DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 34, No. 2, March 2014, pp. 103-109 
  2014, DESIDOC 
Using Blog to Develop an Online Exhibition for Typography  
Research and Education 
Jesvin Puay-Hwa Yeo  
School of Art, Design & Media, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore-639 798 
E-mail: jesvinyeo@ntu.edu.sg 
ABsTRAcT 
 Weblogs, described by one of their creators as the ‘pirate radio stations’ of the web, are a new,  personal  and  determinedly  non-hostile  evolution  of  the  electric  community.  Weblogs  are  platforms  for  intelligent reaction to current events and ubiquitous pundits and in recent year, educators have also used  it to facilitate the progress of learning. This article introduces the defnition of weblog and the major hosted  weblog sites: Blogger, LiveJournal, Pitas, Xanga, and  WordPress . It also explains the different types of  weblogs, from personal blog to topical blog, thoughtful blog, friendblog, collaborative blog, political blog,  directory blog, corporate blog, advice blog, formats blog, audio blog, and photoblog. This article reports  on the process of using weblog to develop an online exhibition for typography research and education.  It also provides an overview of weblog functions, such as, easy uploading of images, video fles, audio  fles  and  information,  digital  archiving  of  exhibits,  online  gallery  space,  and  comment  and  feedback  in  
an interactive format.  
Keywords: Weblog, typography, online exhibition 
1.  InTRODUcTIOn 
Time is scarce in this fast moving world. Technology  advances  and  globalisation  continue  to  change  the  world  we  live  in.  In  recent  year,  weblog  has  become  one  of  the  popular  online  communications  for  people  around  the  world.  A  blog  allows  the  creator(s)  to  post  commentary,  events,  graphics  materials  or  videos.  It  works  like  a  website  and  allows  links  to  other  blogs  and  webpages.  As  of  December 2007, Weblog search engine Technorati says  it  is  now  tracking  over  112  million  weblogs,  with  8,000-17,000  new  blogs  created  every  single  day.  By  fully  utilised  the  capabilities  of  Web  2.0,  weblog  could  be  used  for  the  development  of  an  online  exhibition  without  much  difficulty  and  reach  out  to  its  audience  around  the  globe. 
2.  mEThODOlOgy 
This article reports on the experimental journey  
typographers and typography courses, and a gallery  to  showcase  interesting  typography works. 
The  aim  of  this  article  is  to  illustrate  through  real  world  example,  i.e.,  using  existing  Web  2.0  application  like  weblog  can  enhance  an  aesthetic  institution’s  ability  to  archive,  visualise  and  share  their  exhibitions,  and  research  information  online  easily  and  in  a  more  pervasive  manner.  
3.    WEBlOg  
A weblog, web log or blog is a web-application  that’s designed to be updated with periodic posts in  a  linear,  time-based  manner,  similar  to  a  dairy  or  personal journal, except that the contents are meant  for  public  consumption1.  These  posts  are  often  in  reverse  chronological  order  and  it  would  typically  be  accessible  to  any  internet  user.  Weblogs  are  maintained by single authors or multiple authors, and  it runs from individual diaries to media programmes,  
The  approach  taken  is  to  develop  an  informative  
Web  2.0  frameworks  to  minimise  the  time  putting  in  to  learn  new  software.  Within  this  framework,  
of  using  weblog  to  the  development  of  an  online  
photo  galleries,  corporate  marketing  tools,  and  exhibition for the typography research and education.  
even  as  the  arms  of  political  campaigns.  Most  
weblogs  enable  visitors  to  leave  public  comments,  and  attractive  online  exhibition  within  the  existing  
some  encourage  visitors  to  send  e-mail  message  
that  are  then  quoted  and  incorporated  into  posts,  
online exhibition space that provides links to history  
while  others  are  non-interactive.  The  totality  of  
weblogs  or  blog-related  websites  is  usually  called  the focus has been on developing a comprehensive  
the ‘blogosphere’2. When a large amount of activity,  
information  and  opinion  erupts  around  a  particular  of typography, typography terminology, experimental  
subject  or  controversy  in  the  blogosphere,  it  is  
typography, typography museums, typography institutions,  
Received 19 June 2013, Online published 18 March 2014 
commonly  called  a  ‘blogstorm’3. 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  2, MARCH   2014 
3.1 major hosting  Weblog sites 
Hosted  weblog  applications  take  a  whole  of  responsibility  off  the  blogger  and  the  complication  out  of  starting  a  blog.  The  blog  software  company  manages  the  web  domains,  software  maintenance  and  updates,  data  storage  and  back  up,  as  well  as  template  design  and  management.  It  allows  users  to  focus  on  content  instead  of  codes  and  configuration  setting.  Common  blog  hosting  sites  and  web  services  which  allow  internet  users  to  create  their  blog  for  free  are.  
(a)  Blogger4   –  It  is  a  free  weblog  service  by  Pyra  
Labs and provides web-based tools required by  
the  individuals  to  publish  on  the  web. The  tool  
‘Blogger’ is a service to make weblog publishing  
easier.  The  user  does  not  have  to  write  any  
code  or  install  any  server  software  or  scripts  
and  Blogger  allows  the  users  to  design  their  
blogs  freely.  The  user  could  also  choose  to  
host  the  blog  on  Blogger’s  blogspot  or  on  the  
their own server via file transfer protocol (FTP)  
or simple file transfer protocol. Blogger support  
most of the web browsers but users are adviced  
to switch to Mozilla Firefox browser to have the  
best  possible  experience  using  Blogger. (b)  LiveJournal5  –  It is a free weblog site allowing  
users  to  keep  a  private  journal,  a  blog,  a  
discussion forum or a social network. LiveJournal  
is  popular  with  its  well-like  features  of  a  self- 
contained  community  and  social  networking  
features, particularly with users who are looking  
for discussion-driven blogging. LiveJournal blogs  
are  cataloged  by  region,  interest  and  online  
community  affiliation.  
(c)  Pitas6  – It is a free hosting site for weblogs and  
news. Supports both FTP and web-based editing  
features  including  templates,  multiple  editors,  
and  a  ‘yourname.pitas.com’  sub-domain. (d) Xanga7  –  It currently hosts the largest number of  
weblogs on the internet. It offers a free service  
and  a  pay  service  called  ‘Xanga  Premium’  
which  is  operated  by  Xanga.com.  Xanga  is  
mostly  used  as  a  personal  diary  site,  and  it  
is  separated  from  other  blogging  sites  by  its  
focus  on  community. 
(e)  WordPress8   –  It  is  a  state-of-the-art  publishing  
platform that offers a clean, easy-to-use interface  
with a focus on aesthetics, web standards, and  
usability.  It  is  a  free  and  open  source  blog  
publishing application. WordPress is the official  
successor  of  b2\cafelog  which  was  developed  
by  Michel  Valdrighi. 
Advanced  bloggers  prefer  to  generate  their  blogs  by  using  server-side  software  tools  such  as  Movable  Type,  bBlog,  WordPress,  b2evolution  and  Serendipity9. Such programs provide greater flexibility  
104 
to  users  to  publish  on  these  website  or  on  a  third  party  site,  or  even  to  host  a  group  of  blogs  for  a  company  or  school.  
3.2 Types  of  Weblogs 
Broadly  there  are  12  types  of  weblogs:  
(i)  Personal blog  – It  is an online diary or journal,  
such  as  Blogger  or  LiveJournal.  It  is  a  space  
for users to write their day-to-day experiences,  
complaints,  thoughts  and  many  more.  The  
weblog format is usually user-friendly and allows  
inexperienced  bloggers  to  create,  format,  and  
post  entries  easily.  
(ii) Topical blog  – It  is  often  focuses  on  a  specific  
niche,  often  a  technical  one.  An  example  is  a  
‘Google  Blog’  that  posts  only  Google  news.  
Many  weblogs  now  allow  different  categories,  
which  mean  a  general  blog  can  be  modified  to  
become  a  topical  blog  as  per  the  needs  of  the  
users. 
(iii) Thoughtful blog  – It  presents an individual's or  
a small group's thoughts on current subject that  
are  less  contingent  and  more  philosophical.  (iv) FriendBlog  – It  is a distributed networked journal  
on  the  web,  composed  of  short,  frequently  
updated  posts  written  by  friends  connected  
through  their  similar  interests.  By  connecting  
the user FriendBlog, all posts would appears in  
his  friends  and  acquaintances  ‘FriendBlogs’. (v)  Collaborative  or  Collective  or  Group  blog   –  It  
is  usually  written  by  a  group  of  people  on  a  
specific  topic,  such  as  MetaFilter10.  It  can  be  
either open to the public or limited to a specific  
community. 
(vi) Political blogor watch blog – It is usually comments  
posted by an individual that link to articles from  
news  websites.  It  usually  sets  out  to  criticise  
what  the  author  considers  systematic  errors  
or  bias  in  an  online  newspaper  or  news  site.  
These  days,  politicians  also  use  blog  to  run  
their  campaign;  e.g.,  presidential  campaign  of  
Barack  Obama  for  America  during  2008.  (vii)Directory  blog   –  It  collects  and  categorises  
numerous  websites  with  interesting  content  in  
an easy to use and constantly updated format.  
Political  blogs  also  fall  into  this  category. (viii)Corporate blog  – It  is for employees of corporations  
to post their official or semi-official blogs about  
their  work.  This  type  of  weblogs  could  be  
a  disastrous  if  bloggers  do  not  handle  them  
carefully.  
(ix) Advice blog  – It  is weblog that provides expert  
advice, such as personal finance blog (Mintlife) or  
parenting  and  family  blog  (The  Mother  Load). 

========2========

YEO: uSING  B LOG TO  D EVELOP AN  O NLINE  E XHIBITION FOR TYPOGRAPHY RESEARCH AND EDuCATION 
(x) Formats  blog   –  It  is  weblog  which  specialises  
in  specific  form  of  presentation.  For  example,  
web  comics  (image  blog)  or  videoblog  (video  
blog)  or  moblogs  (mobile  blog)  belong  to  this  
category.  
(xi) Audio blog  – It  is MP3 blog, which make audio  
and  password. These  services  also  provide  design  templates  and  some  of  them  allow  user  to  change  the  header  design.  
After the testing two weblog hosts, Blogger and  Wordpress  were  narrowed.  Both  are  easy  to  use,  user  can  get  help  anytime  from  the  main  website.  
late  60s  soul  music  or  early  90s  hip-hop. (xii)Photoblog   –  It  is  photo-sharing  sites,  such  as  
Buzznet  and  Flickr. They  integrated  the  typical  
photo gallery service with photo sharing, blogging  
and  syndication  to  create  a  new  kind  of  social  
networking. 
files available to the user. It is normally targeted  
Blogger website provides a video tutorial for beginners  at  highly  specialised  musical  genres,  such  as  
and it allow user to upload html without extra cost.  
After much consideration, Wordpress was chosen as  
4.  DEsIgnIng  OnlInE   Exh IBITIOn  In  
WEBlOg  
Weblog,  the  most  widely  adopted  tool  of  the  read/write web can now be used to generate exciting  new  learning  formats,  as  well  as  able  to  engage  students in a new world of synchronous information  feeds  and  interactive  learning11.  It  also  has  the  potential to create learning community and helps to  develop  a  better  grounding  in  fundamental  course  concepts12. Furthermore, educational use of weblogs  is  increasingly  being  brought  into  existence  every  day13,14.  However,  most  of  the  researches  focused  
the  weblog  host  for  this  implementation  because  it  allows  a  user  to  create  multiplies  blogs  using  the  same username and password, it has more design  themes to choose from and the features are clearer  and  easy  to  use  compare  to  Blogger.  The  user  could  create  a  website  looking  blog  in  a  minute  and it allows users to invest in tools that are more  sophisticated when they gain experience. Moreover,  there  are  tons  of  helpful  resources  available  and  easily  searched  for  on  Wordpress  support  site  and  forums.  Some  useful  links  for  beginner  included  getting  started,  write  a  new  post,  change  blog's  settings,  choose  another  theme  and  frequently  asked  questions. 
4.2  Implementation 
The author started by collating all the typography  information  needed  from  the  world  wide  web  was  
collated  and  separated  them  in  different  folders  on  using  the  weblog  as  a  student  journal  or  a  
for  uploading  into  the  blog.  The  content  focused  
forum  or  act  as  a  facilitator  outside  classroom.  There  is  relatively  little  research  on  using  weblog  as an online museum or online exhibition space for  educational proposes. This current study endeavors  to scrutinise how weblog could act a tool to create  an attractive online display of information and shape  up  the  aesthetic  aspect  of  an  educational  portal. 
Following is the implementation and development  of the typography online museum using weblog.  This  section  demonstrates  us  how  weblog  can  enhance  an  aesthetic  institution’s  ability  to  archive,  viualise  and  share  their  exhibitions,  research  information  online easily and more pervasive. The weblog created  will  be  used  for  Typography  courses  in  School  of  Art,  Design  and  Media  at  Nanyang  Technological  university, Singapore. There are a total of three levels  of typography courses in the Visual Communication  BFA programme and these courses are compulsory  to  all  students,  namely,  Typography  I,  Typography  II  and  Typography  III. 
4.1  choosing Authoring  Tool 
A few free service weblog providers mentioned  above  on  what  they  offer  and  exactly  how  they  
on  five  areas  of  typography,  namely,  history  of  typography,  typography  terminology,  experimental  typography,  typography  museums,  typography  institutions,  typographers  and  typography  courses.  These  areas  provide  information  and  links  to  the  subject  matters  and  there  will  be  a  gallery  to  displays  beautiful  type  design. 
On the first attempt, 2 hours were spent to sign  up, design and upload the first batch of information.  A blog address named typographymuseum.wordpress. com was created and it came with 3 gigabytes of file  storage. The  title  of  the  blog  is  Online Typography  Museum  and  it  can  be  changes  at  anytime.  A  theme name Cutline was chosen designed by Chris  Pearson.  To  personalise  the  weblog,  the  original  header was replaced with a typographic banner. A  category  column  was  created  on  the  right  side  of  the  blog  for  easy  access  of  information.    
After 2 hours, part of the content was uploaded;  it  covered  History  of  Typography,  Experimental  Typography  and  part  of  Typography  Museums.  Every  post  came  with  a  description  and  an  image  of  the  information  website.  Viewers  can  link  to  the  
sign-up  page  and  all  of  them  require  a  username  
work  were  studied.  All  of  these  services  have  a  
website  by  clicking  on  the  image. A  search  widget  link  on  the  homepage  that  will  take  the  user  to  a  
was also added for viewer to search specify object  
or  word  on  the  blog. 
105 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  2, MARCH   2014 
figure 1. Theme design template. 
uploading  the  information  continued  on  day  2  for 5 hours. Five more categories had been added,  Typographers,  Typography  Courses  and  Learning,  Typography  Design  and  Bookstore,  Typography  Foundry  and  Typography  Institutions.  Typography  Design  and  Bookstores  and  Typography  Foundry  were  newly  added  to  the  original  content  areas  tp  make  it  helpful  for  researcher  and  students  interested  in  typography.  Another  new  area  would  
be  the  Inspiration  button  on  the  top  bar,  this  page  contained  links  to  all  the  interesting  typography  websites15. 
5.  EvAlUATIOn Of  OnlInE   Typ OgRAphy  
mUsEUm 
The weblog was sent to 40 visual communication  students  at  School  of  Art,  Design  and  Media  in  Nanyang  Technological university  via  e-mail.  They  were asked to browse the blog and give feedback.  
figure 2. Easy to access upload/insert buttons for any digital media. 
106 

========4========

YEO: uSING  B LOG TO  D EVELOP AN  O NLINE  E XHIBITION FOR TYPOGRAPHY RESEARCH AND EDuCATION 
figure 3. final design of the weblog. 
All of them commented that it was easy to use and  navigate.  Eighty  per  cent  of  the  students  felt  that  there was sufficient information but some suggested  that it would be helpful to add in sub-categories when  the time comes whereby there are more entries. A  number of students liked the weblog to include links  
hub connecting various links relating to typography.  Some  of  them  commented  that  they  like  the  site  and  not  seen  a  site  on  typography  quite  like  it.  They  felt  that  most  sites  on  typography  are  less  resource-intensive  and  more  blog-like  and  chatty.  
to typography rules. All the participants agreed that  
Of the total, one eightth of the students suggested  the  weblog  was  very  useful  for  typography  similar  
that it would be useful to have a form where users  
can  submit  new  resources. 
to that before. They felt that it was like a research  
107 

========5========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  2, MARCH   2014 
figure 4. gallery display of type design. 
7.    cO nclUsIOns 
Seeing that more and more educational institutions  are  using  technology  for  their  higher  education  teaching,  the  demand  of  a  well  designed  sites  for  sharing  and  exhibiting  information  is  growing  day- by-day.  Especially  for  design  school,  one  of  the  important  factors  that  students  need  to  learn  is  aesthetics sense. Most of the school blackboard that  supports  teaching  does  not  allow  the  flexibility  of  design and layout. Furthermore, the information on  the blackboard is only available for a certain period  and  for  students  who  have  sign  up  for  the  course.  Instructor might need to recreate or transfer information  for  the  same  course  in  a  new  semester.  
The  article  has  introduced  several  weblog  management  tools  that  offer  free  hosting.  One  of  these  services  is  often  the  best  choice  for  a  
108 
beginner  because  all  the  details  will  be  taken  care  of.  Nevertheless,  there  are  some  drawbacks  on  these  services.  The  service  maybe  outages  when  their hosting servers malfunction or overloaded but  cases  like  that  seldom  happen.  It  is  demonstrated  that  it  is  easy  to  create  an  online  gallery  using  weblog,  as  long  all  the  information  is  ready  for  uploading,  a  professional  online  gallery  can  be  build  within  2  to  3  hours.  Weblog  also  allow  user  to  delete  or  add  information,  images,  video  and  audio files, categories or sub-categories in a minute.  Result  from  the  evaluation  showed  that  weblog  is  an application that is easy to navigate and viewers  can  find  information  easily.  It  proves  that  weblog  can  be  an  excellent  application  for  any  online  exhibition  projects.  

========6========

YEO: uSING  B LOG TO  D EVELOP AN  O NLINE  E XHIBITION FOR TYPOGRAPHY RESEARCH AND EDuCATION 
With the advances of technology and Web 2.0,  ‘we have seen that blogs can be used as notepads  for  exploring  one’s  own  thoughts  and  ideas’16,  but  also  as  online  exhibition  for  an  institution  to  visualise,  exhibit  and  share  a  subject  information.  Weblog  is  a  ‘significant  part  of  a  new  culture  of  voluntary, contributive, and collaborative participation  that,  despite  being  distributed  in  structure,  can  be  highly  focused  in  organisation’16.  Institutions  or  departments  include  exhibition  design,  library  service,  online  museum  or  education  could  create  a  professional  online  exhibition  anytime,  anywhere  and  with  zero  cost.  
REfEREncEs 
1. Kline, D. & Burstein, D. Blog!: How the newest  
media revolution is changing politics, business,  
and  culture.  CDS  Books  in  association  with  
Squibnocket  Partners  LLC,  New  York,  2005. 2. Blood, R. A weblog handbook. Perseus Publishing,  
Cambridge  MA,  2003. 
3. Weblog definition. 2009. http://www.wordiq.com/ 
definition/Weblog/  (accessed  on  3  May  2009). 4. Blogger.  https://www.blogger.com/. 
5. LiveJournal.  http://www.livejournal.com/. 
6. Pitas.   http://www.pitas.com/. 
7. Xanga.   http://www.xanga.com/. 
8. WordPress.   http://www.wordpress.com/. 9. Bruns,  A.  &  Jacobs,  J.  uses  of  blogs.  Peter  
Lang  Publishing,  New  York,  2006. 
10. MetaFilter.  http://www.metafilter.com/. 
11. Will,  R.  Blogs,  wikis,  podcasts,  and  other  
powerful  web  tools  for  classrooms.  Corwin,  
California,  2006. 
12. Kelly, R. Blogs help create learning communities.  
Faculty  Focus,  20  September  2008.  http:// 
www.facultyfocus.com/ articles/blogs-help-create- 
learning-communities/ (accessed on 29 November   
2009). 
13. Courtney, N. Academic library outreach: Beyond  
the campus walls. ABC-CLIO-Libraries unlimited,  
Westport,  C,  2009. 
14. Hirsch, J. Learning collaboratively with technology.  
The  School  Administrator,  2005,  62(7).  The  
School  Superintendents Association,  VA. 15. Typography websites. http://typographymuseum. 
wordpress.com/. 
16. Brady, M. Blogging, personal participation in public  
knowledge-building on the web.Chimera Working  
Paper, 02. university of Essex, Colchester, 2005.  
About  the Author 
prof Jesvin yeo, is Singapore-based multidisciplinary  designer  and  an Assistant  Professor  at  the  School  of  Art,  Design  &  Media  of  Nanyang  Technological  university,  Singapore.  She  also  trained  at  Central  Saint Martins College of Arts and Design in London.  Her research interests are focused on historical and  contemporary  cultural  changes,  particularly  related  to Asian  cultures,  technology,  and  typography.  Her  works  has  also  been  exhibited  at  798  Art  District  in  Beijing,  the  Museum  of  Contemporary  Art  in  Washington  D.C.,  and  she  has  won  international  awards  including  Red  Dot  Award   (Communication  Design), Design for Asia Award, and How International  Design Awards. 
109 

========7========

