DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 34, No. 6, November, 2014, pp. 477-485 
  2014, DESIDOC 
Academic Library’s Responses to the Emerging Trends in Higher  
Education 
Rajendra Kumbhar 
Department of Library & Information Science, University of Pune, India 
E-mail: rajendra-kumbhar@unipune.ac.in 
AbsTRAcT 
The  New  Media  Consortium  (NMC)  Horizon  Report  2014  made  certain  predictions  about  the  emerging technologies and trends in higher education worldwide. The article reviews academic library’s  position with reference to the predictions made by the Report. The articles briefy refers to selected trends  in higher education, mentioned in the Report and reviews and discusses academic library’s present  and future responses. The review and discussions are based on literature review. The articles fnds  that academic libraries are responding to the emerging trends in higher education through innovative  practices and services. It concludes that in spite of their efforts, there is still scope for the academic  libraries  to  improve  their  role  in  the  changing  higher  education  scenario  and  to  prove  their  value.  
Keywords: Academic library’s responses to emerging trends, academic libraries, emerging trends in higher  
 education, NMC Horizon Report 
1.  InTRoducTIon 
The  world  itself  is  a  changing  phenomenon.  Everything  in  it  keeps  changing.  Therefore,  it  is  said that change is the only constant phenomenon.  This  is  certainly  applicable  to  the  twin  fields,  i.e.,  higher  education  and  libraries.  Like  all  other  fields  there  are  constant  changes  in  higher  education  too.  But  this  time  there  are  staggering  changes  in  higher  education  due  to  the  multifold,  accelerated,  and wide affecting developments in the educational  technologies.  
The emerging educational technologies, including  internet, web technology, computer-based educational  games, wearable data capturing devices, software and  hardware developments are all forcing changes in the  every facet of higher education. These technological  changes  are  particularly  affecting  the  teaching- learning and assessment process in higher education.  Libraries  have  been  an  inherent  component  of  the  higher  education  ecology.  It  becomes  inevitable  for  libraries  to  change  so  as  to  respond  positively  to  the  changes  in  the  higher  education.  The  New  Media  Consortium  (NMC)  and  the  EDUCAUSE  Learning  Initiative  (USA)  published  11th   (Higher  education)  edition  of  the  NMC  Horizon  Report1  in  2014  predicting  immediate  and  future  changes  in  higher education. The NMC Horizon Report is much  known as ‘Horizon Report’. The two institutions (i.e.,  NMC  and  the  EDUCAUSE)  every  year  conduct  a  research  to  examine  emerging  technologies,  their  
Received 7 April 2014, Online published 19 November 2014 
potential  impact  and  use  in  primary,  secondary  and higher education. To compile the NMC Horizon  Report  the  producers  used  Delphi  technique  and  collected opinions from international panel of experts  in  the  relevant  field.  The  NMC  Horizon  Report  is  published  at  the  beginning  every  year  since  2002.  It  identifies  key  trends,  significant  challenges  and  important developments in the educational technology  as  applicable  to  higher  education.  This  article  is  based  on  11th   edition  of  the  NMC  Horizon  Report  published  in  2014.  
2. objEcTIvEs 
This  articles  aims  to  review  academic  library’s  responses  to  emerging  trends  identified  by  the  NMC  Horizon  Report,  2014.  The  objectives  of  the  present  research  are  to:  
• Identify which technological trends noted in the  
NMC Horizon Report 2014 applicable to or have  
influenced  academic  libraries.  
• Find  the  responses  of  academic  libraries  to  
these  technological  trends. 
3. 
METHodoLogy And scopE 
The  present  research  article  is  a  ‘literature  review’  article.  For  this  the  author  has  searched  relevant literature by going through the LISA (Library  & Information Science Abstracts), Emerald, Science  Direct  and  Google  Scholar  databases.  To  review  only  the  current  responses,  the  author  the  search  

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  6,  NOVEMBER   2014 
was  restricted  to  the  literature  published  during  2011  to  2014.  To  maintain  currency  of  information  few  ‘in  press’  articles  available  for  early  cite  in  various databases are also reviewed. However, only  selected literature is cited as evidences for current  and expected responses from academic libraries to  the emerging trends in higher education. The NMC  Horizon Report 2014 identified total 18 trends. The  author believes that eight of them have or will have  direct  or  indirect  influence  on  academic  libraries.  Therefore,  only  those  eight  trends  are  reviewed  and  discussed.  
4. 
TREnd  pREdIcTEd And AcAdEMIc  LIbRARy’s REsponsE 
Under each section the article briefly mentions  the  concerned  trend  under  the  same  heading  as  used by the NMC Horizon Report1. Below each trend  heading  the  article  reviews  and  discusses  how  the  academic  libraries  are  presently  responding  to  the  trends. It also discusses how the academic libraries  should respond in future. Both, present (actual) and  future  (expected)  responses  are  discussed  under  the  heading  ‘academic  library’s  responses’.  4.1 Trend  predicted:  Growing  Ubiquity  of  
Social  Media 
Under  this  tagline  the  NMC  Horizon  Report  mentions  that  within  next  one  to  two  years  social  media  will  be  available  ubiquitously.  The  extended  availability  of  internet  facility  and  the  innovations  in  internet  accessibility  tools  like  smart  phones,  tablets, etc., will certainly help realize this prediction.  The Report cites that more and more students and  faculties in higher education are using social media  like YouTube, Facebook, etc. According to the Report  the  use  of  social  media  will  further  accelerate  in  the  next  one  to  two  years.  
Academic  library’s  responses:  The  growing  ubiquity of social media can be used by libraries for  creating  awareness  about  the  library’s  usefulness  in teaching-learning activity. It can also be used for  imparting  information  literacy  skills.  Some  efforts  are  already  made  in  this  direction.  For  example,  Colburn  and  Haines2   studied  how  libraries  are  using  YouTube  for  outreach  purposes.  For  this  study  the  authors  identified  and  analysed  library  promotional  videos  on  YouTube  and  found  that  library professionals comprise a significant portion of  viewers for library promotional videos. The authors  suggested that libraries can increase viewership of  the intended audience by frequently and strategically  featuring online video contents on websites, local or  campus  communication  vehicles  and  social  media  environments.  Del  Bosque,  Lief  &  Skarl3   explored  the  usefulness  of  social  media  in  libraries  and  for  library  professionals.  They  studied  responses  of  
478 
randomly  sampled  296  library  professionals  under  the University of Nevada, Las Vegas to know use of  Twitter  by  library  professionals.  The  authors  found  that  Twitter  enabled  the  library  staff  to  reach  and  interact  with  library  users  effectively  by  sharing  basic  information  and  resources,  conversing  with  patrons,  and  providing  assistance  in  a  quick,  and  useful  way.  Similarly,  Chu  &  Du4   studied  the  use  of  social  networking  tools  in  academic  libraries,  examining the extent of their use and library staff’s  perceptions about these tools. The authors found that  71  %  library  professionals  used  social  networking  tools.  Most  library  staff  had  positive  perceptions  on  the  usefulness  of  social  networking  tools.  This  study offers insights for academic librarians to make  informed  decisions  in  applying  social  networking  tools. Bhardwaj5  studied how library and information  science  professionals  working  in  higher  education  institutions in India integrate social networking sites  (SNS) into their routine work. The study revealed that  the information professionals use SNS to socialise,  keep themselves up-to-date, find jobs, and acquire  information  about  conferences  and  seminars  in  their  respective  fields.  The  author  suggested  that  to  increase  the  use  of  SNS,  the  social  networking  applications must be incorporated into the curriculum  of master’s degree courses of library and information  science.  The  present  author  believes  that  most  of  the  present  LIS  curricula  worldwide  have  included  social  networking  applications  in  their  courses.  
While  further  identifying  the  scope  for  use  of  social media in libraries Grace, et al.6 expressed that  opportunity exists for librarians to join the ‘conversation’  (among students) and to impart information literacy  skills via social media. For example, Facebook can be  used to inspire discussions among relevant interest  groups and for academic interaction and participation  in a more personalised way. YouTube can be used  to introduce new information, concepts and services  at  the  point  of  need.  From  the  above  review  it  could  be  asserted  that  the  social  media  is  used  by  students,  library  users  and  library  professionals  as information source, and as a media for effective  communication.  Romero7   affirms  that  in  the  world  of  libraries  the  use  of  social  networks  has  been  institutionalised, as a communication tool. The author  further  believes  that  by  using  library’s  website  and  its’ profiles on Facebook and Twitter, the library has  reduced the cost of marketing and advertising. The  author expresses that there is scope for libraries to  use the so-called loyalty clubs and communities as  well  as  social  and  collaborative  reading  for  cost- effective  library  marketing  and  advertisement. 
The  growing  ubiquity  of  social  media  and  the  increasing  contents  on  these  media  is  a  matter  of  rejoices  as  well  as  concerns.  It  is  a  matter  to  rejoice because the social media is making available  

========2========

KUMBHAR: ACADEMIC LIBRARY’S RESPONSES TO THE EMERGING TRENDS IN HIGHER EDUCATION 
large  amount  of  contents  in  great  variety,  in  easy  and  quickly  accessible  manner.  At  the  same  time  it  is  a  matter  of  worry  because  the  quality  and  trustworthiness  of  the  social  media  contents  is  beyond  anybody’s  control.  This  situation  of  plenty  of  unevaluated  information  on  the  social  media  has  job  cut  for  librarians.  Library  professionals  have  skills  and  competencies  to  search,  evaluate,  organize and make available right information to the  right users at right time. To display their information  searching and filtering abilities libraries should plan  and provide services such as ‘social media service’;  ‘social media search and evaluation service’, etc., to  make  available  evaluated  social  media  information  to  the  academic  library  users. 
Since the origin of higher education libraries have  been  making  available  various  types  of  documents  to  teachers  and  learners.  Libraries  have  been  at  the  forefront  in  acquiring,  organising  and  making  available  any  new  form  of  document.  Using  this  strength the academic libraries now have to develop  ways and means to track useful information/sources  from  social  media.  In  other  words,  libraries  have  to  develop  and  use  new  apps  for  finding  relevant  contents  from  the  social  media.  
4.2 Trend  predicted:  Integration  of  Online,  
Hybrid  and  Collaborative  Learning 
The NMC Horizon Report predicts that in the coming  one to two years there will be increasing integration  of online, hybrid and collaborative learning. This will  drive  massive  changes  in  higher  education.  
Academic  library’s  responses: Libraries  have  played, are playing and will be playing great role in  teaching-learning process. Library’s role was relevant  in  the  traditional  teaching-learning  environment.  It  is  and  will  be  relevant  in  the  hybrid,  online  and  collaborative  teaching-learning  environment  also.  With  the  increase  in  the  online  courses  including  MOOCs  (massive  online  open  courses)  and  the  open  educational  resources  (OER)  there  are apprehensions whether libraries will be relevant  in  this  era?  Whether  they  will  be  able  to  sustain  in  this  emerging  technological  storm?  Whether  they  will  be  able  to  cope  up  with  the  process  of  disintermediation?  However,  the  literature  indicate  that  libraries  have  always  been  able  to  cope  up  with  the  challenge  of  disintermediation.  Libraries  are  responding  positively  to  the  emerging  trends  of  online,  hybrid  and  collaborative  learning  by  way  of (a) supporting the MOOC and (b) by developing  information  commons. 
MOOC  is  one  example  of  fast  growing  online  higher  education.  According  to  Mazoue8,  MOOC  represents  a  postindustrial  model  of  teaching  and  learning  and  it  has  the  potential  to  undermine  and  replace  the  business  model  of  institutions  that  
depend  on  recruiting  and  retaining  students  for  location-bound, proprietary forms of campus-based  learning. MOOC courses are becoming popular and  they  are  offered  in  many  subjects  including  library  and  information  science9.   Academic  libraries  are  supporting  the  MOOCs  and  there  is  further  scope  for them to enhance their support. For example the  North Carolina State University (NCSU) developed a  course-based widget system called ‘Library Course  Tools’ (http://www.lib.ncsu.edu/course/) to dynamically  generate  student-centric  views  of  library  resources  and  tools  for  all  courses  taught  at  NCSU.(http:// www.lib.ncsu.edu/dli/projects/courseviews).  
Library  associations  and  experienced  library  professionals have realised the inevitability of MOOC’s  entry  and  its  success  in  the  higher  education.  To  ensure  library’s  role  in  MOOC  they  are  making  positive  suggestions  to  libraries.  For  example,  the  ACRL’s  ‘Environmental  Scan’10   report  identifies  current and emerging factors that impact academic  libraries; describes the broader context in which these  libraries  operate;  and  outlines  related  implications  for  library  resources,  services,  and  personnel. The  report  is  prepared  to  support  the  planning  and  positioning of academic libraries for the future. The  ‘Environmental Scan’ report suggested that libraries  should  remain  involved  in  the  development  and  delivery  of  MOOCs.  Similarly,  Kerry  Wu11   explored  the  impact  of  MOOCs  on  academic  libraries,  and  appealed  academic  librarians  that  they  should  be  fully engaged in the discussion and action on their  own campus related to MOOCs. With rapid increase  in MOOC, the academic libraries have an opportunity  to develop packages/portals that provide access to  ‘course-based  additional  resources’  or  ‘e-content  packages’  for  MOOC  learners.  
Academic  libraries  are  also  responding  to  the  emerging online, hybrid and collaborative learning by  developing information commons. Learning commons,  creative  commons,  learning  landscapes,  research  commons,  etc.,  are  some  other  terms  used  to  refer  to  the  facility  of  information  commons.  In  fact these different names indicate that information  commons  are  developed  to  serve  the  emerging  online, hybrid, and collaborative learning situations.  With  information  commons,  libraries  are  able  to  provide  computers  with  internet  facility,  discussion  space for students, research scholars and faculties.  Considering  the  value  of  information  commons  in  collaborative learning, faculties are also cooperating  and  collaborating  with  librarians  in  developing  and  using  information  commons12. 
Evidences prove that through information commons  the academic libraries are actively supporting online,  hybrid and collaborative learning. For example, four  university  libraries  in  UK  designed  and  developed  learning  spaces  so  as  to  support  collaborative  
479 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  6,  NOVEMBER   2014 
learning13.  Talvé14 reported  that  internationally  the  library  has  emerged  as  a  facility  inter-woven  of  digital, social and aesthetic values and has generated  new  loci  for  solitary  and  collective  learning  and  interaction. Beagle15   also  traced  theoretical  origins  through  real-world  examples  the  philosophy  of  the  commons  extension  across  physical,  virtual,  and  cultural domains and the development of the learning  commons as collaboration among multiple learning  support  units,  including  libraries.  
Presently  the  facility  of  information  common  is  available  only  in  very  few  academic  libraries.  The  message of the trend foresighted in the NMC Horizon  Report  is  that  now  all  academic  libraries  have  to  provide  the  facility  of  information  commons.  This  facility  will  enable  students  and  teachers  to  take  advantage  of  the  online,  hybrid,  and  collaborative  learning  processes.  Libraries  which  are  unable  to  develop  immediately,  information  commons  per  se  should at least make available a small ‘discussions/ deliberations/debates/innovation’ space in libraries. Such  spaces may innovatively be named as ‘collaborative  learning zone’; ‘academic discussion zone’; ‘research  interaction zone’, ‘talking zones’, etc. Such facilities  should be made available in addition to the ‘silence  zones’  in  the  libraries.  
To enable and encourage online and collaborative  learning  academic  libraries  should  also  develop  ‘online  reader  clubs’.  Through  such  clubs  libraries  will  be  able  to  establish  interactive  communication  between  themselves  and  the  readers.  Such  clubs  will  enable  readers  to  share  information  about  their  library  activities,  reading  activities  and  library  experiences.  The  online  reader  clubs  created  and  maintained by libraries will help promote interdisciplinary  studies  also.  Many  universities  are  now  offering  interdisciplinary  learning  environment  through  the  ‘cafeteria  approach’.  The  online  reader  club  will  enable libraries to distribute reading material across  disciplines  by  serving  the  students  taking  benefits  of the cafeteria mode of curricula. ‘Online teacher- learner clubs’ should also be established by libraries  to  share  teaching-learning  material  to  both  the  teachers  and  students.  Such  clubs  established  by  library  will  also  help  teachers  to  identify  and  distribute  learning  material  to  students.  
4.3 Trend  predicted:  Rise  of  Data-driven  
Learning  and Assessment 
There is a growing interest in using new sources  for data personalising and learning experience and  for  performance  measurement. The  education  field  has  been  always  involved  in  developing  and  using  innovative  assessment  techniques  and  tools.  The  NMC Horizon Report states that ‘as the students and  educators generate more and more data, especially  in  online  environments,  there  is  growing  interest  
480 
in  developing  tools  and  algorithms  for  revealing  patterns  inherent  in  those  data  and  then  applying  them  to  the  improvement  of  instructional  systems’.  New  data  driven  assessment  techniques  and  tools  are  recognised  as  learning  analytics.  The  NMC  Horizon  Report  states  that  learning  analytics’  is  an  educational  application  of  big  data.  Learning  analytics analyses learning data to inform decisions  made  on  every  tire  of  the  educational  system,  leveraging  student  data  to  deliver  personalised  learning, enable adaptive pedagogies and practices,  and  identify  learning  issues  and  time  for  them  to  be  solved.  The  Report  discusses  various  types  of  data  that  can  be  collected  and  analysed  by  using  learning  analytic  techniques.  It  also  lists  benefits  of  learning  analytics.  
Academic library’s responses:  Like the teaching  community,  libraries  also  serve  students.  Students  learn from teaching community. Similarly, they learn  from  library’s  reading  material  and  information  services. As such, like teachers, libraries should be  able  to  use  ‘student’s  library  use  data’  to  measure  student’s learning performance. This data can also be  used to prove library’s value. The following literature  illustrates  how  libraries  are  trying  to  collect  and  use  ‘student’s  library  use  data’  to  calculate  return  on  investment  (ROI)  and  to  prove  library’s  value.  The  literature  also  suggests  how  the  libraries  can  benefit  from  this  data  driven  approaches.  In  other  words  the  literature  indicates  that  there  are  and  there  should  be  further  efforts  to  develop  ‘library  analytics’,  i.e.,  library  application  of  big  data’.  
  Libraries  are  developing  criteria  to  calculate  ROI  so  as  to  prove  library’s  value.  The  criteria  generally revolves around measuring student’s grade  point  average,  faculty’s  improved  publication  rate  and higher impact factor and h-index, accreditation  grades  received  by  the  academic  institution,  etc.  The  trend  predicted  by  the  NMC  Horizon  Report  provides libraries an opportunity to use the students’  learning data to calculate ROI. For example Kingma  & McClure16  adopted contingent valuation method to  measure ROI of the Syracuse University library. The  economic and environmental value of the Syracuse  University library showed an ROI of $4.49 returned  to  the  university  for  every  $1.00  spent  each  year.  LibQUAL+ROI  is  another  model  that  is  being  used  by  more  and  more  academic  libraries  to  calculate  RIO.17Soria,  et  al.18 studied  the  impact  of  library  usage on retention and academic success of first- time, first year undergraduate students of University  of  Minnesota.  They  found  that  students  who  use  library have a higher GPA (Grade Point Average) for  their first semester and higher retention than non- library users. Academic libraries are also employing  instructional strategies, and assessment methods to  

========4========

KUMBHAR: ACADEMIC LIBRARY’S RESPONSES TO THE EMERGING TRENDS IN HIGHER EDUCATION 
help students achieve their learning goals, increase  their level of academic success, and progress further  and  faster  through  coursework.19 
Many  learning  management  systems  provide  facility  to  gather  data  about  students’  learning  activity,  which  can  be  used  to  identify  students  at  risk.  The  emerging  technique  of  learning  analytics  will  help  libraries  in  knowing  well-doing  as  well  as  the struggling students. Results of learning analytics  will  be  useful  for  academic  libraries  in  developing  ‘personalised information services’. Results of learning  analytics  could  also  be  used  by  academic  libraries  to  develop  ‘reader  development  index’  as  well  as  ‘information/reading  packages  for  challenged/ exceptional  students’.  
E-science librarianship, research data services  (RDS),  data  curation,  etc.,  are  the  other  activities  in  which  libraries  can  make  use  of  data  driven  learning environment. For example, Pollock20   cited  the demand for more advanced skills in searching,  data  visualisation,  data  mining  and  analysis  and  claimed  that  librarians  have  larger  role  in  data  curation.  Considering  this  new  role  of  librarian’s  Pollock  called  them  ‘science  informationist’,  i.e.,  librarians who are involved in science data curation.  Science informationists build systems through their  collaboration  with  those  creating  knowledge  and  they  work  with  publishers  to  improve  standards,  platforms,  and  publication  models.  This  activity  of  collecting, organising, storing, retrieving and serving  science  data  is  also  referred  to  as  ‘e-science  librarianship’.  
Scope for managing big data and similar activities  is increasing day by day because of emergence of  ‘data-intensive  sciences’.  Data-intensive  sciences  create  challenges  for  researchers  and  demand  a  data  management  skill  set  that  likely  was  not  part  of the scientist’s education and for which scientists  likely  do  not  have  time  or  training.  Tenopir21,  et  al.,  believed  that  the  emergence  of  data  intensive  sciences  has  created  a  unique  opportunity  for  academic  libraries  to  provide  consultancy  services  related to research data management and curation;  to  provide  the  infrastructure,  or  at  least  the  front- end,  for  data  storage  and  curation  and  to  support  librarians becoming active members on research and  grant proposal teams as data curation consultants.  In  this  data  driven  higher  education  environment  academic libraries should provide RDS. According to  Tenopir21, et al.,  RDS  are  services  that  are  offered  to researchers in relation to managing data and can  include informational services (e.g., consulting with  faculty, staff, or students on data management plans  or metadata standards; providing reference support  for  finding  and  citing  data  sets;  or  providing  web  guides  and  finding  aids  for  data  or  data  sets),  as  well as technical services (e.g., providing technical  
support  for  data  repositories,  preparing  data  sets  for  a  repository,  deaccessioning  or  deselecting  data  sets  from  a  repository,  or  creating  metadata  for  data  sets).  
In  2012,  the  ACRL  (Association  of  College  and  Research  Libraries)  Research  Planning  and  Review  Committee22   prophesied  that  libraries  will  play  valuable  role  in  this  collaborative  learning  environment as data curation challenges are increasing  as standards for all types of data continue to evolve;  more  repositories,  many  of  them  cloud-based,  will  emerge;  librarians  and  other  information  workers  will  collaborate  with  their  research  communities  to  facilitate  this  process.  It  is  expected  that  in  future  tools such as ‘Data Asset Framework’ (http://www. dcc.ac.uk/resources/repository-audit-and-assessment/ data-asset-framework) will be developed for assessing  student’s performance. Such a framework will also be  useful to libraries in identifying, locating, describing  and  assessing  research  data.  
  In  2012  , ACRL  initiated  a  programme  named  ‘Assessment in Action (AiA)23 which specially aims to  develop the professional competencies of librarians to  document and communicate the value of their academic  libraries primarily in relation to their institution’s goals  for  student  learning  and  success.  It  also  aims  to  contribute to higher education assessment work by  creating approaches, strategies, and practices that  document  the  contribution  of  academic  libraries  to  the  overall  goals  and  missions  of  their  institutions.  Both these aims indicate that libraries are responding  actively  to  the  emerging  data  driven  scenarios  of  higher  education.  
4.4 Trend  predicted:  Shift  of  Students  from  
Consumers  to  Creators 
In  next  three  to  five  years  students  will  be  producing huge amount of information. It specifically  mentions  that  ‘campus  libraries  increasingly  host  …  publication  services’.  That  means  in  the  future  students  will  not  only  information  consumers  but  they  will  become  information  producers.  
Academic library’s responses:  Students produce  information by way of their research articles and project  reports. Libraries can help students in producing and  publishing information produced by them. Evidence  shows  that  libraries  are  actively  helping  students  to  publish  their  research.  For  example,  Hensley,  et  al.24   conducted  a  survey  of  library  support  for  formal  undergraduate  research  programmes  and  found that libraries are strongly supporting students  for  disseminating  undergraduate  research.  The  researchers believed that this has given libraries an  opportunity to provide information literacy instructions  to  engage  undergraduate  researchers  on  issues  of  intellectual  property,  copyright,  open  access  etc.  Another  exciting  initiative  is  the  Library  Publishing  
481 

========5========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  6,  NOVEMBER   2014 
Coalition.  This  coalition  is  working  in  collaboration  with  the  Educopia  Institute25.   Over  50  academic  libraries have joined in this coalition to advance the  field of library publishing. Students are also helped  in publishing information produced by them through  library’s  wikis. As  asserted  by  Herther26   new  roles  and changing visions for academic libraries to enter  into the field of online publishing and create contents  using open-access model is gaining momentum. Such  activities will enable libraries to prove their value in  assisting  students  in  producing  and  dissemination  their own contents. The ACRL Research Planning and  Review Committee22   appreciates  new  opportunities  and  also  warns  them  saying  that  ‘new  scholarly  communication and publishing models are developing  at  an  ever-faster  pace,  requiring  libraries  to  be  actively  involved  or  be  left  behind’. 
Libraries  have  been  helping  the  faculties  for  publishing their research by guiding them in ethical use  of other’s literature and by in identifying appropriate  journals  for  publishing  their  research.  Continuing  this  tradition,  libraries  should  now  help  students  in  identifying e-journals to publish their creative thoughts  and research. Libraries should also guide students  in  using  other’s  information  ethically  and  legally.  They  should  also  help  them  in  using  e-research  tools  such  as  ‘Google  Scholar’  for  creating  their  research  profiles,  computing  impact  factor  and  h-index.  Libraries  should  help  students  in  using  facilities  such  as  ‘Google  Docs’(docs.google.com),  ‘SurveyMonkey’  (www.surveymonkey.com)  etc.,  to  gather data for their research. Libraries can instruct  students  in  the  use  of  ‘reference  management  tools’  such  as  Zotero  (www.zotero.org),  RefWorks  (www.refworks.com),  etc.  Imparting  information  literacy  programmes  will  be  of  high  value  in  case  of  novice  students  who  want  to  create  information  for  the  first  time.  
4.5 Trend  predicted:  Agile  Approach  to  
Change 
Agile  approach  is  an  approach  of  thinking  or  acting  easily,  quickly  and  intelligently.  The  Report  predicts  that  in  the  next  five  or  more  years  the  higher education institutions will be adopting change  more  quickly,  easily,  and  intelligently.  It  is  natural  that  to  survive  and  succeed,  the  higher  education  institutions  have  to  rapidly  change  their  courses,  syllabi,  teaching  techniques,  delivery  of  learning  material and assessment methods. Institutions which  will not adopt the agile approach to change will not  be  able  to  sustain  in  the  ever  changing  world.  
Academic  library’s  responses:  Along  with  the  fast developments in the higher education institutes  their libraries are also developing fast. The academic  libraries  have  always  responded  positively  to  the  changes in the higher education and have accordingly  made  changes  in  their  policies,  programmes  and  
482 
services. Adopting the agile approach to changes in  higher education, academic libraries are computerised,  and are increasingly acquiring and serving electronic  reading material, are providing internet-based services,  are  renovating  their  buildings,  furniture  and  other  infrastructure.  These  are  some  of  the  indicators  of  academic  library’s  adoption  of  agile  approach  to  changes  in  higher  education.  
Adoption of ‘agile approach to change’ is further  affirmed by Brian Mathews27  who in his white paper  entitled ‘Think like a startup: A white paper to inspire  library entrepreneurialism’ said that librarians have  always  adopted  the  agile  approach  to  change.  He  further  says  that  ‘our  jobs  are  shifting  from  doing  what we’ve always done very well, to always being  on  the  outlook  for  new  opportunities  to  serve  an  unmet  need  which  will  advance  teaching,  learning,  service  and  research’.  Nevertheless,  academic  libraries  have  to  continue  to  adopt  this  approach.  4.6 Trend  predicted: Flipped  Classrooms  
‘Flipped class model is a part of a larger pedagogical  movement that overlaps with blended learning, enquiry- based learning, and other instructional approaches  and  tools  that  are  meant  to  be  flexible,  active  and  more engaging’. Such flexible education, NMC Horizon  Report  predicts,  is  going  to  be  in  practice  within  next one or less than one year duration. Academic  library’s response trend is already there in practice  in  the  form  of  online  learning  facilities.  
Neshyba28 defined flipped classroom as, ‘flipping’  is  a  teaching  technique  that  involves  abandoning  the  traditional  lecture  (or  not  just  relying  on  it  so  much)  and  replacing  it  with  interactive  approaches  that experiment with technology and require students  gather information outside of class and be prepared  to  engage  the  material  in  class,  rather  than  sit  passively listening to a faculty member talk’. A study  carried  out  by  Daley29   at  the  University  of  North  Carolina-Chapel  Hill  reported  that  86  %  students  preferred flipped classrooms. This indicates that the  flipped classrooms will be more in demand in future  higher  education.  To  serve  the  students  of  flipped  classroom  there  is  a  need  of  flipped  librarians30. 
Academic  library’s  responses:   It  is  now  the  turn  of  academic  libraries  to  convert  themselves  in  to  ‘flipped  libraries’  i.e.  libraries  offering  flexible  service  hours,  flexible  membership  regulations,  off  campus access, etc. The flexible approach in every  facet  of  librarianship  will  help  libraries  to  respond  the  emerging  flipped  classroom  trend  positively.  Librarians  too  have  to  be  in  flipped  roles.  In  their  flipped roles they will have to simultaneously serve  as  ‘database  search  experts’,  ‘reading  advisors/ consultants’,  ‘advisors  for  ethical  use  of  literature’,  ‘publishing  advisors’,  ‘information  source  advisor’  ‘data  curators’,  etc.  

========6========

KUMBHAR: ACADEMIC LIBRARY’S RESPONSES TO THE EMERGING TRENDS IN HIGHER EDUCATION 
4.7 
Trend  predicted: Game  and  Gamification 
Traditionally games have been recognised as the  great entertainment facilitators. However, of late the  educators  have  been  eying  the  educational  value  of  games.  With  the  development  in  the  computing  technology  the  value  of  games  as  educational  tools  has  increased  considerably.  Gamification  is  application  of  principles  and  mechanics  of  games  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  an  activity.  The  Report  predicts  that  within  next  two  to  three  years  the games and gamification will be one of the major  innovative  facets  of  higher  education.  
Academic  library’s  responses:  Libraries  are  responding  to  gamification  in  higher  education.  For  example,  Fusich31 et  al.,  reported  that  the  Henry Madden Library at California State University- Fresno (Fresno State) created an online orientation  game  named  HML-IQ  to  familiarise  students  with  library  resources  and  services.  Also  the  North  Carolina State University (NCSU) Libraries gamified  traditional  library  instruction  by  creating  a  mobile  scavenger  hunt  that  has  met  with  great  success  and resulted in an increase in the number of library  instruction  sessions  for  ENG  101  classes32.  How  gamification  can  be  used  for  effective  information  literacy instructions is further explained by Becker33.  The University of Huddersfield Library in the UK has  built  a  social  online  game  called  ‘Lemontree’  that  allows  library  patrons  to  earn  points  and  badges  through  their  usual  library  transactions  such  as  borrowing  a  library  material  and  to  display  those  badges  in  their  social  networks  such  as  Facebook  or Twitter34.  While explaining the current and future  use  of  gamification  in  libraries  Kim35   asserted  that  gamification  in  libraries  is  at  a  very  early  stage  of  development  ...  a  clear  goal,  careful  planning,  and  skillful  execution  are  necessary  for  the  success  of  a  gamification  project  (in  libraries).  
Considering  the  educational  value  of  games,  academic libraries should acquire educational games  of all variety and make them accessible. Academic  libraries should also develop a portal of educational  games containing both free and subscription based  games. Providing quick and easy access to educational  games to learners in higher education will certainly  help enhance value of academic libraries in higher  education.  
4.8 Trend  predicted: Quantified  Self 
The  Report  predicts  that  within  next  four  to  five  years  there  will  be  considerable  technological  innovations  that  will  enable  leaners  to  track  data  about their daily activities through wearable devices  such  as  watches,  wristbands,  necklaces,  glasses  etc.  The  process  of  capturing  data  through  such  technological precision devices is named as ‘quantified  self’.  It  predicts  that  the  quantified  self  will  enable  
educators  to  collect  data  about  student’s  every  minute  learning  activities.  Such  data  will  be  useful  to  the  educators  for  evolving  effective  educational  practices.  
Academic library’s responses:  Like the educators  the  library  professionals  are  also  interested  in  understanding  user’s  daily  library  use  patterns  and  study  patterns.  The  technology  meant  for  the  quantified-self  purpose  will  be  certainly  useful  to  libraries  in  studying  and  understanding  student’s  information  seeking  behaviour  and  library  use  behaviour,  including  their  daily  reading  behaviour.  Considering  the  value  of  quantified-self  and  the  emerging tools for these purpose library professionals  should  explore  the  applicability  of  quantified-self  technology  in  understanding  their  users  so  as  to  serve  them  better.  Currently,  however,  one  has  to  wait  for  some  time  to  find  evidences  of  application  of  quantified  self  in  academic  libraries.  
5. 
FIndIngs 
Some  of  the  most  noteworthy  findings  are:  (a) Total  18  emerging  trends  in  higher  education  
have been identified by the NMC Horizon Report  
2014. 
(b) Out  of  those  18,  eight  trends  have  direct  or  
indirect  influence  on  academic  libraries. (c) As far as the responses of the academic library’s  
to the emerging trends is concerned it is found  
that the academic libraries are responding very  
positively.  
(d) The research could find many examples of the  
responses  where  the  academic  libraries  are  
using  the  emerging  technologies  to  improve  
their  services  and  to  bring  innovativeness.  
6.   c oncLusIons  
The  article  reviews  and  discusses  academic  library’s current and expected response to the emerging  trends  in  higher  education  predicted  by  the  NMC  Horizon  Report  2014.  This  review  and  discussions  will be useful to the academic library practitioners in  understanding the emerging technological trends. It  will also help them assess their current position and  plan their future responses. The discussions will be  of value to the library practitioners in designing and  implementing befitting technology literacy programmes  for faculties and students in colleges and universities,  and will also be useful to the library and information  science  educators  in  revising  their  curricula  to  cope  up  with  the  emerging  technological  trends  in  academic  libraries.  The  LIS  educators  can  make  use  of  these  discussions  to  explore  new  teaching  and assessment techniques. Libraries as usual are  serving the changed needs of the higher education  students and teachers and they are simultaneously  
483 

========7========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  6,  NOVEMBER   2014 
preparing themselves to serve any further changes  in  the  higher  education.  Incidentally,  three  of  the  top  ten  trends  identified  by  the  ACRL  Research  Planning  and  Review  Committee22   match  with  the  trends predicted by the NMC Horizon Report. These  three  trends  are  ‘communicating  (library’s)  value,  (library’s role in) scholarly communication and data  curation. They match respectively with NMC Horizon  Report’s  predictions  about  ‘data  driven  approach’,  ‘students  as  producers  of  information’  and  ‘self- quantification’.  
This  matching  of  the  NMC  Horizon  Report’s  predictions  with  the  trends  identified  by  a  library  association  confirms  that  libraries  are  prepared  to  respond  positively  to  any  emerging  technological  trends in higher education. Extended skills to adopt  educational/information technology and increasing use  of technology are the strengths of present academic  libraries.  Favourable  innovations  and  demographic  growth  in  higher  education  is  an  opportunity  of  academic libraries. With this strength and opportunities  as  well  as  the  research  published  in  peer  review  LIS  journals  and  the  scholarly  deliberations  in  LIS  conferences  indicate  that  today’s  academic  libraries  are  serving  satisfactorily  and  will  serve  more  effectively  in  future.  
  R EFEREncEs 
1. 
2. 
Johnson, L.;  et al.   NMC  horizon  NMC  Horizon  Report:  2014  Higher  Education  Edition.  The  New  Media  Consortium, Austin,  Texas,  2014. Colburn,  Selene  &  Haines,  Laura.  Measuring  libraries'  use  of  YouTube  as  a  promotional  tool:  An  exploratory  study  and  proposed  best  practices. J.  Web  Lib.,   2012,  6(1),  5-31.  
8. Mazoue, James G. The MOOC model: Challenging  
traditional  education  (EDUCAUSE  Review).  
January  28,  2013.  http://www.educause.edu/ 
ero/article/mooc-model-challenging-traditional- 
education  (accessed  on  26  March  2014).  9. Pujar,  S.M.  &  Bansode,  S.Y.  MOOCs  and  LIS  
education: A massive opportunity or challenge.  
Annals  Lib.  Inf.  Stud.,   2014,  61(1),  74-48.  10. Environmental  scan  2013.  http://www.ala.org. 
acrl/files/content/publications/whitepapers/ 
EnvironmentalScan13.pdf (accessed on 18 March  
2014). 
11. Wu, Kerry. Academic libraries in age of MOOCs.  
Ref.  Serv.  Rev.,  2013,  41(3),  576-87. 
12. Renee  Dechert,  et  al.  Exploring  the  learning  
commons: Tutoring moves into Hinckley library.  
Coll.  Res.  Lib.  News,  2014,  75(3),  125-46.  13. Appleton,  Leo.;  Stevenson,  Valerie  &  Boden,  
Debbi. Developing learning landscapes: Academic  
libraries  driving  organizational  change.  Ref.  
Serv.  Rev.,  2011, 39(3),  343-61. 
14. Talve,  Annie.  Libraries  as  places  of  invention.  
Library  Management,  2011,  32(8/9),  493-504. 15. Beagle,  Donald.  The  emergent  information  
commons: Philosophy, models, and 21st century  
learning paradigms. J. Lib. Admin.,  2012,  52(6-7),  
518-37.  DOI:  10.1080/01930826.2012.707951. 16. Kingma, Bruce & McClure, Kathleen. Lib-value:  
Values,  outcomes,  and  return  on  investment  
of  academic  libraries,  phase  III:  ROI  of  the  
Syracuse University Library. Coll. Res. Lib. (In  
press). http://crl.acrl.org/content/early/2014/01/17/ 
crl13-485.full.pdf+html (accessed on 26th March  
2014).  
3. 
Del  Bosque,  D.;  Leif,  S.  &  Skarl,  S.  Libraries  
17. Lewin,  Heather  S.  &  Passonneau,  Sarah  M.  
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
atwitter:  Trends  in  academic  library  tweeting.  Ref.  Serv.  Rev.,   2012,  40(2),  199-213. 
Chu,  Samuel  Kai-Wah  &  Du,  Helen  S.  Social  networking  tools  for  academic  libraries.  J.  Lib.  Inf.  Sci.,  2013,  45(1),  64-75.  DOI:  10.1177/0961000611434361. 
Bhardwaj, Raj Kumar. Use of social networking sites  by LIS professionals in higher education institutions in  India: A study. The Reference Librarian,  2014,  55 (1),  74-88.DOI:  10.1080/02763877.2014.855604.  Grace Saw; et.al. Social media for international  students:  It's  not  all  about  Facebook.  Library  Management,  2013,  34(3),156-74. DOI: 10.1108/ 01435121311310860. 
Romero, Nuria. Social reading and the creation  of  customer  loyalty  clubs  or  communities  to  improve  communication  with  our  users  and  reduce costs in marketing and advertising. The  Bottom  Line:  Manag.  Lib.  Fin.,   2012,  25(2),  63-67.  DOI:10.1108/08880451211256388. 
484 
An  analysis  of  academic  research  libraries  
assessment data: A look at professional models  
and  benchmarking  data.  J.  Acad.  Lib.,  2012,  
38(2),  85-93. 
18. Soria,  Krista  M.;  Fransen,  Jan,  &  Nackerud,  
Shane.  Library  use  and  undergraduate  student  
outcomes: New evidence for students’ retention  
and academic success. Portal: Lib. and Acad., 
2013, 13(2),  147-64.  
19. Gilchrist, Debra & Oakleaf, Megan. An essential  
partner: The  librarian’s  role  in  student  learning  
assessment. Urbana-Champaign, National Institute  
for  Learning  Outcomes  Assessment.  http:// 
www.msche.org/publications/LibraryLO_000[1]. 
pdf  (accessed  on  26  March  2014).  
20. Pollock, Ludmila. Data management: Librarians or  
science Informationists? Nature,  2012,  490(343).  
DOI:10.1038/490343d. 
21. Tenopir,  Carol;  Birch,  Ben  &  Allard,  Suzie.  
Academic libraries and research data services:  

========8========

KUMBHAR: ACADEMIC LIBRARY’S RESPONSES TO THE EMERGING TRENDS IN HIGHER EDUCATION 
Current  practices  and  plans  for  the  future.  
ACRL  white  paper. Association  of  College  and  
Research Libraries, Chicago, June 2012. http:// 
www.ala.org/acrl/sites/ala.org.acrl/files/content/ 
publications/whitepapers/Tenopir_Birch_Allard. 
pdf  (accessed  on  26  March  2014).  
22. ACRL Research Planning and Review Committee.  
2012 top ten trends in academic libraries. Coll.  
Res. Lib. News, 2012, 73(6), 311-20. http://crln. 
acrl.org/content/73/6/311.full.pdf+html (accessed  
on  26  March  2014).  
23. Assessment  in  action:  Academic  libraries  and  
student  success,  2012.  http://www.ala.org/acrl/ 
AiA  (accessed  on  14  March  2014).  
24. Hensley,  Merinda.;  et  al.  A  survey  of  library  
support  for  formal  undergraduate  research  
programs. Coll. Res. Lib.  (In press). htttp://crl. 
acrl.org/content/early/2013/02/06/crl13-458.full. 
pdf+html  (accessed  on  26th  March  2014).  25. Educopia Institute. Library Publishing Coalition.  
http://www.educopia.org/programs/lpc (accessed  
on  26  March  2014).  
26. Herther,  Nancy.  Library  publishing  coalition:  A  
milestone  in  evolution  of  scholarly  publishing.  
7  March  2013.  http://newsbreaks.infotoday. 
com/NewsBreaks/Library-Publishing-Coalition- 
A-Milestone-in-Evolution-of-Scholarly-Publishing- 
88253.asp  (accessed  on  26  March  2014).  27. Mathews,  Brian.  Think  like  a  startup:  A  white  
paper to inspire library entrepreneurialism. http:// 
vtechworks.lib.vt.edu/handle/10919/18649 (accessed  
on  26  March  2014).  
28. Neshyba, S. It's a flipping revolution. The Chronicle  
of Higher Education, 4 April 2013. http://chronicle. 
com/article/Its-a-Flipping-Revolution/138259/  
(accessed  on  26  March  2014).  
29. Daley,  J.  Why  86  percent  of  UNC-Chapel  Hill  
students  prefer  the  flipped  classroom. EdTech  
Magazine,  18  December  2013.  http://www. 
edtechmagazine.  com/higher/article/2013/12/ 
why-86-percent-unc-chapel-hill-students-prefer- 
flippedclassroom  (accessed  on  26  March  
2014). 
30. Pinto, Caro & Little, Geoffrey. Flipped librarians:  
Assessing  our  own  need  to  understand  our  
users.  J.  Acad.  Lib. (In  press)  http://dx.doi. 
org/10.1016/j.acalib.2014.01.009  (accessed  on  
26  March  2014). 
31. Fusich,  Monica;  et  al. HML-IQ  Fresno  state's  
online library orientation game. Coll.  Res.  Lib.  
News,   1  December  2011,  72(11),  626-30. 32. Burke,  Anne;  Lai,  Adrienne  &  Rogers,  Adam.  
The  North  Carolina  State  University  Libraries'  
Mobile Scavenger Hunt: A Case Study. In  Mobile  
Library  Services:  Best  Practices,  edited  by  
Charles Harmon & Michael Messina. Scarecrow  
Press,  Maryland,  2013,  65-78.  
33. Becker, Bernd W. Gamification of library instruction.  
Behav.  &  Soc.  Sci.  Lib.,   2013,  32(3),  199- 
202. 
34. Walsh, Andrew. Gamifying the university library.  
In   Online  Information  Conference  2011,  29 
November-1  December  2011,  London.  http:// 
eprints.hud.ac.uk/11938/2/WalshGamifyingpdf. 
pdf  (accessed  on  26  March  2014).  
35. Kim,  Bohyun.  Keeping  up  with...  gamification.  
http://www.ala.org/acrl/publications/keeping_up_with/ 
gamification  (accessed  on  26  March  2014). 
About  the Author 
dr  Rajendra  Kumbhar   is  working  as  Professor  at  the Department of Library and Information Science,  University  of  Pune.  He  has  been  in  the  teaching  profession for last 25 years. He has published more  than 40 articles and 15 books. His areas of interest  are:  LIS  research,  information  retrieval,  thesaurus,  knowledge  organisation  systems. 
485 

========9========

