DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 35, No. 1, January 2015, pp.  3-8  DOI: 10.14429/djlit.35.1.6885 
  2015, DESIDOC 
  Software Selection and Deployment for Library Cooperation and Resource  
Sharing Among Academic Libraries in South-West Nigeria 
Iroaganachi Mercy A.*, Iwu James Juliana** and Esse Ugwunwa C.*** 
    C entre for Learning Resources, Covenant University, Km10 Idiroko Road, Ota Ogun State, Nigeria E-mail: *mercy.iroaganachi@covenantuniversity.edu.ng, **juliana.james@covenantuniversity.edu.ng,  
***Ugunwa.esse@covenantuniversity.edu.ng 
 Ab StRACt 
This study assessed software selection and seployment sractices for library cooperation and resource  sharing among aacademic libraries in South-West Nigeria. The purposive sampling technique was adopted  and data collection instruments were questionnaire and interview. All of the 39 universities in the South- West  zone  were  chosen  and  copies  of  questionnaire  were  administered  to  a  representative  of  each  academic  library.  37  questionnaires  were  received. The  descriptive  statistical  method  of  analysis  was  used. It was discovered that there is no form of cooperation and resource sharing among the academic  libraries  presently. The  study  recommends  that  National  Universities  Commission  (NUC)  should  make  automation a requirement for all academic libraries in Nigeria and recommend particular software(s) for  cooperation and resource sharing to be possible among academic libraries among others.  
Keywords: Resource-sharing, library cooperation, library software packages, Nigeria, academic  
libraries, South-West Nigeria 
1. 
INtRODUCtION     
The  current  trend  in  information  technology  and  its  relevance  to  the  retrieval  system  compels  librarians  everywhere  in  the  world  to  move  from  analogue to the digital systems. This is to enhance  the efficiency of information management. According  to Lesk1, digital information can be accessed rapidly  around  the  world,  copied  for  preservation  without  error, stored compactly, and searched very quickly.  Also  technology  advancement  presents  the  library  profession  a  platform  for  easy  resource  sharing.  
University  libraries  in  Nigeria  should  develop  systems  that  will  help  them  link  online  to  other  institutions  of  interest  with  a  view  to  sourcing  information  online  or  creating  real  time  access  to  information that will enable the faculty and student  and  to  have  access  to  current  and  up-to-date  information2. In essence, they should not be bound  to their local book collection, but through networks,  be  able  to  borrow  books  or  exchange  documents  with  other  libraries3.  
Chapman4, observed that it is no longer feasible  for  any  institution  to  provide  all  the  information  needs  of  its  users  while  Zhang5,  opines  that  we  are  entering  the  golden  age  of  cooperation  as,  (a)  The  technology  to  link  libraries  and  to  make  
users  of  one  library  aware  of  the  collections  
of  others  is  available  and  getting  better  all  the  time;  and  (b)  Economies  are  forcing  libraries  to  cooperate. 
1.1 Statement  of  Problem 
The use of different library software at the same  time or the same library software at different times  which are not internet compatible is a major problem  which  the  academic  libraries  are  facing  in  Nigeria.  The  governing  bodies  NUC  (National  Universities  Commission) and NLA (Nigerian Library Association)  have  no  laid  down  rules  guiding  all  university  libraries  in  the  acquisition  of  a  particular  or  set  of  software(s) and as a result, every institution makes  its  choice  of  software,  based  on  how  appropriate  it  is  in  meeting  the  immediate  need(s),  (perceived  usefulness)  financial  strength,  and  maintenance  capability. The implication is that the most advocated  resource  sharing  and  cooperation  among  libraries  become  a  great  impossibility.  
Also, problems regarding complexity and enormous  task of digitisation, access to the internet, electricity  supply, and skilled man power are major obstacles  in the path of technological advancement in Nigeria  and  the  academic  libraries  are  not  left  out  of  this  predicament.  With  this  background  that  the  researchers seek to investigate software adaptation  
Received 9 April 2014, revised 5 November 2014, online published 22  January 2015 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  1,  JANUARy  2015 
practices and their application to library cooperation  and  resource  sharing  among  academic  libraries  in  South-West  Nigeria. 
1.2 Library  Software  and  Cooperation/ 
Resource  Sharing  in  Nigeria 
The advent of library software in Nigeria, which  dates  back  to  the  1970s,  had  the  challenge  of  acquiring and maintaining software packages because  of  cost.  Even  with  the  variety  of  library  software  available  in  the  market,  which  came  either  as  integrated  or  modular  package,  Nigerian  libraries  did  not  adopt  any  until  1984  when    International  Institute  of  Tropical  Agriculture  (IITA)  library  in  Ibadan  replaced  its  card  catalogue  with  a  fully  computerised  integrated  software  called,  Battlelle  Automated  Search  Information  Systems  (BASIS)8. 
Academic  libraries  in  Nigeria  didn’t  seem  to  use  library  software  until  the  National  Universities  Commission (NUC) acquired TINLIB for only federal  university  libraries  and  UNESCO  introduced  CDS/ ISIS. Afterwards, different software came into market  resulting  to  lack  of  uniformity  in  the  use  of  library  software became a major problem in the academic  environment  militating  against  effective  resource  sharing and cooperation9. Zhang5  explained that, for  any  successful  cooperation  and  resource  sharing  among  libraries,  all  interested  libraries  must  form  a  consortium.  
Library cooperation in Nigeria has its root traced  back to the National Union Catalogue (NUC) which  was  conceived  in  1963  by  the  National  Library  of  Nigeria and had 85 libraries as participants. However,  the programme could not accomplish its aim because  it  lacked  standard  in  the  cataloguing  information  supplied by participating libraries6. Then there was  the  meeting  of  the  working  group  on  inter-library  lending  held  at  a  forum  of  the  National  Library  of  Nigeria  in  1974  at  Ile-Ife  and  the  subsequent  conference on cooperation in Nigeria, held at Kaduna  in  198011.  The  result  was  the  NUC  project  which  aimed at examining the possibilities of cooperative  acquisition  and  to  consider  a  viable  framework  for  operating  the  scheme  in  Nigeria,  this  also  failed7. 
2. 
ObjeCtIveS     
Specific  objectives  of  the  study  are  to:  (a) Determine the extent of automation in academic  
libraries  in  the  South-West  zone  of  Nigeria (b) Determine  the  library  software(s)  in  use  in  
academic  libraries  in  the  South-West  zone  of  
Nigeria 
(c) Determine  the  extent  of  use  of  the  software  
adopted  by  the  libraries 
(d) Determine  the  level  of  library  consortia  among  
academic  libraries  in  the  South-West  zone  of  
Nigeria 
4 
(e) Identify strategies for enhancing library automation  
and software adoption practices in the academic  
libraries 
3. 
MetHODOLOGY 
The survey method of research was adopted for  the study. Respondents were chosen from Universities  in the South-West geopolitical zone of the country.  The  purposive  sampling  technique  was  adopted  and data collection instruments were questionnaire  and  interview.  In  Nigeria,  there  is  a  total  of  128  universities while in the South-West zone comprising  of  six  states  of  the  federation,  there  are  39  as  at  the  time  of  this  study.  All  of  the  39  universities  were  chosen  and  copies  of  questionnaire  were  administered to a representative of each academic  library.  37  questionnaires  were  retrieved  and  valid  for  the  study.  The  descriptive  statistical  method  of  analysis  was  used.    
4. 
DAtA ANALYSIS  AND  FINDINGS 
Table 1 revealed that 26 (70 %) of the respondents’  libraries were PAWLS (partial automation with library  software)  meaning  that  the  libraries  do  not  fully  deploy  their  software  to  all  automation  operations,  
table 1. extent of automation in Nigerian academic  
libraries and the software in use 
Institutions 
extent of  automa- tion PAWLS PAWLS 
Software in  use 
University of Ibadan 
Olabisi Onabanjo University,  Ago-Iwoye  
Covenant University Ota University of Lagos  
The Bells University of Technol- ogy, Ota 
Fountain University, Oshogbo  Mcpherson University Seriki  Sotayo, Ajebo  
Redeemers University  Lagos State University 
FA PAWLS LOWLS 
VTLS  Alice for  Windows MILLENIUM MILLENIUM 
LOWLS PAWLS 
Liberty3 
PAWLS PAWLS 
KOHA Alice for  Windows 
Achievers University, Owo   Pan-African University, Lagos  Federal University of Agricul- ture, Abeokuta 
Lead City University, Ibadan Wesley University of Science &  Technology, Ondo  
Crawford University 
Adekunle Ajasin University,  Akungba 
LOWLS LOWLS PAWLS 
KOHA 
PAWLS PAWLS 
KOHA Liberty 3 
PAWLS PAWLS 
KARLMARK SLAM 

========2========

MERCy, et.al.,: SOFTWARE  S ELECTION AND  D EPLOyMENT FOR  L IBRARy COOPERATION AND  R ESOURCE  S HARINg 
Tai Solarin University of Educa- LOWLS 
tion, Ijebu-Ode 
Adeleke University, Ede  PAWLS KOHA Obafemi Awolowo University,  PAWLS VTLS  Ile-Ife  
Ladoke Akintola University  PAWLS KOHA Technology, Ogbomoso  
BOWEN University, Oyo  PAWLS KOHA Crescent University, Abeokuta  LOWLS 
Federal University, Oye-Ekiti   PAWLS KOHA Federal University Technology,  PAWLS SLAM Akure  
Afe-Babalola University, Ado- PAWLS KOHA Ekiti  
Caleb University, Lagos PAWLS KOHA Bishop Ajayi Crowther Univer- LOWLS 
sity, Ibadan  
Babcock University  PAWLS KOHA Joseph ayo Babalola University  LOWLS 
Ekiti State University  PAWLS SLAM Osun State University KOHA Oduduwa University, Ipetumodu  LOWLS 
University of Ado-Ekiti  PAWLS SLAM Ondo State University of Sci- SLAM ence and Technology  
CETEP City University, Lagos  LOWLS 
Technical University, Ibadan  LOWLS 
Elizade University, Ilara-Mokin PAWLS KOHA National Open University of  PAWLS Liberty 3 Nigeria, Lagos 
PAWL=  Partial Automation  With  Library  Software;  FAWL=  Low  Automation Without Library Software, FA= Full Automation 
for example what is available, is catalogue and not  content  of  the  materials  even  the  catalogues  in  some  libraries  do  not  reflect  majority  the  library’s  holding while 10 (27 %) were low automation without  library  software  (LOWLS).  However  only  1  (2.7  %)  was found to be full automation (FA). The Covenant  University  Library  is  automated  with  all  routine  activities  computerised.  It  has  a  functional  virtual  library  service,  which  gives  staff  and  students’  access  to  the  web  public  access  catalogue,  and  other electronic resources from offices, departments  and  wherever  there  is  a  computer  terminal  which  is  linked  to  the  university  network. 
This  indicated  that  about  75  %  of  academic  libraries in the south-west Nigeria are automated to  a fairly reasonable extent which is an improvement,  compared to study by Isiaku & Ibrahim10  who found  in  a  survey  that  resource  sharing  is  practiced  at  a  very  low  level  in  the  two  northern  universities  partly  due  to  the  fact  that  these  institutions  have  failed to embrace the adoption of ICT (automation).  
KOHA SLAM VTLS   Liberty 3   Alice  Millenium  Karl                             for Windows         Mark 
Figure 1. Rating of most used software 
From Fig. 1, it is revealed that out of the 26 partial  automation with library software (PAWLS) academic  libraries  surveyed,  seven  different  software  were  identified.  KOHA  was  the  most  commonly  adopted  software  and  perceived  to  be  most  available  to  academic libraries from South-West Nigeria universities  with  a  total  12  (44  %).  This  followed  in  perceived  affordability  and  availability  by  SLAM  with  a  total  of 5 (19 %), VTLS, Liberty3, Alice for Windows and  MILLENIUM  with  an  equal  total  of  2  (7.6  %)  each,  and  KARLMARK  1  (3.8  %).  KOHA  appeared  to  be  the most used perhaps because it is an open-source  integrated library system and does not require fund  to  download  and  customise.  
Table 2 revealed that majority of the respondent’s  libraries  are  not  fully  utilising  their  software.  Only  1  (3.8  %)  of  the  libraries  have  all  its  collections  catalogued,  indexed  and  has  all  its  library  routine  activities  computerised.  The  remaining  25  (96  %)  only  have  part  of  their  total  collections  catalogued  and  indexed.  In  essence,  they  are  still  in  the  process of cataloguing and indexing their collections.  However,  they  do  not  yet  have  all  their  library  routine activities computerised, except for 1 (3.8 %)  of  the  libraries  that  is  still  in  the  process  of  test- running  its  software.  The  indication  is  that  these  libraries  are  automated  to  some  extent  yet  the  librarians  are  not  fully  utilising  their  platform  for  routine  activities  let  alone  share  their  resources.  Nevertheless, response to interview questions revealed  that  beyond  adequate  skills  and  funding,  there  are  challenges  of  misappropriation  of  the  little  funds  that  are  meant  for  running  the  library  and  many  of  the  universities  did  not  consider  resource  sharing  as  criteria  during  software  acquisition. 
Finally,  it  can  be  deduced  from  the  findings  that  many  librarians  in  the  South-West  zone  are  indifferent  about  moving  with  the  trend  in  the  field  
5 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  1,  JANUARy  2015 
table 2. extent of use of the software adopted by the  
libraries 
Institutions Software  Cata- Library  
in use logue/ routine  
index of  activities  
all collec- computerised 
tions 
University of  VTLS     NCC 0 Ibadan 
Olabisi Onabanjo  Alice for     NCC 
University, Ago- Windows 
Iwoye 
Covenant Univer- MILLE-    CAC        ALAC sity, Ota. NIUM 
University of  MILLE-    NCC 0 Lagos NIUM 
The Bells Univer- 
sity of Technology,  
Ota 
Fountain Univer- 
sity, Oshogbo  
Mcpherson Univer- 
sity Seriki Sotayo,  
Ajebo  
Redeemers Uni- KOHA    NCC 
versity 
Achievers Univer- 
sity, Owo 
Pan-African Uni- 
versity, Lagos 
 Lagos State Uni - Alice for     NCC 
versity Windows 
Federal University  KOHA 
of Agriculture, 
Abeokuta 
Lead City Univer- KOHA 
sity, Ibadan 
Wesley University  
of Science & Tech- 
nology, Ondo 
Crawford Univer- KARL-    NCC 
sity MARK 
Adekunle Aja- SLAM 
sin University,  
Akungba 
Tai Solarin Univer- 
sity of Education 
Adeleke Univer- KOHA    NCC 
sity, Ede  
Obafemi Awolowo  VTLS  
University Ile-Ife 
Ladoke Akintola  KOHA 
University Technol- 
ogy, Ogbomoso 
BOWEN Univer- KOHA 
sity, Oyo 
6 
Crescent Univer- sity, Abeokuta 
Federal University  SLAM Technology Akure  Caleb University  KOHA 
   NCC 
Bishop Ajayi  Crowther Univer- sity, Ibadan Babcock Univer- sity Library 
KOHA 
  NCC 
Joseph Ayo Ba- 
balola University 
Afe-Babalola Uni- KOHA    NCC 
versity  
Osun State Uni- KOHA 
versity  
Oduduwa Univer- 
sity Ipetumodu 
University of Ado- SLAM    NCC 
Ekiti  
Ondo State Uni- SLAM 
versity of Science  
and Technology  
Federal University   KOHA 
Oye-Ekiti  
CETEP City Uni- 
versity, Lagos 
Technical Univer- 
sity, Ibadan 
National Open  Liberty 3    NCC 
University of  
Nigeria,Lagos 
Elizade University  KOHA    NCC 
Ilara-Mokin 
CAC=Catalogue of All Collections 
NCC= Non Catalogue of All Collections 
ALAC= All Library Routine Activities Computerised NALAC= Not All Library Routine Activities Computerised 
therefore, not engaging in aggressive full automation  exercise  or  the  means  of  sustenance  is  lacking  since  they  already  have  adopted  one  software  or  the  other.      
Table 3 showed the level of software use among  academic  libraries  in  South  -West  zone  of  Nigeria  and that there is no form of cooperation and resource  sharing  taking  place  amongst  PAWLS  academic  libraries  in  the  South-West  zone  of  Nigeria  not  even  those  using  same  software. 
It was gathered from the interview session that  the  only  activity  that  looks  like  cooperation  is  on  the  KOHA  community  platform  where  a  co-user  library  can  have  access  to  a  generated  report  of  members  of  the  community.  Others  on  the  VTLS  

========4========

MERCy, et.al.,: SOFTWARE  S ELECTION AND  D EPLOyMENT FOR  L IBRARy COOPERATION AND  R ESOURCE  S HARINg 
table 3. Level of software use among academic  
libraries in the South-West zone of Nigeria 
Institutions 
University of Ibadan 
Olabisi Onabanjo University, Ago-Iwoye Covenant University, Ota 
University of Lagos 
Redeemers University 
 Lagos State University 
Federal University of Agriculture, Abeo- kuta 
Lead City University, Ibadan 
Crawford University 
Adekunle Ajasin University, Akungba Adeleke University, Ede   
Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife Ladoke Akintola University Technology,  Ogbomoso 
BOWEN University, Oyo 
Adekunle Ajasin University, Akungba Federal University Technology, Akure  Caleb University  
Babcock University  
Afe-Babalola University  
Osun State University  
University of Ado-Ekiti 
Ondo State university of Science and  Technology  
Federal University, Oye-Ekiti  National Open University of Nigeria,  Lagos 
Elizade University, Ilara-Mokin 
Software in use VTLS  
Alice for Windows MILLENIUM MILLENIUM KOHA 
Alice for Windows KOHA 
KOHA KARLMARK SLAM KOHA VTLS  KOHA 
KOHA SLAM SLAM KOHA KOHA KOHA KOHA SLAM SLAM 
KOHA Liberty 3 
KOHA 
platform  claimed  that  efforts  were  made  towards  forming  a  consortium  which  failed  because  of  lack  of  consistent  power  supply,  fund  for  mechanical  retrospective conversion of hard copies and difficulty  in migrating from previous software due to improper  conversion  to  MARC  format  (lack  of  IT  skills).  
3. CONCLUSIONS AND   Re COMMeNDAtIONS 
Seven different types of software packages were  identified  to  be  in  use  in  these  libraries  and  it  was  found  during  the  interview  sessions  that  there  is  no form of resource sharing and cooperation taking  place  among  them.For  a  successful  cooperation  and  resource  sharing  among  academic  libraries  in  the  south-west  zone  and  Nigeria  as  a  whole,  all  interested  libraries  must  form  a  consortium.  There  should  be  a  policy  on  software  acquisition  which  should  include  compatibility  and  ease  of  use  as  criteria for acquisition so as to ensure the possibility  of  resource  sharing  among  libraries.  
The  findings  of  this  study  is  in  tandem  with  a  survey by Anasi & Ali12  which revealed that the prospect  for  resource  sharing  among  university  libraries  in  Nigeria  is  high,  but  that  factors  hindering  effective  exercise  of  same  include:  inadequate  funding,  a  dearth of skilled librarians, power outages, an absence  of  web-accessible  OPACs,  uneven  development  of  libraries,  and  slow  progress  of  library  automation.  What  is  referred  to  as  lack  of  skills  may  be  that  the  software  are  not  easy  to  use  as  observed  and  recommended by Wallace & Sheetz13  that software  developers should direct more effort on ease of use  as  a  measure  in  developing  software. 
This  study  recommends  that  the  NUC  should  make  automation  a  requirement  for  all  academic  libraries in Nigeria and recommend particular software  which  are  internet  compatible  cooperation  and  resource  sharing  to  be  possible  among  academic  libraries. Software developers should direct enough  effort  at  ease  of  usage  when  developing  software  for libraries. All academic librarians should develop  good ICT skills, be well-oriented and given in-depth  training  on  the  particular  software  that  their  library  is  using  thereby  being  able  to  maximise  the  use  of  same.  Librarians  should  endeavour  to  engage  in  personal  cataloguing  of  their  library’s  holdings  rather  than  wait  for  mechanical  digitisation  that  may  never  happen.  government  and  proprietors  of  tertiary  institutions  should  give  more  attention  to  the  libraries  by  making  available  better  funding  than  is  the  situation  presently.  Finally,  available  fund  should  be  well  appropriated  by  the  university  authorities.  
ReFeReNCeS 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
Lesk, M. Understanding digital libraries. Morgan  Kaufmann  Publications,  San  Francisco.  2005. Nwabuisi,  T.I  &  Uche,  H.I.  The  challenges  of  software  use  in  Nigerian  university  libraries:  Review  of  experiences  from  1990-2009.  Lib.  Phil.  and  Prac.,   2011.  http://www.webpages. uidaho.edu/~mbolin/nwabuisi-igbo2.htm Helosia, H.A. Sharing of information and cooperation  among university libraries and their importance  in  the  networked  world.2013.http://www.0277. ch/ojs/index.php/cdrs_0277/article/view/30/80 Chapman,  E.  Buying  shares  in  libraries:  The  economics of cooperative collection development.  IFLA  Journal,  1997,  24(2),  102-06.  
Zhang,  W.  Library  electronic  resource  sharing  among  liberal  arts  colleges:  ACS  palladian  alliance project. 1997. http://www.white-clouds. Com/iclc/clij/cl3zhang.htm (accessed on 11 March  2004) 
Ubogu,  F.N.;  Okoh,  M.I.;  Alimole,  A.N.  &  Eyitayo,  O.T.  Library  networks  and  resource  
7 

========5========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  1,  JANUARy  2015 
sharing  in  Nigeria.  African  J.  Lib.  Arch.  Inf.  
Sci.,   1992,  2(2),  99-109. 
7. Agboola, A.T. Information technology potentials  
for inter-library loan and cooperation. Lagos  J.  
Lib.  Inf.  Sci.,  2003, 1(2),  106-12. 
8. Oyiloye, A.M. Software packages for libraries in  
Nigeria. In   Technology for Information Management  
and  Service:  Modern  Libraries  and  Information  
Centers in Developing Countries.edited by E.C.  
Modu.  Evi-Colman,  Ibadan,  pp.  40-51. 9. Oketunji,  I.  Professional  challenges  in  digital  
age.  Lagos  J.  Lib.  Inf.  Sci.,   2003,  1(2),  101- 
05. 
10. Isyaku,  A.A.  &  Ibrahim,  U.  Resource  sharing  
services in academic library services in Bauchi: The  
case of Abubakar Tafawa Balewa university and  
Muhammadu Wabi libraries, Federal Polytechnic,  
Bauchi,  Merit  Research.  J.  Edu.  Rev.,  2013,  
1(1),  1-5.http://www.meritresearchjournals.org/ 
er/index.htm 
11. Kundu,  A.K.  &  Panda,  N.M.  Inevitability  of  
resource sharing among the university libraries  
in  North-East  India:  A  pragmatic  approach.  
Herald  of  Lib.  Sci.,  1998,  37(1-2),  56-69. 12. Anasi, S. &  Ali, H. Resource sharing challenges  
and  prospects  in  Nigerian  university  libraries.  
Inter.  Doc.  Supp.,  2012,  40(3),  156–62. 13. Wallace,  L.N  &  Sheetz,  S.D.  The  adoption  of  
software  measures:  A  technology  acceptance  
model (ATM). Persp. Inform. Manag., 2014, 51,  
249-59. 
8 
About  the Authors 
Ms Iroaganachi, Mercy A.  is the Readers’ Services  Librarian,  Covenant  University  Library  (Center  for  Learning  Resources).  She  holds  BA  (Hons.)  in  Communication  and  Language  Arts,  and  Masters  Degree in Library and Information Science (MLIS) from  the  University  of  Ibadan.She  is  a  Senior  Resource  Officer  in  Covenant  University  Ota,  Ogun  State  Nigeria, a Certified Librarian of Nigeria (CLN) by the  Librarian Registration Council of Nigeria (LRCN). Her  areas of interests are: Metrics/Assessment, gender  studies in librarianship, librarianship/ICT,information  for  vulnerable  groups  and  library  administration. 
Ms  Iwu-james juliana   is  presently  working  as  a  Resource  Officer  at  Convenant  University,  Nigeria.  She has done BLIS and MLIS. Her areas of interests  are: Libraries and education in developing nations,  corporate social responsibility, enhancing information  access  and  use  for  the  dyslexics,  and  cataloguing  education. 
Ms  esse  Ugwunwa  Chinyere   is  a  Librarian  1  in  Centre for Learning Resources, Covenant University.  Her  area  of  research  interest  are:  Information  and  communication  technology,  user  education,  human  computer  interaction,  etc. 

========6========

