DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 34, No. 5, September 2014, pp. 435-439 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.34.7054 
  2014, DESIDOC 
Document Delivery Service by Central Library, Babasaheb  
Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Lucknow: A Study 
O.P. Saini  
Central Library, Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Lucknow-226 025 
E-mail: omsays@gmail.com  
ABStrACt 
Interlibrary loan, also recognised as interloan, interlending, document delivery, or document supply  is a service whereby a user of one library can borrow books or receive photocopies of documents that  are owned by another library1. Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University (BBAU), Lucknow is a central  university established in 1996. The University became a member of JCCC@UGC–INFONET in April 2008.  The present paper discusses theoretical and practical frameworks of document delivery service (DDS)  which was initiated by the University in July 2009. The paper deals with the steps and methods involved in  DDS. It throws light on the advantages and disadvantages of the service and provides an understanding  on the role of INFLIBNET for supporting the service in higher education. For this study, all the available  offcial records were consulted, analysed and presented in tabulated form. The paper highlights the use  and utility of the service and gives recommendations for improvement in services.   
Keywords: UGC-INFONET,  DDS  centers,  resource-sharing,  inter-library  loan,  document  delivery    
  service  
1. INtrODUCtION 
Emergence of Information and Library Network  (INFLIBNET) is proven to be a revolution in higher  education  in  India.  Its  involvement  in  creating  infrastructure  for  sharing  of  library  and  information  resources and services among academic and research  institutions in India has a great impact. Sophisticated  access  mechanisms,  increases  serials  costs,  new  technologies,  and  growing  researcher  needs  and  expectations  are  all  driving  libraries  to  reassess  basic assumptions about interlibrary loan (ILL) and  document  delivery2.  
The  term  document  delivery  is  used  for  a  service,  namely,  the  supply  of  journal  articles  and  other copies on a personalised basis, whether these  come from other libraries or direct from publishers.  The  end-user  is  usually  responsible  for  any  fees,  such  as  costs  for  postage  or  photocopying1.  The  user makes a request to their library, which, acting  as an intermediary, identifies owners of the desired  item, places  the request,  receives  the item,  makes  it available to the user, and arranges for its return.  The  lending  library  usually  sets  the  due  date  and  overdue  fees  of  the  material  borrowed.  Although  books  and  journal  articles  are  the  most  frequently  requested  items,  but  some  libraries  lend  audio  recordings,  video  recordings,  maps,  sheet  music,  and  microforms  of  all  kinds1.  
The  advent  of  ILL,  information  explosion,  and  scarcity  of  budget  has  forced  libraries  to  supply 
the  documents  to  the  users  not  only  from  their  own  collection  but  also  from  collection  of  other  libraries3.  The  Xeroxing  was  developed  in  1960  then  it  became  possible  to  provide  photocopies  of  documents4. According to Dictionary of Library and  Information Science, “The provision of published or  unpublished documents in hard copy, microform, or  digital format, usually for a fixed fee upon request.  In  most  libraries,  document  delivery  service  is  provided  by  the  interlibrary  loan  office  on  a  cost- recovery  basis.  The  patron  is  usually  required  to  pick up printed material at the library, but electronic  full-text  may  be  forwarded  via  e-mail.  Also  refers  to  the  physical  or  electronic  delivery  of  documents  from  a  library  collection  to  the  residence  or  place  of  business  of  a  library  user,  upon  request”5. 
To  fulfill  the  information  needs  of  the  end-user  through  supply  of  information  documents  is  known  as  document  delivery  service6. 
1.1.Aadvantages/disadvantages  of  Document  
Delivery  Service 
The  service  has  following  advantages: 
(i) It  shows  efficiency  and  commitment  of  the  
library  to  serve  the  users. 
(ii) It  is  more  effective  service  in  absence  of  a  
specific  document. 
(iii) It  is  cost-effective  service  as  it  depends  on  
resource  sharing  among  libraries. 
Received 5 May 2014, Revised 21 July 2014, Online published 4 September 2014 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  5, SEPTEMBER   2014 
(iv) It  provides  more  user  satisfaction  and  fulfils  
gap  of  non  availability  of  documents. (v) It  solves  budget-related  problem  of  the  
libraries. 
The  service  has  following  disadvantages: (i) It  is  time  consuming,  as  it  depends  on  the  
efforts  of  others  libraries. 
(ii) Sometimes, the overlapping of request documents  
caused  problems  to  libraries. 
(iii) Users  may  forget  after  making  a  request  to  a  
document. 
2. OBJECtIVES  OF  tHE  StUDY 
In  this  study,  the  DDS  implemented  and  provided  by  the  central  library,  Babasaheb  Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Lucknow is analysed  and  discussed. An  attempt  is  made  to  find  out  the  usage  of  the  service  by  the  user  with  the  help  of  available  official  records.  The  study  suggests  few  ways of making it better and effective to satisfy the  needs of the research community of the university.  This  study  can  be  useful  for  the  students  of  the  library  and  information  science  (LIS)  at  a  large.  After the analysis of the records, it is observed that  this  service  is  proved  a  way  by  which  the  users’  information  needs  satisfy  up  to  some  extent.  The  main  objectives  of  the  study  are  to: 
(i) Understand  the  role  of  INFLIBENT  Centre  in  
DDS 
(ii) Know  the  growth,  development  and  usage  of  
DDS  in  the  central  library,  and 
(iii) Suggest  the  ways  for  betterment  of  the  DDS. 
  3. MEtHODOLO gY 
Since,  the  central  library  is  responsible  for  supply of documents to the users who request under  this  service,  therefore,  it  maintains  all  the  records.  The  official  records  are  an  invaluable  tool  of  data  gathering for case study research that is focused on  the past and its impact on the present. The careful  analysiss of records can provide valuable information  on the life, concerns, and aspirations of individuals  and  groups,  as  well  as  on  the  activity,  structure,  mission,  and  goals  of  associations,  organisations,  and  institutions.  For  this  study,  all  the  available  records were consulted and analysed and the results  were  presented  in  the  subsequent  tables. 
4.   ANALYSIS 
4.1   r ole  of  INFLIBNEt 
INFLIBNET Centre is an autonomous inter-university  centre of the University Grants Commission (UGC)  of  India,  started  in  1991  with  its  headquarter  at  Gujarat University Campus, Ahmadabad. INFLIBNET  
436 
is involved in modernising university libraries in India  and connecting them through a nation-wide high speed  data network for information and resource sharing7.  It  has  initiated  interlibrary  loans  and  document  delivery services from the comprehensive collection  of subscribed journals under JCCC@UGC-INFONET.  JCCC  is  J-Gate  Custom  Content  for  a  group  of  homogeneous consortia members8. INFLIBNET has  designated  22  libraries  to  fulfill  ILL  request  from  the  users,  affiliated  to  149  universities  covered  under  UGC.  The  22  universities  were  identified  as  document delivery/ILL centres by the INFLIBNET at  the  time  of  starting  JCCC9   as  given  in  Table  1. 
These document delivery centres deliver, on demand,  the copies of papers from learned journals, conference  proceedings  and  other  materials  available in  their  collection at free/nominal cost on No profit-No loss basis  and expected to be prompt9. Universities can request  for articles from the journal holdings of those libraries  wherever  they  find  useful  articles  in  JCCC  search,  that  are  not  available  in  that  particular  library7. 
table 1. Document delivery/inter library loan centers 
S. No. University  Place 
1. Annamalai University Annamalai Nagar  
(Tamil Nadu) 
2. Banaras Hindu University Varanasi (Uttar Pradesh) 3. Bangalore University Bangalore (Karnataka) 4. Jawaharlal Nehru  New Delhi 
University 
5. Maharaja Sayajirao  Baroda (Gujarat) 
University of Baroda 
6. North Eastern Hill  Darjling (West Bengal) 
University 
7. Pondicherry University Pondicherry (Goa) 8. Punjabi University Patiala (Punjab) 9. University of Calcutta Kolkata (West Bengal) 10. University of Hyderabad Hyderabad 
(Andhra Pradesh) 11. University of Pune Pune (Maharashtra) 12. Assam University Silchar (Assam) 13. Banasthali University Banasthali (Rajasthan) 14. Jadavpur University Kolkata (West Bengal 15. Kurukshetra University Kurukshetra (Haryana) 16. Nagpur University Nagpur (Maharashtra) 17. Pandit Ravishankar  Raipur (Chhattisgarh 
Shukla University 
18. Punjab University Chandigarh (Punjab) 19. Tata Institute of Social  Mumbai  (Maharastra) 
Sciences 
20. University of Delhi Delhi 
21. University of Madras Chennai (Tamil Nadu) 22. University of Rajasthan Jaipur (Rajasthan) 

========2========

SAINI: DOCUMENT  D ELIVERy SERVICE By CENTRAL  L IBRARy, BBAU, LUCKNOW 
4.2 Steps  in  Document  Delivery  Service 
The  following  steps  are  involved  in  document  delivery service available in the library of Babasaheb  Bhimrao Ambedkar  University: 
(i) Receiving  of  requests  from  the  users  via  
e-mail 
(ii) Identification  of  bibliographical  detail  of  
documents 
(iii) Identification  of  supplier  and  publisher  of  
documents 
(iv) Processing of the request and checking availability  
of  document  in  library  collection. 
(v) Making  a  formal  request,  if  document  is  not  
available  in  library  collection  (or  sometimes  
placing  order)  for  supply  of  documents  to  the  
concerned  supply  centre  or  supplier 
(vi) Receiving  of  document  and  proper  record  by  
the  library 
(vii) Informing  the  concerned  users  and  delivery  of  
the  document.  
4.3 Methods  of  Document  Delivery  Service 
University  library  meets  out  the  demand  of  the  documents  through  different  methods.  The  library  delivers  request  documents  through: 
(i) Available  library  resources 
(ii) Inter-library-loan  among  libraries 
(iii) Library consortia, such as, UGC-INFONET digital  
library  consortium,  etc. 
(iv) Vendors  by  subscribing  request  documents (v) Online  by  collecting  documents  from  the  
websites 
(vi) Request  through  the  document  delivery  
centres 
4.4 Usage  of  Document  Delivery  Services  
To  know  the  usage  of  the  document  delivery  services  provided  by  the  Library,  an  analysis  of  records  has  been  carried  out. 
4.4.1 Gender-wise  Distribution  of  Receivers 
To get the gender-wise distribution of the users  who received documents from the library, the records  were  analysed.  It  revealed  that  the  majority  of  the  documents  were  received  by  the  334  (92.78  %) male users, it shows that the Male users  are more  aware,  while  the  female  users  (26  (7.22  %)  need  orientation  for  awareness.  
4.4.2 Users  Category 
During  the  analysis  of  records,  the  categories  of  the  users  were  identified  which  are  given  in  the  Table  2.  However,  the  faculty  members  need  more  documents  to  fulfill  their  day-to-day  requirement  
though  the  faculty  members  have  received  fewer  documents  from  the  library.  The  faculty  member  should  be  encouraged  to  request  more  documents  under this service, but they should also encourage  the  research  scholars  and  PG  students.  
S.  No. 1. 2. 3. 
table 2. Category of users 
Category Male Female No. of  
documents (%) Faculty members 18 3 21 (5.83) Research scholars 80 5 85 (23.61) PG students 236 18 254 (70.55) total 334 26 360 
4.4.3 Document  Delivery  Period 
On  arrival  of  a  document,  the  library  intimates  a  user  who  requests  for  documents  in  the  library.  The  users  take  time  to  receive  their  documents.  It  is  observed  from  Table  3  that  17.2  %  documents  are  still  pending  to  be  delivered.  In  case  of  delay,  the  users  forget  to  receive  their  documents.  It  is  also  observed  that  once  their  task  is  completed,  they  usually  do  not  receive  documents  from  the  library,  though  the  library  recalls  them  about  their  documents.  To  solve  this  problem,  library  needs  to  fix  a  set  of  time  to  receive  the  document  and  after that the document should be delivered by the  library  itself.  The  period  of  document  delivery  is  mentioned  in  Table  3.  
S. No. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 
table 3. Period of documents delivery 
Period (days) No. of documents (%) 
01-10  180 (50) 
11-20  31 (8.6) 
21-30  42 (11.6) 
31-40  30 (8.3) 
41-50  7 (1.9) 
> 50  8 (2.2) 
Not delivered 62 (17.2) 
total 360 
4.4.4 Types  of  Documents 
Through the analysis of records, different types  of documents (Table 4) were delivered under DDS.  Majority of the documents were journal articles, those  delivered to the users. The journal articles supplies  pin-pointed information about a topic of research and  these  are  costlier  also,  therefore,  maximum  users  request  for  the  journal  articles  only.  Considering  the  fact,  the  library  should  focus  on  subscribing  print  and  electronic  journals  in  its  collection.  It  is  because  the  research  articles  in  the  University  are  consulted  at  large.  The  users  should  also  request  for  some  other  formats  of  the  documents. 
437 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  5, SEPTEMBER   2014 
S.  No. 
1. 2. 3. 4. 
table 4. types of documents 
types Form No. of  
Print Soft 
documents (%) Book chapter 19 2 21 (5.8) Journal articles 290 8 298 (82.7) Proceeding articles 30 3 33 (9.1) Other 6 2 8 (2.3) total 345 15 360 
4.4.5  Document  Delivery  Centres 
It  is  observed  during  the  analysis  that  only  4  centres  (Table  5)  have  supplied  documents  to  the  library.  It  is  because  that  the  library  has  an  inbuilt  system  for  Request  Articles  (RA)  in  its  databases  accessible  that  whatever  users  request,  it  goes  direct to the INFLIBNET Centre and a carbon copy  of  e-mail  to  central  library.  Hence,  on  maximum  occasions the INFLIBNET centre solves the problem  at  their  end  and  sends  the  documents  directly,  however,  it  is  found  that  some  other  DDS  centres  also send documents to the library on the basis on  the  direction  of  the  INFLIBNET  Centre. 
table 5. Document delivery centers 
S. No. Name of centers No. of documents (%) 1. INFLIBNET 240 (66.6) 2. Delhi University 93 (25.8) 
3. Banasthali University 25 (6.9) 
4. Punjabi University 2 (0.5) 
total 360 
4.4.6 Year-wise  Distribution 
The year-wise distribution is presented in Table 6.  During the period of four and a half years the service  became  more  powerful  tool  to  satisfy  the  need  of  the users. Initially first two years, i.e., July 2009 to  December  2010,  the  demand  of  documents  in  the  library remained less. However, it speeded up after  2013 when documents delivery increased as 40.27  %.  It  is  expected  that  this  service  will  increased  with  the  membership  of  the  library. 
4.4.7  Department-wise  Distribution 
The  University  is  running  23  regular  courses  under  8  schools,  though  only  the  users  from  17  departments (Table 7) have received their documents  under this service. It shows that the library is lacking  to  provide  adequate  orientation  and  awareness  among  the  users,  because  only  two  departments,  i.e.,  Department  of  History  and  Economics  asked  more  than  73  %  of  the  total  documents,  while  9  departments  have  asked  only  3  %  of  the  total  documents delivered under this service. To enhance  this service, periodically information literacy programs  should  be  organised  by  the  library. 
438 
table 6. Year-wise distribution 
S. No. Years No. of documents (%) 1. Jul’ 2009- Dec’ 2009 4 (1.10) 
2. 
Jan’ 2010 – Dec’ 2010 
6 (1.60) 
3. 
Jan’ 2011 – Dec’ 2011 
82 (22.70) 
4. 
Jan’ 2012 –Dec’ 2012 
123 (34.16) 
5. 
Jan’ 2013 -31 Dec’ 2013 
145 (40.27) 
total  
360 
S. No. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 
table 7. Department-wise distribution Departments No. of documents (%) History 144 (40.00) Economics 122 (33.88) Animal Science 25 (6.94) Environment Science 19 (5.27) Library Science 14 (3.88) Political Science 8 (2.22) Sociology 8 (2.22) Computer Science 6 (1.66) Journalism 3 (0.83) Information Technology 2 (0.5) Biotech 2 (0.5) Law 2 (0.5) Human Right 1 (0.27) Pharmacy 1 (0.27) Horticulture 1 (0.27) Chemistry 1 (0.27) Home Science 1 (0.27) total  360 
5. FINDINgS AND SUggEStIONS 
The  findings  of  the  study  are  given  as: (i) Male  users  are  in  the  majority  who  received  
majority  of  the  documents  under  this  service  (ii) PG  students  request  most  of  the  documents  
followed  by  the  Research  Scholars 
(iii) Most of the users receive their documents from  
the  library  within  10  days  
(iv) Research  articles  in  the  journals  are  the  most  
demanded  documents 
(v) INFLIBNET is the major document delivery centre  
that  supplies  majority  of  the  documents (vi) IMajority of the documents delivery made during  
Jan-Dec  2013.  However,  initially  the  service  
remained  less  used  by  the  users,  and (vii) Users from the Department of History requested  
most  of  the  documents.  

========4========

SAINI: DOCUMENT  D ELIVERy SERVICE By CENTRAL  L IBRARy, BBAU, LUCKNOW 
The  main  suggestion  for  improve  the  DDS  in  the  library  are: 
(i) Proper  intimation  should  be  given  for  pending  
documents  to  the  concerned  user,  for  this,  a  
time  bound  limit  should  be  fixed  to  cope  up  
with pending delivery. After that time, the library  
should  itself  handover  the  pending  documents  
to  the  concerned  users. 
(ii) There  is  an  urgent  need  of  orientation  and  
awareness  for  this  service  among  the  users  
especially,  among  the  female  and  the  faculty  
users  so  that  they  should  also  be  encouraged  
for request documents to the library under this  
very service. This will not only break the limit of  
just  four  centres;  but  also  it  will  extend  among  
all  Document  Delivery  Centres. 
(iii) The service should not be limited to the journal articles  
and book chapters only but is should be include  
the reports, theses, copies of patents or standards,  
orchestral  scores,  CDs  and  DVDs,  etc. 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
One  of  the  major  purposes  of  all  types  of  libraries is to provide documents to its clientele. The  document may be either in form of print, non-print,  online, offline or e-format of any books, journals or  documents.  No  library  today  can  hold  every  item  required  to  meet  the  needs  of  its  users  under  the  crisis faced due to resource crunch and higher cost  of the documents. Hence, sharing of resources has  become a necessity of the hour. Document delivery  service is an important tool used by the librarian to  support  uses  information  needs.  Therefore,  it  has  become significantly more useful for users because  of it ease to use and speed of delivery factors. There  is  a  need  to  explain  the  strength  of  this  service  and  involve  those  users  who  will  be  with  us  over  the  long  run  (the  faculty)  and  involve  them  for  the  process of delivering the documents they required.  For  the  betterment  of  this  service,  librarians  need  to  collaborate  with  other  neighboring  libraries  in  addition  to  document  delivery  centres  to  provide  access  to  the  resources. The  service  in  the  library  is  in  its  initial  stage,  there  is  a  need  to  spread  among  the  research  community  of  the  university  through  periodical  awareness  programme.  As  on  now,  the  library  is  subscribing  14  major  electronic  databases  from  UGC-Digital  Library  Consortium,  which  satisfy  the  need  of  the  users.  The  future  perspectives  of  the  library  for  improving  the  DDS  include: Increasing number of requests for documents; 
contact  to  maximum  delivery  centres  for  document  supply;  supply  of  e-documents  over  the  networks;  and prompt contact for supply of pending documents; etc. 
rEFErENCES 
1. Wikipedia. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interlibrary_ 
loan. 
2. Chakraborty, H.K. & Chakraborty, Banani. Electronic  
document delivery: An overview. In  CALIBER-2001:  
Proceeding of National Conference: Creation and  
Management of Digital Resources (CALIBER-2001),  
15-16  March  2001.  INFLIBNET,  Pune,  2001.  
http://ir.inflibnet.ac.in/handle/1944/150. 3. Bhatt, R.K. Use of UGC-INFONET digital library  
consortium resources by research scholars and  
faculty  members  of  the  University  of  Delhi  in  
history and political science. Library Management ,  
2010, 31(4-5),  319-43. 
4. Wikipedia.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xerox. 5. Rietz, John M. Dictionary for library and information  
science.  Libraries  Unlimited,  Westport,  2004. 6. Biswas, R.C. Document delivery to industrial R&D  
personnel:  The  weakest  link  in  the  information  
provision chain. In  IASLIC Conference: Knowledge  
Management  in  Special  Libraries  in  Digital  
Environment, edited by Rakhal Chakraborti Biswas  
&  Chanderjit  Kaur  Mamik.  Paper  Presented  at  
the XXIV IASLIC Conference, 15-18, December,  
2003,  Dehradun.  Indian Association  of  Special  
Libraries  and  Information  Centre,  (IASLIC),  
Kolkata,  2003.  pp.  113-20. 
7. INFLIBNET.  http://www.inflibnet.ac.in. 8. INDEST.  http://paniit.iitd.ac.in/indest. 
9. Bhatt,  Sunil.  Consortia  system  and  document  
delivery:  E-information  services  of  Banasthali  
University. DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol. , 2013,  
33(2),  141-46. 
About  the Author 
Mr  O.P.  Saini   is  working  as  Assistant  Librarian  in  Babasaheb  Bhimrao  Ambedkar  University  (Central  University), Lucknow. He has completed MA (Pol. Sc.),  MLIS, and MPhil (LIS) from University of Delhi, Delhi.  He has published a book and 5 research papers in  peer-reviewed journals and presented more than 10  papers in various national and international conferences.  His areas of interest include: Institutional repository,  library  automation  and  networking,  user  services,  research  methodology,  and  information  literacy. 
439 

========5========

