DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 34, No. 6, November 2014, pp. 455-460 
  2014, DESIDOC 
  Embedded Librarianship: Librarian Faculty Collaboration 
Pramod Sharma*, Kamal Kumar** and Parveen Babbar*** 
   *University of Delhi, Delhi-110 007 
E-mail: tauruspramod@gmail.com 
**Directorate of Education, Govt. of NCT of Delhi-110 054 
E-mail: kamal.maths@gmail.com 
***Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi, Delhi-110 067 
E-mail: parveenbabbar@gmail.com 
AbstrACt 
Embedded  librarianship  is  an  old  concept  in  new  context.  It  is  an  old  phenomenon  to  initiate  a  new range of services in the present environment. This paper defnes the attributes of embedded library  services  such  as  user-oriented,  no  physical  proximity  required,  miniature  group  centric,  expertise,  etc.  It  also  endows  with  suggestions  to  the  future  embedded  librarians  which  embraces  acting  as  a  group  and not as an individual, support from the organisation and associates, commercial outlook, risk taking  competence, etc. This paper also explains the practicing embedded librarianship process which starts with  the identifcation of a faculty member who is library-friendly and ends with providing with embedded library  services in the hi-tech era. It is a transformation process of traditional librarian to embedded librarian. As  compared to traditional librarianship which is based on transaction, embedded librarianship is based on  relationship with the faculty, or user community.  When an embedded librarian initiate interacting with the  patrons, it takes them to the another level of understanding with the user. Librarianship with the help of  IT has developed into a fruitful affliation. Most of the high-fying libraries in India are providing embedded  library  services  to  its  users,  some  of  the  libraries  are  Delhi  University  Library  system,  IIT  Delhi,  Indira  Gandhi National Open University, etc. The success of embedded librarianship depends not only on the  understanding of librarian and the faculty members but also on the support from the organisation.  
Keywords:   Embedded librarianship, librarian-faculty collaboration 
1. IntroduCtIon 
Embedded  librarianship  is  not  a  new  term  but  a novel concept in the present era of librarianship.  It  is  an  expanding  trend  and  a  term  used  to  cover  a  range  of  initiatives  and  service  concepts  in  the  present  world  of  librarianship.  The  development  of  digital information resources  and  related  economic  and administrative changes, have made embedded  librarianship  critically  important  to  librarians  and  information  professionals.  With  so  many  decades  of  support  of  ICT  in  the  domain  of  LIS,  librarians  are crossing not only the four walls of the libraries  but  also  the  physical  and  virtual  outreach  of  the  libraries.  Libraries  are  providing  new  services  to  their patrons with the access to e-resources to their  users;  digitised  material  and  many  other  high-tech  services  like  ‘ask  a  librarian’,  ‘real  time  reference  service’,  etc.  The  association  among  the  faculty  members  and  librarians  are  helping  in  achieving  a  height  at  which  librarians  can  entrench  library  instructions or library techniques in the curriculum.  
Received 18 May 2014, Online published 19 November 2014 
The embedded librarianship depicts an array in the  innovative services in set up different organisations.  This, in particular, also helps in explaining the job of  an academic librarian who contributes in curriculum  and courses on regular basis and helps in learning  information  literacy  skills.  It  now  embraces  in  the  job  profile  of  librarians  in  research  institutions  or  any  other  type  of  organisations1. 
Shumaker2  has defined it as “Embedded librarianship  is a distinctive innovation that moves the librarians  out  of  libraries  and  creates  a  new  model  of  library  and information work. It emphasises the importance  of  forming  a  strong  working  relationship  between  the  librarian  and  a  group  or  team  of  people  who  need  the  librarian’s  information  expertise.” 
2. 
EmbEddEd  LIbrArIAnshIp  sErvICEs  AttrIbutEs 
2.1   u ser-oriented  as  an Alternative  of  Library- 
oriented 
Embedded librarianship permits a more concentrated  

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  6, NOVEMBER   2014 
approach and negligible inhibition for librarians so as  to engage themselves in a team/group or department  work.  Embedded  librarians  evolve  highly  focused,  targeted,  specialised  information  research  results  due  to  cogent  and  firm  relationships.  Noticeably,  it  leads to a more integrated and analytical approach  as  compared  to  what  a  library  conventionally  provides. 
2.2   p hysical  proximity  
participating in meeting and conferences and joining  e-mail distribution lists. Another concern for embedded  librarians are as to how they get embed themselves  in a practice group. Once a they are well equipped  with  adequate  knowledge  or  understanding  of  that  are  of  law  including  practice  specific  resources  and  corresponding  knowledge  of  usage  of  these  resources  to  disseminate  information  on  evolving  issues  and  trends  in  that  practice  area  afterwards  
embedded librarians can effectively open the dialogue  
The meaning of embedded librarianship may be  
with  clients  in  order  to  determine  their  needs  and  different to different people but the prime element of  
eventually  deliver  results  as  per  their  needs3. it  is  to  move  librarians  out  of  the  traditional  library  
setting  whether  physically  or  virtually  into  a  new  
3.   s uGGEstIons For EmbEddEd  
framework  for  providing  library  services.  It  shifts  
the  thrust  from  reactively  responding  to  research  
3.1 Group  not  as  an  Individual 
queries  to  developing  a  unique  comprehension  of  patrons  requirements  and  providing  farsighted  outcomes. 
2.3   m iniature  Group-centric 
It is to be believed that its more entertaining to  deliver  high  level  of  service  to  a  smaller  group  as  compare to larger population, i.e., rather providing a  superficial  standard  of  service  to  a  larger  group. 2.4 Experts  rather  than  Generalist 
The embedded librarians transform themselves  as a chief source of information which makes them  specialist  and  experts  in  this  field.  Thereby  to  use  their  specialisation  in  definite  forms  that  will  have  a direct and profound impinge on teaching, learning  and  research.  Librarians  shift  from  a  supportive  position  to  a  collaborative  role  with  their  client  by  developing  more  cogent  and  solid  relationship  and  tie  up  with  those  they  deliver  or  serve. 
2.5   r eliant  on  universe  of  Knowledge  and  not  
only  Library skills 
Embedded  library  services  are  based  on  the  whole  universe  of  knowledge  and  not  only  on  the  knowledge  about  the  library  skills.  It  includes  library  skills  as  well  as  the  tailor-made  services  to  its  users. 
2.6 Aspiring  for  Further  study  and  
Amalgamation  rather  than delivery 
Embedded  library  services  are  broader  than  the  traditional  library  services  which  are  based  on  the  delivery  of  the  content  to  its  users. 
2.7   b ased  on  trusted  Guidance  not  service  
deliverance 
After  establishing  the  relationship  and  trust,  it  becomes  imperative  on  the  part  of  embedded  librarians to engage themselves to know the needs  and interests of their customers. More often embedded  librarian  tend  to  learn  while  doing  their  job,  viz.,  having  one  to  one  interaction  with  the  clients,  
456 
LIbrArIAn 
Embedded librarian should work as a team player  and  not  as  an  individual.  He  should  understand  that  how  the  group  should  work  and  perform  their  tasks, be aware of his authority and responsibilities,  responsibilities  of  other  members  of  the  group. 3.2   s upport  from organisation  and Associates 
Embedded  librarian  needs  the  whole  hearted  support of the organisation as well as his associates.  Embedded  librarian  should  knew  the  role  of  the  librarian which works outside the boundaries of the  library.  It  is  redefining  the  duties  of  the  librarian  and  his  staff  and  enlarging  the  working  of  the  librarianship. 
3.3 Commercial outlook 
Embedded librarianship is a new opportunity for  the  librarianship  to  start  innovative  products  and  services of knowledge. They may have a commercial  outlook  as  they  have  to  upbeat  in  providing  new  services  and  products  to  their  users.  They  should  be  proactive  in  defining  opportunities. They  should  know  how  to  sell  themselves  and  tell  people  what  new  services  and  products  they  can  offer. 3.4   r isk-taking  Competence 
Embedded librarian should be able to take risks  because  when  a  new  work  has  to  be  started  there  is  a  lot  of  risk  in  that.  This  risk  is  limited  not  only  to  the  librarian  but  also  for  the  organisation.  For  example, in the business when a businessman starts  a  new  venture  it  takes  a  lot  of  time  to  make  profit  out of that venture. It is to be remembered that risk  taking  is  essential  for  the  transformation. 3.5   t ransformation  of  Library  science  to  
Information science 
Embedded librarianship needs to pertain library  skills in a new mode. Most people are unaware of a  librarian’s duties and tasks. Embedded librarian has  to be capable to enlighten them about his knowledge  and  expertise.  It  is  a  very  time  consuming  job. 

========2========

SHARMA, et al.: EMBEDDED  L IBRARIANSHIP: LIBRARIAN  F ACULTy COLLABORATION 
3.6   m aking dependable relations 
Embedded librarianship is based on the interactions  of  the  librarians  with  the  user  community,  work  with  a  focus  on  teaching  and  learning  from  both  the  parties.  The  user  should  know  the  librarian  and  the  librarian  should  know  the  user  perfectly.  The motive behind this is to develop trust between  them  and  alliance  between  the  embedded  librarian  and  the  user. 
3.7 Get  out  of  Comfort  Zone 
Embedded  librarianship  demands  that  librarian  should  get  out  of  his  cozy  and  comfy  library  environment  and  take  a  plunge  into  unfamiliar  zone.  While  venturing  into  new  territory,  do  help  when  users  need  it.  When  things  are  indefinite  then  the  librarian  must  take  counsel  from  reliable  colleagues.  In  this  ever-changing  era  of  research  which invokes different needs and requirements on  the  part  of  researcher,  embedded  librarian  must  have  adequate  skills  to  deal  with  it.  
3.8   d on’t  Just think, but Act 
At  the  moment,  most  librarians  realise  the  necessity  to  re-evaluate  the  roles  of  librarians  at  colleges/universities  and  accommodate  their  work  to  a  novel  era  of  research.  It  is  high  time  to  move  forward  with  actual  transformation  at  ground  level  beyond  merely  thinking  of  it4. 
4.   p rACtICInG   Emb EddEd  LIbrArIAnshIp 
Embedded  librarianship  starts  by  identifying  a  faculty member who is library friendly and is open to  an  embedded  librarian. The  next  step  is  to  include  writing emphasis courses in the universities so as to  promote research component that would require the  use of library materials and resources. Having said  that, one must adopt effective marketing measures  and informational materials to draw attention towards  embedded librarian services. An embedded librarian  should participate regularly in departmental/divisional/ school  meetings  to  ground  their  feet  and  also  provide  relevant  information  at  faculty  workshops/  seminars or conferences etc. The embedded librarian  should  use  ICT  to  interact  with  faculty  programme  to  enlighten  them  about  embedded  librarianship  programs.  Next  step  is  achieve  access  in  learning  management  system.  First  and  foremost,  need  to  get  permission  from  faculty  who  is  teaching  the  course.  Interact  and   work  together  with  IT  staff  who  can  add  you  into  courses  or  a  librarian  job  can  be  displayed  in  learning  management  system.  Embedded librarian can start a discussion forum and  can introduce new knowledge products and services  for  example  tutorials,  etc. The   embedded  librarian  has  to  convince  the  users  about  the  services  they  want  to  provide  to  the  users.  Embedded  librarian  
has to encourage students to ask queries. For this  they  need  to  be  always  welcoming.  One  student’s  doubt  can  be  other’s  too,  so  it  needs  to  be  posted  on  social  platforms. They  need  to  develop  a  list  of  ready  to  go  posts.  These  posts  can  help  trigger  discussions  and  questions  at  various  forums.  To  achieve  success,  librarian  may  want  to  target  all  sections of a particular course for embedded librarian.  They  can  develop  some  higher  level  activities  that  can  be  embedded5. 
Librarianship with the help of IT has grown-up into  a  prolific  affiliation.  In  the  recent  years  technology  has  become  an  integral  part  of  librarianship.  For  example  course  management  systems  are  been  used  for  providing  library  services  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  users.  
Embedded  librarian  is  the  one  who  actively  participate in the online environment. He can provide  links  for  the  other  e-resources  to  interact  with  the  patrons  through  online  mode  or  can  communicate  with its user via e-mail, discussion forums or real- time  reference  or  real-time  chat.  With  the  help  of  faculty  librarian  collaboration  librarian  becomes  a  part  of  course,  and  the  faculty  members  and  students can interact with them immediately for the  library  help,  suggestions  from  the  librarian  about  the  library  resources  can  also  be  sought.  When  the  librarian  is  a  part  of  course,  students  and  faculties are more interested to take help from him.  These  services  are  used  by  the  various  academic  institutions,  universities  and  colleges  in  the  form  of  feedback  from  its  users.  
The  embedded  librarianship  is  very  beneficial  for  the  users  because  in  the  present  environment  the students start their search on the internet. The  students cannot access all the library resources as  the resources may or may not be remotely accessed.  The  faculty  and  students  want  their  information  at  the  right  time,  in  the  right  form  at  the  time  of  need.  With  the  help  of  embedded  librarians,  the  students  and  faculty  members  can  increase  their  knowledge by using peer reviewed information and  databases  provided  by  the  library.  The  future  of  embedded  librarianship  assures  fresh  prospects  for the librarians to assimilate into the professional  and  academic  lives  of  its  users6. 
5. 
EmbEddEd LIbrAry sErvICEs In IndIAn  promInEnt  LIbrArIEs: ExAmpLEs 
5.1   d elhi  university  Library  system  
Delhi University Library System (DULS), University  of  Delhi,  has  more  than  34  libraries  in  its  fold  to  reach  to  wider  academic  community.  The  website  of  DULS  name  it  as  ‘Knowledge  Portal’. As  a  part  of  embedded  librarianship,  the  DULS  is  providing  a  lot  of  services  and  activities  which  includes: 
457 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  6, NOVEMBER   2014 
• 
• 
Information Literacy: To empower the students,  researchers  and  faculty  members  to  serve,  evaluate, use and create information effectively  and efficiently and to achieve their educational,  social, occupational and personal goals, the Delhi  University  Library  System  (DULS)  has  started  Information Literacy activities since 2006 in the  domain of E-Resource Orientation Programmes;  Online  Searching  Techniques;  Open  Access  Resource  Orientation  Programme;  Instructions  for Bibliographic Citations; Virtual Referencing;  Exposure  to  Copyright  and  Plagiarism  Issues;  Citation Analysis and Online Information Literacy  Tutorial7. 
E-Referencing: DULS has introduced ‘Reference  Service’  through  e-mail  which  is  responded  immediately7. 
• 
Virtual  Reference  Service:  DULS  provides  an  
• 
  • 
option of ‘chat’ with the library staff. Chat option  is available to provide virtual reference service  to  the  users.  They  can  chat  with  library  staff  regarding  their  queries.  For  this,  user  has  to  sign  in. 
Workshops: DULS organises information literacy  workshop for the assistance of the faculties and  research  scholars  in  all  the  disciplines.  This  workshop is organised annually to encourage the  use of e-resources for the purpose of teaching  and  learning  to  make  aware  the  researchers,  faculties  and  students  about  the  e-resources  subscribed  by  the  University  of  Delhi.  And  to  give  demonstration  and  to  expose  faculties  and  researchers  about  the  different  searching  techniques  on  the  web  for  federated  search.  The  purpose  of  these  workshops  is  to  give  orientation  of  various  electronic  resources; information  about  the  open  access  electronic  resources; and information about the information  services  provided  by  University  of  Delhi8. 
Figure 1. virtual reference service at duLs. 
5.2 Indira  Gandhi  national  open  university  
(IGnou)  Library  &  documentation  division  
The  IGNOU  library  is  the  most  resourceful  
458 
information  centre  in  the  country  in  the  field  of  distance  education.  The  library  has  the  largest  collection of books, journals and other related materials  in  the  field  of  distance  education,  throughout  the  country. It was established in 1986 in tune with the  objectives  of  IGNOU.  The  primary  mission  of  the  library  is  to  support  the  educational  and  research  programmes of the University by providing physical  and intellectual access to information. IGNOU L&DD is also providing lot of activities and services which  includes: 
5.2.1 NODLINET  
IGNOU has started a project known as NODLINET  which is an integrated electronic platform for sharing  resources of the networked libraries at the national  level  across  open  and  distance  learning  system. 
Implements  latest  technologies  for  resource  
sharing and dissemination of information among  
the  distance  learning  fraternity  to  provide  them  
the high quality information as good as traditional  
education  community. 
• Provides  faculty  members  and  students  of  the  
distance learning community the ways to access  
networked  resources  online 
• Acts  as  a  support  system  of  IGNOU  and  other  
distance learning institutions for providing quality  
education 
• Put  forward  flawless  access  to  library  
resources 
• Integrate  ICT  for  the  target  of  integrating  all  
the  libraries  in  the  realm  of  distance  learning  
system  into  a  network 
• Premeditated commotion for open and distance  
learning  system 
• Offer access to e- resources such as e-journals,  
e-books, e-databases, etc., disseminated across  
all  libraries 
Further,  it  will  look  forward  to  create  digitised  contents  of  all  significant  material  and  other  resources.  It  also  planned  to  provide  guidelines  and  standards  for  establishing  distance  learning  libraries  for  automating  libraries,  building  library  collection, providing broadband connectivity for the  target  libraries,  etc.  The  various  activities  have  been  clustered  as:  VISDOL  (Virtual  Information  System  for  Open  and  Distance  Libraries)  with  its  constituent CERDOL (Consortium of e-Resources for  Open & Distance Libraries) and includes availability  of  digitised  content;  intensification  of  ODL  library  system; junction with traditional system; association  with other networks; literacy on e-resources; system  assimilation;  web  portal  with  access  administration  and  endorsement  and  an  integrated  platform  for  library  allied  and  other  services8. 

========4========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  6, NOVEMBER   2014 
5.2.2 IGNOU  Online 
IGNOU Online provides one stop window catering  to the learning needs of IGNOU learner community.  It provides the links to access all learning resources  including eGyanKosh  which is the digital repository  of  programme-based  learning  content  available  in  text  and  video  formats.  It  provides  Education  broadcast  which  a  webcasting  facility  is  linking  to  educational channels like Gyandharshan, Gyanvani and  EDUSAT.  It  also  provides  ‘Virtual  Class’  links  to  all  the  online  programmes  of  the  University.  It  also  includes  the Sakshat   link  HRD 
9. 
5.3 IIt delhi  Library 
IIT Delhi Library provides VPN for faculty facility  in their library. IIT Delhi support VPN for IIT Delhi’s  internal  network  from  outside  IIT  Delhi.  The  VPN  feature  is  useful  for  the  faculties  while  traveling  outside  Delhi.  It  can  be  used  to  access  software  license  servers  and  for  accessing  internal  SVN  repositories. Faculties can access online databases  through  IIT  Delhi  website  with  the  help  of  VPN.  VPN helps in accessing internal web servers for the  purpose  of  accessing  software  repositories,  forms,  etc.  It  also  helps  in  accessing  Internal  DNS,  mail  servers,  etc.,  as  and  when  required  at  the  time  of  need.  It  is  very  useful  when  faculty  members  have  to  access  the  resources  available  on  the  internal  systems. 
The  Central  Library,  IIT  Delhi  takes  an  active  role  in  the  user  orientation  programmes  for  new  students in the beginning of every academic session  familise them with library resources and services10. It  organises training, workshops and conferences etc.,  for the library professionals working in S&T libraries  to  assist  them  update  and  uphold  their  skills  and  knowledge.  Following  services  are  provided  to  its  users through seminars and workshops; web-based  instructions; orientation programmes; presentations  and  demonstrations;  and  mailing  lists. 
5.4   t amil virtual university  Library 
Tamil Virtual University11 is an autonomous institution,  established  by  the  Government  of  Tamilnadu.  Its  
Figure 2. tamil virtual university library. 
459 
courses include certificate courses, diploma courses  and  bachelor  degree  in  Tamil.  The  virtual  library  of  Tamil  Virtual  University  provides  all  material  in  digital  format  with  virtual  reference  services. 
6. ConCLusIons 
Embedded  librarianship  is  a  new  term  but  it  is  an old concept in librarianship. Tailor-made services  have  always  existed  in  the  libraries  from  their  inception. In the present environment, many libraries  are using latest technologies to provide new services  to their users. Collaboration is an important aspect  in the present scenario. The success of embedded  librarianship depends not only on the understanding  of librarian and the faculty members but also on the  support from the organisation. Embedded librarians  have  to  meet  future  challenges.  They  should  be  proactive  in  making  relationships  with  the  faculties  and  users  and  in  building  new  partnerships  with  academic  departments  and  providing  important  services  to  users.  
rEFErEnCEs 
1. Li,  Judy.  Serving  as  an  educator:  A  southern  
case  in  embedded  librarianship.  J.  Bus.  Fin.  
Libr.,  2012,  17,  133–52. 
2. Shumaker, David. Embedded librarians in special  
Libraries. Information Today. 2012, July/August.  
http://www.infotoday.com/it/jul12/Shumaker-- 
Embedded-Librarians-in-Special-Libraries.shtml  
(accessed  on  10  March  2014) 
3. Riccio,  Holly  M.  Embedded  librarianship:  The  
library  as  a  service,  not  a  space.  The  New  
Librarian.  AALL  and  ILTA  digital  white  paper.  
http://www.aallnet.org/main-menu/Publications/ 
products/aall-ilta-white-paper/embedded.pdf  
(accessed  on  5  March  2014) 
4. Carlson,  Jake  &  Kneale,  Ruth.  Embedded  
librarianship in the research context: Navigating  
new waters. Coll. Res. Lib. News, 2011, 72(3),  
167-70 
5. Hardenbrook, Joe. Embedded librarian 101: How  
to get started. Mr. Library Dude blogging about  
libraries,  technology  &  teaching.  2013.  http:// 
mrlibrarydude.wordpress.com/2013/06/17/embedded- 
librarian-101-how-to-get-started/  (accessed  on  
12  March  2014) 
6. Becker,  Bernd  W.  Embedded  librarianship:  A  
point-of-need  service.  Behav.  Soc.  Sci.  Lib.,  
2010,  29(3),  237-40 
7. Delhi University Library System (DULS). http:// 
crl.du.ac.in/  (accessed  on  12 April,  2014) 8. IGNOU library. Library & Documentation Division.  
http://www.ignou.ac.in/ignou/aboutignou/division/ 
ldd/introduction  (accessed  on  15 April,  2014) 9. IGNOU  Online.  http://www.ignouonline.ac.in/ 
(accessed  on  18 April  2014) 

========5========

SHARMA, et al.: EMBEDDED  L IBRARIANSHIP: LIBRARIAN  F ACULTy COLLABORATION 
10. IIT-Delhi. Central Library. http://library.iitd.ac.in/  
(accessed  on  3  March  2014) 
11. Tamil  Virtual  Academy.  Library .  http://www. 
tamilvu.org/library/libindex.htm (accessed on 23  
April  2014) 
About  the Authors 
mrs  pramod  sharma   is  presently  working  as  Professional Assistant at Institute of Home Economics,  University  of  Delhi.  She  has  more  than  8  years  of  professional  experience.  She  holds  Master  degree  in Library and Information Science and MCom from  University  of  Delhi.  She  has  passed  UGC-NET  in  Library and Information Science. She has published  papers  in  journals  and  conferences. 
mr  Kamal  Kumar   is  presently  working  as  TGT  (Mathematics) in Directorate of Education, Govt. of  NCT, Delhi. He has 10 years professional experience.   He hold  a degree in MPhil  from Algappa University,  MEd  from  Delhi  University,  MSc  (Mathematics  with  Computer Science) from Jamia Millia Islamia University,  MA  (Economics)  from  CCS  University,  MCom  from  CCS  University.  He  has    also  qualified  UGC-NET  in  Library  and  Information  Sciences.    
dr parveen babbar  is working as Deputy Librarian,  Jawaharlal  Nehru  University,  Delhi.  He  obtained  his  MLIS  from  University  of  Delhi  and  PhD  (LIS)  from  University  of  Rajasthan.  He  has  published  more  than  30  papers  in  journals  and  conferences  of  national  and  international  repute. 
460 

========6========

