DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 35, No. 3, May 2015, pp. 184-192 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.35.3.7806 
  2015, DESIDOC 
Collection Development in Indian Academic Libraries: An Empirical  
Approach to Determine the Number of Copies for Acquisition 
Rabishankar Giri*, B.K. Sen** and G. Mahesh*** *Presidency University, 86/1, College St, Kolkata, West Bengal-700 073 
E-mail: rsgiri11@gmail.com 
**Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology, University of Malaya, Malaysia 
E-mail: bksen1938@gmail.com 
***National Institute of Science Communication and Resources, 14 Satsang Vihar Marg, New Delhi-110 067 
E-mail: gmahesh@niscair.res.in 
AbstrACt 
Collection  development  in  academic  libraries  has  many  challenges  and  one  of  them  concerns  determining  the  number  of  copies  of  some  books  that  are  required  in  multiple  copies  in  the  library.  In  the present study, fve major academic libraries in New Delhi were surveyed to understand the prevalent  policies and practices on determining the number of copies of books that are required in multiple copies.  It  was  found  that  there  was  no  consistency  in  the  approach  to  deciding  the  number  of  copies  in  the  libraries studied. Further it was noted that all the libraries arbitrarily decided on the number of copies to  be purchased. The paper discusses a method that has been evolved to determine the number of copies.  The method has been applied in one of the academic libraries under study which when combined with  other measures have been found to be more effective in determining the number of copies required. 
Keywords: Collection development, academic library, library acquisition, multiple copies 
1.  INtroDuCtIoN 
Collection  development  is  one  of  the  most  important activities of a library and information centre,  be it small and specialised, large and academic, or  spread  over  many  sites.  It  is  the  composition  and  size  of  a  collection  that  is  a  major  determinant  of  the  importance,  value  and  quality  of  a  library.  At  the  root  of  all  collection  development  in  libraries,  the  goal  is  to  procure  those  materials  that  will  meet  the  diverse  needs  of  their  users.  As  defined  by Evans1,  it  is  the  process  of  making  certain  that  the  library  meets  the  information  needs  of  its  user  population in a timely and economic manner, using  information  resources  produced  both  from  inside  and outside the organisation. This process involves  several components that include, the library’s mission,  assessment of patron’s needs, strength and weakness  of  the  existing  collection  and  tools  for  identifying  the  relevant  and  quality  materials. 
Over  the  last  decade,  India  has  witnessed  a  huge  growth  in  academic  institutions  in  the  area  of  engineering,  technology  and  so  on2,3.  These  institutes charge much higher fees than the existing  
old university system where basic science, arts and  humanities  subjects  are  being  taught.  Libraries  of  these  new  institutions  have  taken  several  steps  to  provide superior amenities to their major stakeholders  such  as  having  a  book  bank  that  allows  issuing  a  certain  number  of  books  for  a  whole  semester,  increasing  the  limit  of  lending  materials,  etc.  As  a  consequence,  libraries  are  to  acquire  multiple  copies of many books. But decision on the number  of  copies  of  a  book  to  be  acquired  for  libraries  is  largely  based  on  assumption  on  anticipated  use,  availability  of  funds,  or  even  physical  space.  
In the 21st  century, when information explosion  (both in print and electronic form) is but a common  phenomenon,  it  is  impossible  to  manage  libraries  effectively and efficiently, without precise consideration  of the composition of their collection and how they  are  going  to  be  developed.  Thus,  determining  the  number  of  copies  of  a  book  to  be  procured  has  to  go  beyond  assumption,  budget  or  space.  Deciding  the  number  of  copies  can  be  related  to  student  needs  that  may  be  assessed  by  an  empirical  or  evidence-based  approach.  
Received 27 June 2014, revised 21 October 2014, online published 22 April 2015 

========1========

GIRI, et al.: COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT IN INDIAN ACADEMIC LIBRARIES 
2.    CoLLECtIoN DEvELopmENt  prACtICEs  
&  probLEms  IN   I NDIAN ACADEmIC 
LIbrAry  systEm 
Collection  development  in  an  academic  library  is  a  two-way  process  involving  the  faculty  and  the  librarian. Thus, informal communication between librarian  and  faculty  is  needed  to  cultivate  consciously  the  relationship to make collection development process  efficacious4.  Unlike  the  academic  libraries  in  the  western world, Indian academic libraries hardly have  subject specialist librarians. Thus, there is a lack of  library  staff  that  can  be  spared  to  liaise  constantly  with faculties and students to understand their needs  and  expectations  and  contribute  significantly  to  collection  development.  In  most  of  the  libraries,  it  is still a rigid process that follows hierarchical path.  So, almost all recommendations originate from faculty  and rout through the heads/deans of the respective  departments before reaching the library. Generally,  the Library Advisory Committee (LAC) takes the final  decision  as  to  the  items  to  be  purchased  for  the  library. In most of the Indian libraries, chief librarians  and in some cases acquisition librarians are mainly  responsible  for  collection  development5.  But,  chief  librarians  are  ‘disadvantaged  and  encumbered’  by  other  duties  as  they  have  to  devote  much  time  in  many  administrative  and  planning  works  and  have  very little time to understand the students’ needs. It  also leaves very little time for present day librarians  to  read  and  be  updated  on  the  needs  of  users.  Earlier,  many  librarians  practised  the  system  of  routing  which  emphasised  that  any  new  incoming  material  in  the  library  should  go  to  shelf  after  routing  through  the  librarian’s  desk.  That  helped  the librarians develop a broader perspective of the  universe of knowledge as well as to understand the  needs  of  the  users.  But,  nowadays  the  advent  of  e-form of materials, diversion of attention towards the  application  of  IT  in  the  library,  and  general  apathy  towards  reading  limit  majority  of  the  librarians  to  practise  the  earlier  routing  system.  
The acquisition librarian largely performs mere  administrative  functions  acting  like  a  nodal  point.  He/she  receives  the  recommendations  from  the  faculty/students,  checks  the  existing  collection  to  avoid duplication, compiles the list of recommended  materials,  selects  the  vendor,  places  orders  with  vendors, etc. Many of them also lack adequate training  for handling enormous and complex task of collection  development. Knowledge gathered from LIS training  also  helps  them  little  as  hardly  any  library  school  around the globe teaches nuances and complexities  of collection development6-8. Collection development is  not to be seen merely as an administrative function.  It is also an intellectual effort and one should view  the collection as a fundamentally intellectual construct  rather  than  exclusively  as  an  assembly  of  physical  
objects9.  Thus,  the  important  aspect  of  collection  development either the intellectual contribution from  the  librarian  or  the  competency  ‘that  is  inherent  in  many librarians’ roles is an awareness of students’  needs 
10 
  is  lacking  in  our  system.  
The sections of the library that can be of great  help  to  the  librarian  in  collection  development  are  lending/circulation  and  reference  sections,  as  these  witness  the  most  interactions  between  users  and  the  library.  The  regular  interaction  between  the  staff  of  these  sections  and  users  give  them  a  perspective that may be complementary to a faculty.  The faculty may know what they are assigning and  what students need, but librarians (here circulation  and  reference  librarians)  know  what  students  start  out  looking  for  before  modifying  their  topic  to  use  they’ve  been  able  to  find11.  But,  in  many  a  case,  the acquisition department/ librarian has a weak tie  with circulation /lending/reference sections that are in  the best position to understand the students /faculty  demands. In this scenario, faculties are almost the  sole  determiner  of  purchasing  decisions.  Certainly,  the  faculty  can  and  should,  contribute  to  collection  development  but  relying  entirely  on  faculty  may  invite  danger  due  to  the  following  reasons. 
(a) By  definition  and  tradition,  the  faculties  are  
research  specialists.  Their  primary  loyalty  is  
more  often  to  a  profession  rather  than  to  the  
institution12.  The  promotion,  merit  decisionof  
faculties  is  largely  based  on  scholarship  and  
successful teaching. So, their scope of selecting  
library  materials  is  generally  narrower  and  
inclined mostly to a specific discipline and greatly  
directed  to  specialised  materials.  But  selection  
of  documents  for  a  library  used  heavily  as  an  
instructional  laboratory  (i.e.,  class  teaching)  is  
different  from  a  collection  used  for  research.  
The  former  emphasizes  quantity  and  breadth,  
while  the  latter  requires  depth  and  selectivity.  
An  academic  library  serving  both  functions  will  
find  the  user  of  approval  plans  and  librarian  
selector  appropriate  for  many  aspects  of  its  
collection  rather  than  faculties13.  This  is  also  
supported  by  several  subsequent  studies  that  
observed student needs differ significantly from  
teaching  faculty  needs.  
(b) The demands of preparing lectures, taking classes,  
advising students, grading papers, drafting grant  
proposals and other duties routinely burden the  
faculty.  Additional  service  opportunities  have  
little appeal for them. Many of the faculties feel  
that, it is a time consuming process and hardly  
intends to participate in it14. Even faculties rarely  
glance  through  a  recommended  list  unless  it  
is  being  consistently  followed  up  and  pursued  
by  the  librarian  and  also  the  relation  between  
faculty  and  librarian  play  a  great  role16,16.  
185 

========2========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  3,  MAy  2015 
(c) The  varying  degree  of  involvement  of  the  
faculty  in  collection  development  supports  the  
applicability  of  Darwinism,  i.e.,  the  survival  of  
the fittest. Thus, collection grows rapidly in the  
area where faculty members are frequent users  
of  the  library  and  proactively  participates  in  
material  selection  process.  On  the  other  hand  
the collection declines, where faculty members  
simply ignore the use of the library17. As a result  
the library grows disproportionately giving rise to  
a skewed collection instead of a balanced one.  
This  puts  enormous  pressure  on  the  librarian  
when  a  new  faculty  joins  a  discipline  where  
collection  is  least  developed.  Thus,  there  is  
always a need to develop a core collection and  
that  is  to  be  maintained  for  the  future18. 
In Indian library system though stock verification  is  done  at  some  intervals,  collection  analysis/  evaluation is hardly done. Effective collection analysis  and assessment provide quantitative and qualitative  data  for  evaluating  the  usefulness  and  utility  of  library  holdings19.  Interaction  with  many  librarians  reveals that lack of staff as well as non-availability  
weeding  out  of  these  obsolete  materials.  But  
weeding  out  of  multiple  copies  of  books  which  
were  hardly  used  is  a  difficult  task  and  in  all  
possibility  may  invite  severe  criticism  from  the  
auditors.  It  may  also  raise  the  question  of  the  
librarian’s  accountability  and  integrity. (b) The  situation  demands  a  rational  approach  
towards determining the number of copies to be  
purchased. Publishers for the most part work in  
a  commercial  world,  and  strive  wholeheartedly  
to make profits. In a highly competitive market,  
they always push for more copies, and selection  
of material in a library generally happens more or  
less in an unplanned manner often mingled with  
political and economic interest not always above  
board21-23.  In  this  situation,  leaving  everything  
(i.e.,  number  of  copies  to  be  purchased,  titles  
to  be  procured)  to  faculty  may  jeopardise  a  
library’s  overall  mission.  
(c) It  takes  major  chunk  of  the  budget.  Once  the  
scarce  resource  is  spent  for  one  choice,  the  
other  remains  unfulfilled.  
of standard guides like WorldCat Collection Analysis  3.   objECtIvEs 
tool in Indian libraries discourage them to take the  
The  study  aims  to:  
collection analysis is very expensive, time consuming  and  labor  intensive. 
In  a  constrained  system  of  human  resources/ professionals in Indian libraries, librarians generally  look  forward  to  the  reviews  for  selecting  library  materials.  But,  in  India,  there  are  no  authoritative  reviews for course-related textbooks that are mostly  needed by undergraduate students. Though in USA,  such authoritative tools like Choice: Current review  for  academic  libraries  (published  by  ALA)  plays  a  vital  role  in  collection  development1,20. 
burden of collection evaluation because conducting  
(a) Understand the procedures, rules and methods  
In  this  scenario  procuring  multiple  copies  of  printed  textbooks  raises  several  challenges:  (a) In principle, multiple copies of a textbook should  
be  decided  where  degree  of  fitness  with  the  
needs of users is considerably high and possibly  
the  best  fit  materials  as  per  students’  needs.  
Otherwise,  these  newly  procured  materials  will  
remain  unused  and  occupy  the  scarce  space  
of  a  library.  In  many  libraries,  it  has  been  
found that a considerable number of titles were  
purchased  earlier  in  multiple  copies,  but  they  
were hardly used. This obliges many librarians  
to move these almost unused materials either in  
remote storage or in a less circulated compact  
storage  area.  Unfortunately  all  libraries  do  
not  have  offsite  storage  or  the  compact  rack  
facility. Moreover, keeping almost unused books  
in  multiple  copies  for  a  long  time  in  a  library  
hardly serves any purpose. It naturally demands  
186 
followed  in  the  acquisition  of  multiple  copies,  
especially  in  book  selection  and  capping  the  
limit  in  respect  of  multiple  copies;  and  (b) Search  for  an  optimal  solution  to  the  
problem. 
4.   mEthoDoLogy  
The  study  was  carried  out  in  two  phases.  In  the first phase, five academic libraries of prominent  institutions  established  by  Govt.  of  NCT  of  Delhi  were surveyed where multiple copies (more than five  copies) of books were procured, viz., GGS Indraprastha  University, Delhi Technical University (DTU), Netaji  Subhas Institute of Technology (NSIT), Indira Gandhi  and Delhi Technical University for Women (IGDTUW),  Ambedkar Institute of Technology. The method hinged  on informal interview and interaction with the library  staff and visit to libraries to understand the process  of  determining  the  limit  relating  to  multiple  copies  and  their  recommendation  process.  Sometimes  repeated  visits  were  made  to  have  a  feel  of  the  real-life  situation  and  have  talks  with  the  users  of  the  library  selected  for  this  purpose.  
In the second phase, library usage data of one  of  the  participating  libraries  (i.e.,  IGDTU  Library)  is  examined  to  understand  the  subject-wise  and  title-wise  demand  of  books  in  a  course  within  a  semester.  The  IGDTU  library  is  using  NewGenLib,  FLOSS  for  integrated  library  management,  which  provides individual patron’s circulation history through  

========3========

GIRI, et al.: COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT IN INDIAN ACADEMIC LIBRARIES 
its patron’s utility window24. For this purpose, books  usage data of IVth semester students of Mechanical  & Automation Engineering (MAE) during the period of  
The data also reveal’s that faculties are almost  the  sole  recommenders.  In  majority  of  the  libraries  surveyed, there is hardly any process to encourage  
January 2012 to June 2012 was taken to understand  their  major  stakeholders,  i.e.,  the  students  of  the  the  subject-wise  and  title-wise  demands  of  books.  institute to participate in the process. Some libraries  This  particular  semester  and  course  was  selected  still follow the highly rigid process of recommendation.  
as  it  is  believed  that  the  collection  of  the  library  for  this  course  is  strong  enough  to  serve  all  the  students  effectively. 
5.    rEsuLts AND   D IsCussIoNs 
The library staff of some of the libraries surveyed  
Thus, when a student wants to recommend a book,  he/she  has  to  forward  it  through  the  Head  of  the  Department.  This,  in  many  instances,  discourages  them  to  participate  actively  in  the  recommendation  process.  
Some librarians raise a genuine concern. When a  
were  reluctant  to  share  the  policies  relating  to  the  
faculty member recruited for a short-time recommends  purchase  of  multiple  copies  and  assurances  had  
purchase  of  multiple  copies  of  a  textbook,  the  to  be  given  that  the  information  shared  shall  not  
librarian  purchases  the  multiple  copies.  After  the  be  identified  with  the  libraries  concerned.  Table  
teacher  leaves,  a  new  faculty  member  joins  and  1  summarises  the  processes  practised  in  the  five  
recommends  multiple  copies  of  another  textbook  libraries.  From  the  data  it  is  clear  that  an  arbitrary  
approach has been followed to cap the limit. There  
to  replace  the  earlier  one.  Thus,  the  previous  is hardly any operation research approach to justify  
book  loses  its  importance  and  passes  into  the  the  capping  limit.  Librarians  maintain  that  they  are  
realm  of  permanent  non-use  or  reduced  use  as  not  always  in  a  position  to  understand  the  likely  
most  students  demand  the  book,  the  new  teacher  demand  of  a  subject  or  a  particular  title  within  
has  recommended.  More  often  than  not,  teachers  the  subject.  Thus,  a  collective  decision  in  the  
recommend certain books in multiple copies, which  LAC  meeting  was  followed  finally  to  determine  
find hardly any readers. Students’ feedbacks at times  the  student  book  ratio.  But,  as  pointed  out  earlier  
show that the teacher had forgotten to suggest the  
newly  arrived  books  in  the  class.  
when  most  of  the  faculties  feel  that  participation  in collection development is a thankless job4,  then  
When  a  particular  field  is  highly  evolving  and  
the effectiveness of such collective decision where  
every two to three years, a new edition of the book  
decision  makers  are  reluctant  to  put  their  critical  thought  will  inherently  attract  many  questions.  
is hitting the market, then, there is hardly any taker  of  the  old  edition  of  the  books.  Purchasing  a  large  
table 1.  maximum limit of multiple copies of books and the recommendation process 
Lib- rary  
                                      Limit 
1. 
recommendation process 
Maximum numbers of copies are determined on the basis of  Teachers  are  almost  the  sole  recommender.  Research  student strength for a particular course. This policy has been  scholars  recommend  Occasionally  and  students  rarely.  
2. 
changed over the years. 
Initially,  Student : Book= 1:1 
Then,  Student : Book=4:1  
Presently,  Student : Book = 2:1 
In addition, one instructor’s copy can be acquired. 
When a title is prescribed for multiple courses, up to a maxi- mum of three copies  can be obtained for instructors. Final decision is taken by the Library Advisory Committee.  Student : Book ratio = 4:1 
Final determination left to Library Committee.  
3.  
Student: Book ratio = 5:1 + one instructor copy 
Library staff recommend rarely except books related to Li- brary and Information Science. There is no policy/method  of encouraging student participation. If a student wants to  recommend, it should be forwarded through the Head of the  Department 
Teachers  are  major  recommenders  but  research  scholars  also take part in recommendation process. Students hardly  recommend. The library staff do it occasionally.  
Teachers are major recommenders. Students are also en- couraged to recommend online. The library staff also rec- ommend a signifcant number of books 
4.  
A maximum of 30 % of the total students needed  the book.  Teachers are almost the sole recommender. A student can  
Final decision on cap is left to the Library Committee 
recommend when a prescribed book in a class is not avail- able  in  the  library. The  recommendation  needs  to  be  for- warded through the Head of the Department 
5.  
Deciding the number of copies is left to Library Advisory Com- Teachers are almost the sole recommenders 
mittee. The maximum can go up to 3:1 as Student: Book ra- tio.  
187 

========4========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  3,  MAy  2015 
table 2. subject-wise book demand behaviour of Ivth semester students of mAE during january 2012 to june 2012 
subjects  
Number of times   books issued on  the subject 
192 
Number of reserva- 
tions made on the  
books on the subject 
Kinematics & Dynamics  of Machines 
Heat Transfer Manufacturing Machines Numerical Analysis &  Programming Operation Research LAN & Networking Others* 
24 
288 293 122 
8 31 6 
203 275 93 
7 11 10 
total Demand (tD) =  % of  total Demand = ( tD  Issue + reservation of the subject /tD of all  
subjects)*100 
216 13.82 
296 324 128 
20.73 18.94 8.19 
210 286 103 
13.44 18.3 6.59 
*Others is used for the subjects that are not part of the course work for the semester 
number  of  copies  in  these  areas  not  only  wastes  money  but  also  reduces  the  shrinking  space. 
With this background, library usage data of IVth  year student of Mechanical & Automation Engineering  (MAE)  during  the  period  of  January  2012  to  June  2012 was taken to understand the subject-wise and  title-wise  demands  of  books. 
From Table 2 it is clear that there is a considerable  variation  of  demands  of  books  among  the  subjects  studied  in  the  semester. This  may  be  due  to  one’s  
denotes  the  weightage  of  the  subject  correspond  to  the  subject  Si,  and  then  the  maximum  number  of  books  required  for  the  subject Si   is  given  by 
                                                        (1)  
Here,  it  is  to  be  mentioned  that  weightage  of  a  subject  (Tj)  among  the  subjects  taught  (i.e.,  S where i =1, 2, 3,…n ) in a course of a semester is i  
or the perceived importance of the subjects among  the  students  for  the  semester.  Whatever  it  may  
inclination/preference towards the specific subjects  
determined  by  the  ratio  of  demands  books  in  that  
particular  subject  with  respects  to  other  subjects  
taught  in  that  particular  course.  Let  us  Suppose:  
be,  knowledge  of  this  demand  variation  among  
Total  number  of  students  in  a  semester (N)   =  60 
the  subjects  studied  in  a  semester  of  a  course  will  help  librarians  to  take  informed  decision  for  
Maximum  no.  of  books  a  student  can  borrow 
(P)  = 6 
books  of  above  six  subjects  is  shown  in  Table  3.  The    title-wise  usage  data  of  each  subject  reveals  that  undergraduate  students  primarily  use  a  few  
collection development.The title-wise demand of the  
No.  of  subjects  taught  in  a  semester (S)   =  6,  say  
wide  spectrum  of  titles  within  the  subject.  Thus,  it  
S1,  S2,  S3,  S4,  S5   and  S 
6 
Let, the corresponding weightageTj  of the subject  
in  multiple  copies  to  provide  better  support  to  
selective  text  books  within  the  subject  rather  than  
Si  according to the ratio of demands of books among  
the  subjects  taught  in  the  semester  is  as  follows: may  be  argued  that  only  a  few  titles  are  required  
T1:  T2:  T3:  T4:  T5:T6   =  4:  3:  2:  4  :2  :  3 
Hence, subject S1 
   
requires {(60*6)/18}*4 =80 books  
in multiple copies which has been observed by the  authors  in  the  participating  libraries. 
Thus, the maximum number of copies of a book  to  be  purchased  may  be  decided  mathematically  basing  the  anticipated  requirement/usage  statistics  of  the  book.  The  formula  can  be  based  on  the  total  number  of  students  of  a  course  for  a  given  semester  and  the  maximum  loan  limit  to  students.  
students rather than procuring a wide range of titles  
maximum                                       (A) 
Here,  it  is  assumed  that  at  any  point  of  time,  lending  of  books  among  the  subjects  hardly  cross  the  demand  ratio  derived  from  consolidated  ratio  of  demands  of  books  among  the  subjects. 
Further  extending  the  formula  (1),  if  for  a  subject, Xi   number  of  book  titles  is  the  prescribed  
given semester of a course in a university and each  student  can  be  issued  a  maximum  of  P   number  of  books.  Hence,  at  any  given  point  of  time,  a  maximum  of NP   number  of  books  will  be  required  to  serve  the  students.  Let,  S  denotes  the  number  of  subjects  taught  in  the  given  semester  and  Tj 
text  books  and  W 
Suppose  N   is  the  total  number  of  students  in  a  
j 
  is  the  weightage  given  to  the  
title  Xi,  and  then  the  maximum  limit  for  multiple  
copies  of  for  a  given  title Xi   should  be 
188 
                                                        (2)  

========5========

GIRI, et al.: COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT IN INDIAN ACADEMIC LIBRARIES 
table  3.   majorly  used  books  within  the  subjects  of  Ivth  semester  students  of mAE  during january  2012  to june  
2012 
subject titles of the book Issued reserved total  Demand for majorly  
demand used books as a % of  
total  demand (given in  
table 2) in the subject Kinematics &  Theory of machines / SS Rattan 52 6 58 
Dynamics of Ma- 
chines 
Theory of mechanisms and machines /  46 7 53 
AmitabhaGhosh 
Theory of machines and mechanisms / P. L.  24 8 32 
Ballaney 
Theory of machine / R.S. Khurmi 22 2 24 
Sum of demands of majorly used books in the subject = 
167 
77.3 % 
Heat Transfer 
Thermal engineering/ Ballaney 102 Engineering thermodynamics / P.K. Nag 96 Heat and mass transfer/ R. yadav 34 Sum of demands of majorly used books in the subject =  
11 2 1 
113 98 35 246 
83.1 % 
Manufacturing  Machines 
Elements of workshop technology / S.K.  116 Hajra Choudhury 
A course in workshop technology / B.S.  77 Raghuwanshi 
Manufacturing technology : Metal cutting  32 and machine tools / P.N. Rao 
Sum of demand of majorly used books in the subject   =  
9 
125 
6 
83 
7 
39 
247 
76.2 % 
Numerical Analy- sis & Program- ming 
Numerical methods in engineering and sci- 59 ence / B.S. Grewal 
Numerical methods / E. Balagurusamy 17 Computer programming and numerical  10 analysis : An integrated approach / N. Datta 
Sum of demand of majorly used books in the subject  =  
4 
63 
17 10 
90 
70.3 % 
Operation Re- search 
Operations research : an introduction /  Hamdy A. Taha 
Quantitative techniques in management /  N.D. Vohra 
Operations research / R. Panneerselvam 
66 
2 
68 
46 
12 
58 
54 
2 
56 
Sum of demand of majorly used books in the subject   = 
182 
86.7 % 
LAN & Networking 
Computer networks / Andrew S. Tanenbaum 92 Data communications and networking / Beh- 84 rouz A. Forouzan 
Data and computer communications / Wil- 33 liam Stallings 
Sum of demand of majorly used books in the subject   =  
6 5 
98 89 
33 
220 
76.7 % 
Here,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  weightage  (Wj)  of  a  Hence,  in  continuation  with  the  example  given  book title among the prescribed titles (i.e., Xi  where  at  A,  let  the  subject  S1   corresponding  to  subject  i   =  1,2,3….. n)  in  a  subjects  is  determined  by  the  weightage  T1   has  5  prescribed  textbooks  say  X1,  preference  ratio  of  majorly  used  individual  titles  in  X2,  X 
3, 
 X 
4, 
 X 
5 
  and  their  corresponding  weightage  that  subject. W1:W2:W3:W4:W5   =  4:2:3:4:3.  Hence,  the  maximum  
189 

========6========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  3,  MAy  2015 
limit  for  multiple  copies  for  a  title  say X1   is  equal  to  (80/16)*4  =20  copies.  
An  alternate  proposal  of  purchasing  e-copy  of  books  (wherever  available)  to  avoid  acquisition  of  
ratio  of  titles  in  that  subject.  
Here,  it  is  assumed  that  at  any  point  of  time,  
multiple copies were also in consideration. But e-copy  demand of titles in a subject hardly cross preference  
of many prescribed textbooks is not available. Majority  
of the university-prescribed textbooks published by  
6.   mEAsurEs AppLIED IN   I gDtuW  LIbrAry  
The library is striving to follow the above formula  
the  Indian  publishers  are  not  available  in  e-form.  A  small  experiment  was  carried  out  to  assess  the  usability of the e-book. In the experiment, e-copies  of  the  four  textbooks  that  were  on  heavy  demand  
in determining the maximum limit as to the number of  
were  kept  in  the  library  server  for  downloading  copies of a particular title. The above mathematical  
and  using  within  the  campus.  It  was  observed  that  
formula  is  found  to  be  very  useful  when  library  
though  there  was  significant  downloading  of  the  
receives request to procure several titles in a subject. e-copy, but students’ demands for the print version  While  applying  the  above  formula,  the  practical  
almost  remained  the  same.  From  the  feedback  of  
limitation  arises  in  determining  the  weightage  of  a  
students,  it  was  found  that  they  use  e-copy  only  
subject  of  a  course  in  a  given  semester.  For  this  
when the hard copy of the books was not available  purpose,  the  library  has  adopted  a  mixed  policy.  
and  most  of  the  student  prefer  reading  from  the  
Whenever  a  new  subject/course  is  introduced,  the  library  requests  the  course  coordinator/concerned  
printed  version  of  the  textbooks.  
To  reduce  dependency  on  the  faculty,  several  
the  students  needs,  it  goes  for  additional  copies. 
For  books  in  a  subject  that  are  already  being  taught  in  a  semester  and  available  in  the  library,  the  usage  data  of  consecutive  two  years  for  the  semester  are  used  in  determining  the  weightage  of  the  subjects  when  a  large  number  of  copies  of  several  titles  are  recommended  for  procurement. 
The  other  problem  arises  when  a  given  title  is  
faculty  to  indicate  atmost  three  major  titles  in  the  
subject that may be primarily used by the students  
communication  channels  are  being  used  to  reach  for  the  subject,  so  that  they  may  be  procured  in  
students and researchers. These include recommendation  multiple copies. Even in that case, the library initially to e-recommendation form created in Google Docs,  
through  OPAC;  group  e-mailing  system  with  a  link  purchases  atmost  five  copies  and  after  observing  
social networking site (e.g. Library Facebook page,  
Twitter);  and  a  permanent  link  in  library  blog. As  a  result, it is found that there is about three-fold jump  in  student  participation  in  book  recommendation  process25. 
Whenever  a  new  title  in  multiple  copies  (more  than three copies) is recommended by a temporary  faculty, the scenario of library holdings on the same  subject  is  presented  to  the  concerned  faculty  and  
required  by  students  of  other  courses  at  the  same  
then efforts are made to collect data on availability  time. For example, computer language programming  
of other titles on the same subject in the market as  
by  C  was  needed  by  the  students  of  3rd   semester  of  Mechanical  &  Automation  Engineering  (MAE)  
well as from other peer libraries. In many instances,  the  library  staff  of  peer  libraries  (e.g.,  the  library  
students  as  well  as  Electronics  &  Communication  
of  DTU)  supplies  valuable  information  relating  to  
Engineering  (ECE)  students  at  the  same  time.  In  that case, maximum value for MAE for 3rd  semester  and  maximum  value  or  ECE  for  3rd   semester  has  been  compared  and  higher  value  has  been  taken  as  maximum  limit  for  purchasing  initially.  After  that,  feedbacks  from  circulation  department  as  
structure  in  mind  up  to  a  maximum  to  the  sum  
much  used  titles  on  the  subject.  
Thereafter, the total scenario is presented to the  dean/head of the respective department. If they still  insist for more copies, the library starts purchasing a  maximum of five copies initially and then purchases  
well  as  from  students  were  collected.  When  it  was  
phase-wise up to the limit of maximum value provided  observed that more copies were needed, additional  
by  the  formula  by  observing  the  student  demands.  copies were purchased phase-wise keeping demand  
In  a  fast  evolving  discipline  like  fuzzy  system  and  
neural  networks  of  computer  science,  when  more  total  of  requirements  of  the  two  departments.  But  
than  three  copies  of  books  are  recommended,  the  it  is  observed  that  rarely  the  sum  total  of  two  
library has taken the policy of phase-wise purchasing  
of books and extensive diversification of titles. This  
departments’  requirement  is  needed  as  there  are  other books on the same subject that supplement the  students’ need. In addition, to ensure the availability  of most needed books at any time in the library for  consultation, one copy (generally instructor’s copy)  is  kept  in  the  frequently  used  book  section.  As  it  is  only  for  consultation,  it  is  not  issued.  
190 
automatically  downs  maximum  value  as  X   value  increases  with  extensive  diversifications. 
7.    CoNCLusIoNs  
Procurement of multiple copies of books demands  the  librarian  to  take  ownership  of  the  collection  

========7========

GIRI, et al.: COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT IN INDIAN ACADEMIC LIBRARIES 
development.  As  at  the  end  of  the  day,  it  is  the  librarian  who  is  held  responsible  for  the  quality  and  performance  of  the  library’s  collection.  If  the  collection  is  deemed  inadequate  by  accrediting  agencies, it is the librarian rather than the faculty will  be  asked  to  take  the  appropriate  steps  to  improve  it. The  librarian/  acquisition  staff  should  also  make  conscious  and  continuous  efforts  to  harness  the  expertise of the faculty as it is vital to the health of  the collection26.  Continuous  interaction  with  faculty  and students as well as regular scanning of incoming  materials  have  the  potential  to  give  them  broader  perspective  as  well  as  enlighten  them  about  the  new  developments  which  eventually  help  them  to  play  the  leading  role  in  collection  development.  It  
and  Tech.  Serv.,  2001, 25(2),  171-78. 
7. Forte, E.,  et al.,  Developing a training program  
for  collection  managers. Lib.  Coll.,  Acqui.  and  
Tech.  Serv.,  2002, 26(3),  299-306. 
8. Johnson, P. Fundamentals of ccollection development  
and management. American Library Association,  
Chicago,  2014.  
9. Galbreath, R. Nailing Jell-O to the wall? Collection  
management in the electronic era. North Carolina  
Libraries,  1997,  55(1),  18-21. 
10. Connell, T. H. Comparing the circulation of library  
materials  ordered  by  faculty  and  librarians.  
Collection  Management,1991,  14(1/2),  73-84.  
also underscores the necessity of subject librarians  
11. Kohn,  K.C.  Usage–based  collection  evaluation  
in Indian academic library system. Thus, instead of  being  a  mere  administrative  functionary,  librarians  can  intellectually  contribute  to  the  health  of  the  
with a curricular focus. Coll. & Res. Lib., 2013,  74(1),  85-97. 
collection.  Also,  there  should  be  local  training  
12. Dinkins, D. Circulation as assessment: Collection  
programmers  on  collection  development,  so  that  new entrants as well as existing professionals in the  library field may be better prepared to develop their  collections  as  practicing  librarians18,27.  In  addition,  it  demands  optimal  use  of  current  advancements  in ICT especially developments in web to reach all  the stakeholders in real time. Above all, determining  the maximum number of copies of a book required  for  the  library  calls  for  better  understanding  of  users’  need  as  well  as  application  of  operational  research  techniques. 
rEFErENCEs 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
Evans, G.E. Developing library and information  center collections. Libraries Unlimited, Colorado,  2004. 
Banerjee, R. & Mulley, V. P. Engineering education  in India. Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai,  2008. http://casi.sas.upenn.edu/system/files/En gineering%2BEducation%2Bin%2BIndia%2BDec 1608-1.pdf.  (accessed  on  1  February  2013). AICTE. Approval  process  handbook  (2012-13).  All  India  Council  for  Technical  Education,  New  Delhi, 2012. http://www.aicte-india.org/downloads/ approval_process_12_13_051011.pdf (accessed  on  1  February  2013). 
Chu, F.T. Librarian-faculty relations in collection  development. J. of Acad. Lib ., 1997, 23(1), 15- 20. 
Khan, A.M. Managing collection development and  organization in globalising Indian university libraries.  Collection  Building,  2010,  29(1),  15-21. Sorgenfrei, R. & Hooper-Lane, C. Book selection  responsibilities  for  the  reference  librarian:  Professional benefit or burden?  Lib. Coll., Acqui.  
development  policies  evaluated  in  terms  of  
circulation at a small academic library. Coll.  &  
Res.  Lib.,  2003, 64(1),  46-53. 
13. Gorman, G.E. & Howes, B. R. Collection development  
for  libraries.  Bowker-Saur,  London,  1989. 14. Joswick,  K.E.  &  Stierman,  J.K.  Perception  vs.  
use:  Comparing  faculty  evaluations  of  journal  
titles with faculty and student usage. J. of Acad.  
Lib.,  1995, 21(6),  457-58. 
15. Yang, E.L. Psychology collection review: A cooperative  
project  between  librarians  and  departmental  
faculty members. Collection Management, 1990,  
13(3),  45-53. 
16. Arendt,  J.  &  Lotts,  M.  What  liaisons  say  about  
themselves  and  what  faculty  say  about  their  
liaisons,  a  US  survey.  Portal:  Lib.  and  Acad.,  
2012, 12(2),  155-77. 
17. Kim,  U.C.  Participation  of  teaching  faculty  in  
library book selection. Collection Management,  
1981, 3(4),  333-52. 
18. Bodi,  S.  &  Maier-O’Shea,  K.  The  Library  of  
Babel: Making sense of collection management  
in  a  postmodern  world. Journal  of  Acad.  Lib.,  
2005, 31(2),  143-50. 
19. Henry,  E.;  Longstaff,  R.  &  Van  Kampen,  D.  
Collection  analysis  in  an  academic  library.  
Collection  Building,  2008,  27(3),  113-17. 
20. Lawson, K.; King, C. & Matava, T. Interdisciplinary  
on campus: How the publishing world is responding.  
Collection  Building,  2012,  31(1),  4-10. 
21. Frazier, K. Collection development and professional  
ethics. J.  of  Lib. Admin.,  1999, 28(1),  33-46. 22. Kertesz,  C.  The  Unwanted  Gift:  When  saying  
191 

========8========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  3,  MAy  2015 
“no  thanks”  isn’t  enough.  American  Libraries ,  
2001, 32(3),  34-36. 
23. Clayton, P. & Gorman, G.E. Managing information  
resources in libraries. Collection management in  
Theory and Practice. Facet Publishing, London,  
2006. 
24. Giri, R. NewGenLib 3: An integrated open source  
university, he held as in-charge library automation,  digital library and library 2.0 in Indira Gandhi Delhi  Technical  University  for  Women,  Delhi.  He  worked  as  Head–Photo  Archives,  Times  of  India,  Delhi;  In-charge-Periodicals  and  Database,  Institute  for  Defence  Studies  and  Analyses,  the  premier  think  tank  in  India’s  Defence  and  Security  Studies. 
library  management  system  that  makes  your  Dr  bimal  Kanti  sen  graduated  in  Science  with  
library  visible  in  web.  Library  Hi  Tech  News ,  
2012, 29(10),  4-12. 
25. Giri,  R.;  Kar,  D.C.  &  Sen,  B.K.  The  effect  of  
Facebook adoption in an academic library. World  
Digital  Library,  2014, 7(2), 
26. Neville, R.; Williams III, J. & Hunt, C.C. Faculty- 
library teamwork in book ordering. Coll. & Res.  
Lib.,  1998, 59(6),  523-32. 
27. Adekanmbi,  A.R.  &  Boadi,  B.y.  Problems  of  
developing library collections:  A study of colleges  
of  education  libraries  in  Botswana.  s,  2008,  
24(4),  275-88. 
About  the Authors 
mr rabishankar giri is working as Assistant Librarian  at Presidency University, Kolkata. His research interest  centres  on  investigating  how  knowledge  brokers  in  complex,  multimodal  communication  settings  use  information  systems  to  transfer  knowledge  and  influence  others.  He  has  written  articles  in  several Scopus indexed journals. Prior to joining the  
192 
Distinction  and  obtained  his  Diploma  in  Library  Science from the University of Calcutta. He obtained  his Master’s degree in Library in Information Science  from the University of Delhi and PhD from Jadavpur  University working on the history of Indian scientific  periodicals.  He  served  INSDOC  for  more  than  30  years  working  on  various  capacities  and  heading  among others Russian Science Information Centre;  National  Centre  on  Bibliometrics;  Education  and  Training  Division  and  National  Science  Library.  He  served  the  University  of  Malaya  as  a  Visiting  Professor  from  1995  to  1999. 
Dr g. mahesh  is Principal Scientist at CSIR-National  Institute of Science Communication and Information  Resources  (NISCAIR),  New  Delhi.  He  is  currently  Head, National Science Library and the Coordinator  of  the  National  Knowledge  Resource  Consortium  (NKRC),  a  project  that  facilitates  online  access  to  information resources to all CSIR and DST labs. He  has about 20 papers published in international and  national  journals.  He  is  also  the  Editor  of  Annals  of  Library  and  Information  Studies. 

========9========

