DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 35, No. 1, January 2015, pp. 41-46  DOI: 10.14429/djlit.35.1.8036 
  2015, DESIDOC 
  Tag Cloud Application and Information Retrieval System: Visualisation to  
Create Information Literacy 
Shri Ram 
    Jaypee University of Information Technology, Waknaghat, Solan-173 234 
E-mail: shriram2576@gmail.com 
 Ab STRACT 
The purpose of this paper is to discuss the application of tag clouding for information visualisation  and information retrieval over social cataloguing tool such as Shelfari (http://shelfari.com). This is a case  study where tag cloud is being used as a tool for information visualisation and information retrieval to  create awareness about new arrivals in the library. For the purpose of creating awareness amongst the  user  of  the  library  and  promote  the  use  of  newly  catalogued  resources,  an  online  social  cataloguing  system  ‘Shelfari’  (http://shelfari.com)  has  been  used. The  new  arrivals  are  catalogued  through  social  cataloguing  system. The  Library  of  Congress  subject  heading  (LCSH)  and  Medical  Subject  Headings  (MeSH)  are  being  used  as  tag  words  for  each  resource. The  tag  cloud  created  in  this  way  has  been  evaluated for the effectiveness of the social cataloguing. The results suggest that tag clouding helps to  create a visual effect and help users to learn about availability of the resources in the library along with  the  collaborative  activities  such  as  reviews  and  feedbacks,  to  choose  right  kind  of  reading  materials.  Social  cataloguing  activities  are  now  getting  momentum  in  online  social  network  system. The  use  of  internet and social network activities are increasing day-by-day so as the use of reviews and feedback  for choosing right reading material. This study shall be valuable for those who are interested in choosing  
right reading materials based on popularity.  
Keywords:  Social cataloguing, tagging, tag clouds, information search and retrieval, new arrivals 
1. 
InTRoduCTIon 
Recent years have seen an explosion in online  collaborative information sharing. Social cataloguing  is  one  of  the  collaborative  network  activity  which  is  characterised,  firstly  by  cataloging  of  resources  and  interaction  with  others  based  on  shared  item  and,  secondly  by  the  enrichment  of  cataloguing  descriptions  through  either  explicit  cooperation  of  cataloguing metadata or through analysis of implicit  data.  Social  cataloguing  helps  user  to  catalogue  their own resources on web owned by them or liked  by  them.  In  this  process,  user  assigns  some  tags  (freely chosen keywords) for their convenience based  on  the  principle  of  mnemonics  and  follow  social  networking  sites  commonly  used  for  video-sharing  (YouTube),  photo-sharing  (Flickr),  book-marking  (Citeceer, CiteULike, Del.cio.us), and cataloguing of  personal books (LibraryThings, Shelfari). It is found  that over these social networking websites, the users  are freely using certain keywords to demonstrate the  theme  of  the  content.  This  has  given  the  origin  of  social tagging as one of the key web 2.0 application  that  helps  users  to  identify  the  resources  tagged  by them. Such tagging-based systems enable users  
to  categorise  web  resources  by  means  of  tags,  in  order to re-find these resources later. Mendis et al.,    debated  such  activities  as  collaborative  tagging,  social indexing, and mob indexing1. Shiri discussed  the  thesauri  development  on  web  and  further,  in  2009  used  the  terms  communal  categorisation,  ethno-classification and free-text tagging system(2, 3).  Thus,  in  the  process  of  choosing  a  set  of  popular  tags  populated  in  a  particular  context  is  known  as  ‘Folksonomy’. According to Vander Wal, who coined  the term ‘folksonomy’, social tagging had its origins  in  the  1990s,  but  it  remains  one  of  today's  major  successes through websites such as ‘Delicious‘(tagging  webpages),  ‘Flickr’  (tagging  images)  and  YouTube  (tagging  videos)4.  Within  the  library  world,  much  attention  has  been  paid  to  ‘LibraryThing’,  a  social  tagging  based  website  that  allows  users  to  upload  records of their entire book collection5. Folksonomy  is the combination of taxonomy and folk. At the time  of tagging, the keywords popularised as an interface  model  for  visual  information  retrieval  known  as  ‘Tag-Cloud’.  Description  of  resources  over  internet  and  to  ensure  effective  retrieval  from  plethora  of  information is a challenging task. It is essential to describe  resources  in  an  effective  ways. 
Received 29 September 2014, revised 7 November 2014, online published 22 January 2015 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  1,  JANUARY   2015 
Metadata,  a  structured  information  which  is  used  to  describe,  explain,  locate  an  information.  It  adds  value  to  description  of  information  element  and  makes  it  easier  to  retrieve6.  Metadata  aids  in  the  identification,  description,  management  and  location of information in both digital and non-digital  environment. Digital environments finds its usability  in  enhancing  resource  discovery  and  disclosing  sufficient description about the resource, to enable  users to discriminate between what is relevant and  what is not relevant to a specific query. To facilitate  retrieval of information or subject, the resources are  assigned subject headings, based on the content, in  the process of cataloguing. Lancaster had given the  processes  of  indexing  system  in  order  to  achieve  high  precision  in  information  retrieval.  To  ensure  the  effective  indexing  and  to  maintain  the  overall  efficacy  of  the  retrieval  system,  it  is  necessary  to  apply some of the degree of control of the indexing  process.  By  controlling  the  indexing  process  using  a so-called controlled vocabulary, index terms were  standardised and similar or related resources were  collocated for ease of the discovery by user7.  The  preeminence of controlled vocabularies has recently  been challenged by the appearance of “Collaborative  tagging”  in  a  variety  of  social  cataloguing  and  bookmarking  applications8. 
2.   o bjeCTIVeS 
The objective of the paper is to study the tagging  process  which  can  help  in  information  retrieval  in  social  cataloguing  environment. 
3. MeThodoLogy  
A  profile  of  library  was  created  by  the  name  of  ‘Learning  Resource  Center,  Jaypee  University  of Information Technology, New Arrivals’on Shelfari  (http://www.shelfari.com/lrcjuit/shelf)  (Fig.  1).  Each  month  new  books  catalogued  in  the  library  were  
Figure 1. Virtual shelve of library on Shelfari. 
42 
being  updated  on  this  virtual  shelf  for  displaying  new arrivals globally. After this process, a feedback  on impact on the users of this facility was obtained  through  a  survey.  The  faculty,  student  and  staff  members  were  asked  to  give  their  feedback  on  this  service.  The  result  of  the  survey  is  presented  in  analysis  section. 
Shelfari, based in Seattle, introduces readers to  a global community of book lovers and encourages  them to share their literary inclinations and passions  with  peers,  and  friends.  The  aim  of  Shelfari  is  to  gather authors, publishers and readers at one place.  Shelfari  has  many  tools  and  features  that  help  authors,  publishers  and  readers  connected  each  other.  These  tools  are  indexing  of  books,  reviews,  suggestions,  and  sharing  of  information  about  a  book,  they  write,  publish  and  read  (http://shelfari. com).  In  August  2008,  Shelfari  was  purchased  by  Amazon27. 
4. SoCIAL   C ATALoguIng 
A  Social  cataloging  application  is  a  web  application  designed  to  help  users  to  catalogue  reading  materials  owned  or  otherwise  of  interest  to  them.  The  terminology  is  characterised  by  two  peculiar  characteristics  arising  due  to  the  multi- user  cataloguing  environment,  firstly,  the  ability  to  share  catalogue  and  interact  with  others  based  upon  shared  item  and  secondly,  the  enrichment  or  improvement  of  cataloguing  description  through  either  explicit  co-operation  in  the  production  of  cataloguing metadata or through analysis of important  information architecture associated with the resources  under  cataloguing  activity.  Steele  described  such  activity  as  a  social  phenomenon  and  its  use  in  cataloguing activity, metadata description, discussing  folksonomies, social bookmarking, tagging and use  of controlled vocabulary such as Library of Congress  Subject Heading (LCSH) or Medical Subject Heading  (MeSH)  for  information  retrieval9.  In  recent  times,  the discussion is on the information architecture by  community  about  the  classification  of  information  as  ‘social  classification’,  ‘ethnoclassification’  and  ‘falkosonomies’10.  The  folksonomies  allows  user  to  describe  documents  (in  web  based  environment)  with  subject  headings  called  ‘tags’,  without  regard  for conventional rules11. The tags acquire their size  according to the amount of use, and are organised  in  a  ‘cloud’  of  tags.  Folsosonomies  act  as  an  Internet-based  information  retrieval  methodology  and involves collaboratively generated, open-ended  labels which categorise any content, web resources,  and  photographs  over  internet,  etc.  There  are  so  many websites that exists today which has become  increasingly  popular  in  collaborative  tagging  and  appears in a variety of prominent web-based services.  The example includes CiteULike (www.citeulike.org/),  Del.icio.us  (http://del.icio.us/),  Flickr  (www.flickr. 

========2========

SHRI RAM: TAg CLOUD  App LICATION AND  I NFORMATION  R ETRIEVAL  S YSTEM: VISUALIzATION TO  C REATE  I NFORMATION  L ITERACY 
com/),  etc.  Similarly,  there  are  also  various  social  networking website which are dedicated to describing  books  by  various  user  groups. These  websites  are  LibraryThings (www.librarythings.com), and Shelfari  (www.shelfari.com). While describing a document over  social  networking  website,  the  user  often  marks  a  label to describe his/her documents. The labels are  commonly  known  as  tags  and  the  labeling  process  is called tagging. Tags are helpful in improving the  efficiency of search-engine, because the content is  categorised using a familiar, accessible, and shared  vocabulary. Tags also have an additional benefit of  creating  a  group  of  related  web  resource12.  This  process  of  collaborative  tagging  emerged  in  this  way  is  still  developing  as  a  means  of  organising  information  resources  on  the  web. 
5. ConCepT   o F   T Ag  CLoudIng 
Many changes have happened to the web in the  past 10-15 years in terms of increased sophistication  of  the  technology  supporting  internet  and  have  led  to  an  online  paradigm  shift  commonly  label  web  2.0.  The  concept  as  described  by  Tim  O’Reilly  as  web  platform  with  collective  intelligence,  rich  user  experience,  and  light  weight  programming.  These  concepts of web 2.0 have applicability of remixibility,  convergence, and participation amongst the user of  internet13.  These  phenomenon’s  are  taking  place  since the time of Carl (Carolus) Linnaeus, the father  of  taxonomy,  to  classify  the  living  organism  in  to  Kingdom-phylum-Sub phylum-Class-Family-genus. On  the same principle library resources are also being  classified  according  to  their  subject  matter  based  on  the  same  or  other  principle  devised  by  Melville  Dewey (The Dewey Decimal Classification) and S. R.  Ranganathan (Colon Classification). Dewey system  organises  books  on  library  shelves  in  a  specific  and  repeatable  order  that  makes  it  easy  to  find  any  book  and  return  it  to  its  proper  place.  On  the  other  hand,  Colon  classification  is  a  system  based  on hierarchical classification, applying the principle  of  development  from  the  general  to  the  specific  in  disciplinary  and  subject  relationships,  under  the  terminology  Faceted  classification  scheme14.  
Every school of library and information science  has  incorporated  taxonomy  into  their  classification  and cataloguing curriculum to teach structure of the  subject.  This  taxonomy  is  the  ‘science  of  finding,  describing, classifying, and naming organisms (here  in  this  case,  books  and  other  reading  materials).  Over  the  time,  the  concept  of  taxonomy  has  come  to  include  categorisation  of  not  just  ‘organism’  but  anything  that  can  be  categorised,  given  the  phrase  the  ‘Hierarchical  system  of  classification’.  The  National  Library  of  Medicine  Medical  Subject  Heading  (MeSH)  and  Library  of  Congress  (LCSH)  are  using  this  system.  With  the  convergence  of  online  information  system  and  development  in  
computer programming, a new social service, known  as  bookmarking,  has  given  user’s  a  flexibility  to  comment  on  the  subject  in  their  own  way.  During  this  process,  reader  assigns  keywords  or  tags  for  which  they  can  search  it  at  later  stage.  Tagging  is  implicitly  a  social  indexing  process;  in  which  users  share their tags and resources, constructing a social  tag index, so-called ‘folksonomy’. Del.icio.us is one  of the example website which provides this facility.  This tagging system has been defined by information  scientist  in  various  ways  depend  upon  its  use  in  the  context.  Congregation  of  tag  words  results  in  Tag  Clouding.  A  tag  cloud  is  a  text  based  visual  representation  of  set  of  tags  which  usually  depicts  tag importance by font size and/or font color. Recent  trends  in  social  and  collaborative  software,  social  cataloging,  and  web  based  library  and  information  management  environment  have  greatly  increased  popularity  of  tag  representation  form.  A  tag  cloud  provides users with comprehensible overview on the  content  of  large  tagged  repositories.  Each  of  the  individual tag links to relevant subsets of repository  content  and  tag  clouds  act  as  an  instrument  for  topical browsing of the content15. Tag clouds occupy  a  peculiar  niche  in  the  domain  of  visualisation.  
Many  authors  have  studied  the  purpose  of  tag  clouding for various purposes. Kuo et al.,  evaluated  the pubcloud interface by comparing it to the pubMed  list  layout16.  The  authors  found  that  the  response  time was less when using lists but the quality of the  answer was improved by the cloud layout. Halvey &  Keane  evaluated  the  influence  of  the  different  tag  cloud  properties  on  search  time17.  They  compared  vertical  and  horizontal  list  of  tag  cloud,  all  of  them  either  sorted  by  tag’s  relevance  alphabetically  or  using  larger  font  size  of  the  text  in  tags.  They  conclude  that  alphabetisation  can  aid  users  to  find  information  more  easily  and  quickly  and  also  the  font size helps in identification of information more  quickly  than  smaller  size.  Flicker  tags  for  finding  landmark photos18, use of social tags for classification  of web pages(19, 20), application of falkosonomies for  social  classifications  of  resources21   were  some  of  the highlighted applications demonstrated by these  authors.  gupta  et  al.,   surveyed  and  summarised  different  techniques  employed  to  study  various  aspects of tagging22  and again  gupta et al.,  discussed  the  various  properties  of  tags  in  terms  of  tag  streams, tagging models, tag semantics, generating  recommendations using tags, visualisations of tags,  applications  of  tags  and  problems  associated  with  tag  usage23.  
As the technology is changing, libraries are also  adopting  new  techniques  for  getting  to  person’s  personal interest. These changes in new technologies  are the application of web technology such as social  networks,  syndication  techniques,  and  information  retrieval  technologies.  Information  communication  
43 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  1,  JANUARY   2015 
through OpAC enhancement is one of the important  aspects that libraries should consider as media for  information literacy24.  Another study suggested the  specific  applications  of  the  tags  as  a  lightweight  way of enhancing descriptions of on-line information  resources and improving access to resources through  broader  indexing.  Searching  tags  can  enable  the  discovery  of  relevant  resources  and  developing  social  relationship  among  taggers  and  act  as  a  means  of  information  discovery(25,26). 
6. TAggIng And  TAg  CLoud  wITh  
SheLFARI 
Library is making huge investment for acquiring  different  kinds  of  books  every  month  on  various  subject  areas.  Each  book,  which  is  being  received  in the library, metadata elements set is prepared for  title, author/s, publisher, subject heading, purchased  date, department group, and placed in the category  ‘currently  reading’.  These  element  sets  are  also  updated  at  the  new  arrival  lounge  of  Learning  Resource Center on Shelfari. The tag/s or the words,  which  describe  the  central  theme  of  the  books,  are  assigned  in  Tag  section  on  Shelfari.  This  tag  word is used as “subject heading” of the book. The  subject  heading  is  based  on  Library  of  Congress  Subject Headings (LCSH) or Medical Subject Heading  (MeSH). Being an engineering institution the subject  heading have its implications in co-relating subjects  of  the  title.  Jill  O’Neill  describes  subject  heading  as  a  ‘language  that  is  more  in-keeping  with  users  approach  to  information  seeking  rather  than  more  traditional  classification  schemes’28.  The  subject  headings  assigned  to  each  book  automatically  converted  into  ‘tag  clouds’.  Different  members  tag  differently  for  a  particular  book.  Most  commonly  used  tags  are  represented  by  larger  font  size. 
The  tagging  system  contributes  an  exciting  feature  on  Shelfari  to  create  a  visual  information  retrieval29. The tag cloud is a simple visual interface  model, which may have some limitation as it depend  upon the frequency of use of tag words. Each items  catalogued on Shelfari can be rated, reviewed and  flagged  as  all  time  favorite  items. 
7. ReSuLTS And dISCuSSIon 
The  distribution  and  creation  of  the  tag  cloud  depends  upon  the  fonts  of  the  texts  in  cloud.  In  principle,  the  font  size  of  a  tag  in  a  tag  cloud  is  determined  by  its  incidence.  For  a  word  cloud  of  categories  like  weblogs,  the  frequency  of  use  for  example,  corresponds  to  the  number  of  weblog  entries  that  are  assigned  to  a  category.  For  small  frequencies  it  is  sufficient  to  indicate  directly  for  any  number  from  one  to  a  maximum  font  size.  For  larger  values,  a  scaling  should  be  made.  In  a  
si:  display  font  size;  fmax:  max.  fontsize;  ti:  count;  tmin:  min.  count;  tmax:  max.  count 
Figure 2. picture of collection on virtual shelve. 
weights30. 
After  careful  observation  of  the  tag  cloud,  it  can  be  visualised  that,  there  are  certain  words  which  have  larger  font  size  and  appear  bigger  in  size.  The  increase  in  font  size  indicates  the  number of resources available or catalogued in the  virtual  shelves.  Fig.  2  gives  the  overall  pictures  of  the  top  ten  subjects  heading,  used  as  tag,  on  virtual  shelve  of  Learning  Resource  Center,  JUIT.  Out  of  503  tag  words  used  on  this  virtual  shelve  ‘Bioinformatics  (47,  9.37  %),  Biology  (29,  5.7  %),  Computer  Science  (17,  3.38  %),  Data  Mining  and  Statistics  (10,  1.99  %),  geotechnical  Engineering,  Molecular biology, pharmaceutical Chemistry (Each  7,  1.39  %)  are  the  some  of  the  larger  font  words  and  represents  larger  collection.  
The  above  data  analysis  gives  an  idea  about  the content of the tags available over Shelfari. But,  the  real  challenge  was  whether  this  service  of  the  library,  actually  had  any  impact  on  the  users  in  terms of retrieval of information through tag clouds.  In  order  to  assess  the  impact;  a  feedback  survey  was  conducted  amongst  the  users  of  the  library.  A  total  of  352  responses  were  received.  Table  1  presents  the  result  of  the  survey.  When  asked  about  profile  of  library  on  Shelfari  for  display  of  new  arrivals,  38.15  %  of  student  and  46.67  %  of  faculty  responded  that  they  are  not  aware  about  this,  in  contrast,  61.85  %  student  and  53.33  %  faculty  accepted  that  they  are  not  aware  of  this  service. 
The  result  of  impact  of  this  service  is  quite  
linear  normalisation,  the  weight  ti   of  a  descriptor  
is  mapped  to  a  size  scale  of  1  through  f,  where  satisfactory in terms that 146 users who were aware  
tmin   and  tmax   are  specifying  the  range  of  available  
44 
of  the  services  also  responded  on  the  impact.  Out  

========4========

SHRI RAM: TAg CLOUD  App LICATION AND  I NFORMATION  R ETRIEVAL  S YSTEM: VISUALIzATION TO  C REATE  I NFORMATION  L ITERACY 
Table  1. Awareness  about  the  profile  of  library  over  
Shelfari 
Category  Total no. of Aware of  not aware  of  respondent virtual  of virtual  respondent (n=352) shelves on  shelves on  
shelfari shelfari Student 173 38.15 % 61.85 % Faculty 90 46.67 % 53.33 % Others 89 42.50 % 57.50 % 
of  these  51.52  %  student  and  64.29  %  of  faculty  feel that the tag cloud has helped them in knowing  about the new books in library (Table 2). There were  negative  feedbacks  also,  which  may  be  useful  for  the  understanding  about  specific  reason  and  may  
Table 2. Impact of tag cloud on awareness about new  
arrivals in the library through Shelfari 
Category of  Total no. of Awareness of new  respondent respondent books 
(146) 
no  yes Student 66 48.48 % 51.52 % Faculty 42 35.71 % 64.29 % Others (Non- 
Teaching and  38 31.58 % 68.42 % Alumni) 
be  helpful  in  improving  the  service  in  future.  
8. ConCLuSIonS 
This paper has presented a practical approach of  creating information literacy about arrivals of newly  catalogued books in the library. While using this web- based  technology  the  library  has  experienced  one  of the novel ideas of visual information retrieval and  information literacy mechanism to create awareness  of new arrivals. Since the data and information are  very  small,  still  it  requires  a  comprehensive  study  for future development and testing of the usefulness  of  this  service.  Some  of  the  earlier  works  in  this  direction have already demonstrated the application  of  social  cataloguing  activity  in  the  library  and  information centers of the global community(31, 32)  and  these trends could be possible more elaborative ways  as the information and communication technology is  having  great  potential  and  impact  over  all  subjects  including  library. 
ReFeRenCeS 
1. Mendes, L.H.; et al.,   Subjecting  the  catalog  to  
tagging. Library  Hi  Tech,  2009, 27(1),  30-41. 2. Shiri,  A.  &  Revie,  C.  Thesauri  on  the  web:  
Current  developments  and  trends.  Online  Inf.  
Rev,   2000,  24(4),  273–79. 
3. Shiri, A. An examination of social tagging interface  
features and functionalities: An analytical comparison,  
Online  Inf.  Rev.,  2009,  33(5),  901–19. 4. Vander Wal, T. Folksonomy, 2007. http://vanderwal. 
net/folksonomy.html. (accessed on 16 February  
2014). 
5. Santolaria, A.M. Librarything as a library service.  
Assessment  report  ((2009).  http://e-collection. 
library.ethz.ch/eserv/eth:777/eth-777-01.pdf.  
(accessed  on  16  February  2014). 
6. Understanding  metadata.  http://www.niso.org/ 
publications/press/UnderstandingMetadata.pdf.  
(accessed  on  14  February  2014) 
7. Lancaster,  F.W.  Information  retrieval  systems:  
Characteristics,  testing  and  evaluation,  Ed.2.  
John  Wiley  &  Sons,  Chichester,  1979.  8. Steele,  L.  Collaborative  tagging  as  distributed  
cognition. Pragmatics & Cognition, 2006, 14(2),  
287-92.  
9. Steele, T. The new cooperative cataloging, Lib.  
Hi  Tech,  2009, 27(1),  68-77. 
10. Speller, E. Collaborative tagging, folksonomies,  
distributed  classification  or  ethnoclassification:  
A  literature  review.  Lib.  Stu.  J.,  2007.  http:// 
www.librarystudentjournal.org/index.php/lsj/article/ 
view/45/58  (accessed  on  16  February  2014). 11.   p eters, I. & Stock, W.g. Folksonomy and information  
retrieval. proceedings  of  the American  Society  
for  Information  Science  and  Technology,  2007,  
44(1),  1-28. 
12. Shirky.  C.  Ontology  is  overrated:  Categories,  
links  and  tags,  2005.  http://www.shirky.com/ 
writings/ontology_overrated.html  (accessed  on  
16  February  2014).  
13. O'Reilly,  T.  What  is  web  2.0:  Design  patterns  
and  business  models  for  the  next  generation  
of software, 2007. http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen. 
de/4580/  (accessed  on  16  February  2014). 14. Heiner-Freiling, M. & Landry, p. The use of the  
Dewey  Decimal  Classification  (DDC)  for  the  
organisation of national bibliographics: Switzerland  
and germany/Austria. IFLA general Conference  
and  Council,  Oslo,  Norway,  2005. 
15. Seifert C; et al.   On  the  beauty  and  usability  of  
tag clouds. In proceedings  of  the  International  
Conference on Information Visualisation, London,  
2008,  pp.17-25. 
16. Kuo, B.Y. L, et al. Tag  clouds  for  summarising  
web search results. In  Advances in information  
retrieval  (LNCS:  5478),  Springer,  germany,  
2009,  pp.  654-61. 
17. Halvey, M. & Keane, M.T. An assessment of tag  
presentation techniques. In proceedings of the  
16th  International World Wide Web Conference,  
Banff, Alberta,  Canada,  2007. 
18. Abbasi, R,et al.  Exploiting flickr tags and groups for  
finding landmark photos. In  ECIR ’09:  proceedings  
of the 31st  European Conference on IR Research.   
Springer-Verlag  ,Berlin,  Heidelberg,  2009,pp.  
654–661 
45 

========5========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  1,  JANUARY   2015 
19. Aliakbary, S, et al.  Webpage classification using  
social tags. In proceedings of IEEE International  
Conference  on  Computational  Science  and  
Engineering,  2009, 4,  588-93. 
20. Castano  ,S;  Ferrara  ,A;  Montanelli,  S.  Mining  
topic clouds from social data. In proceedings of  
the 5th  International Conference on Management  
of Emergent Digital Eco-Systems, 2013, pp.108- 
12. 
21.   z ubiaga, A, et  al.   Harnessing  folksonomies  to  
produce  a  social  classification  of  resources,  
knowledge and data engineering. IEEE transactions,   
2012, 5(8),  1801-813. 
22.  g upta,  M.,  et  al.   Survey  on  social  tagging  
techniques, ACM SIgKDD explorations newsletter,  
2010, 12(1),  58-72.  
23.   g upta  Manish;  et  al.,   An  overview  of  social  
tagging  and  applications.  edited  by   Charu  C.  
Aggarwal  Social Network Data Analytics.Springer,   
Netherlands:  2011,  pp.  447-497. 
24. Ram,S.  Information  Literacy  literacy  through  
web 2.0 integrated Webopac: An experiment at  
Jaypee group  of  institution.  DESIDOC  J.  Lib.  
Inf.  Technol.,  2010, 30(3),  43-50. 
25. Marlow, C., et al.  Tagging paper, taxonomy, Flickr,  
academic article, to read. In proceedings of the  
17th  Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia.  
ACM,  New  York,  2006,  31-40.  
26. Trant J. Studying social tagging and folksonomy:  
A  review  and  framework.   J.  Dig.  Inf. ,  2009,  
10(1). https://journals.tdl.org/jodi/index.php/jodi/ 
article/view/269/278 
27. Shelfari  joins  the  Amazon.com  family  (2008),  
Shelfari.com.  http://shelfari.typepad.com/my_ 
weblog/2008/08/shelfari-joins-the-amazoncom- 
family.html  (accessed  on  16  February  2014).  28. O’Neill,  J.  LibraryThing:  Cataloguing  for  the  
(Social) masses. Information Today, 2007, 24 (8),  
23. 
46 
29. Hassan-Monteroa,  Y.  &  Herrero-Solana,  V.  
Improving  tag-clouds  as  visual  information  
retrieval  interfaces.  International  Conference  
on  Multidisciplinary  Information  Sciences  and  
Technologies,  Mérida,  Spain,  2006.  
30. Lohmann, S.; ziegler, J. & Tetzlaff, L. Comparison  
of Tag Cloud Layouts: Task-related performance  
and visual exploration. edited by  T.  gross, et al. 
INTERACT  2009,  part-I,  LNCS,  2009,  57(26),  
392–404.  
31. Jeffries, S. Social cataloging tools: A comparison  
and  application  for  librarians.  Library  Hi  Tech  
News,  2008, 25(10),  1-4. 
32. Hvass,  A.  Cataloguing  with  LibraryThing:  As  
easy  as  1,2,3!,  Library  Hi  Tech  News,  2007,  
25(10),  5–7. 
About  the Author 
dr  Shri  Ram   is  working  as  Deputy  Librarian  at  Jaypee  University  of  Information  Technology  (JUIT),  Solan  since  2002.  He  holds phD  degree  in  Library  and  Information  Science  ,along  with  MSc  in (Anthropology). He has also qualified UgC-NET  in  Library  and  Information  Science. prior  to  joining  JUIT, he has worked with Indian Council of Medical  Research, New Delhi and Commonwealth Educational  Media Center for Asia in various capacities. He has  been  awarded  with  Commonwealth  Professional  Fellowship 2013   and  went  to  University  of  East  London,  London,  UK  during  September–December  2013. He has published 19 papers in various national  and  international  journals,  12  papers  in  national  and  international  conferences,  and  also  edited  two  conference  volumes.  His  research  areas  include:  Implementation  of  information  and  communication  technology,  multimedia-based  information  literacy,  user  education,  library  automation,  and  mobile  application  in  libraries. 

========6========

