DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 34, No. 6, November 2014, pp.461-466 
  2014, DESIDOC 
Embedded Librarianship—New Horizon of Librarianship 
Mehak Talwar 
 Department of Library & Information Science, University of Delhi, Delhi-110 007 
E-mail: mehaktalwar312@gmail.com 
 Abstr Act 
This paper is an effort to understand meaning of embedded librarianship, and its implementation in  academic libraries and how is it useful to the users. It attempts to understand the terminology and has  included an expert opinion on the subject. It explores the core competency and skills and attributes an  embedded librarian should possess. The paper is based on primary and secondary sources which also  deal with brief discussion of the charactersitcs of embedded librarianship and is an attempt to empirically  highlight  the  practices  followed  in  Central  Library,  Jawaharlal  Nehru  University  (JNU). This  study  also  tries to examine the pivotal role of embedded librarianship in the surroundings of Central library, JNU.  
Interview method was used. 
Keywords: Embedded librarianship, Central Library, JNU, innovative library services 
1. 
INtroductIoN 
The advent of the internet and related technologies  has transformed the nature of library and information  services.  There  is  a  paradigm  shift  from  ‘library  as  storehouse’  to  ‘library  as  a  knowledge  power  house’.  There  is  significant  transformation  in  the  role of librarian from mere custodian of information  sources and services to embedded librarian, who is  redefining  role  of  librarian  by  reactively  answering  research requests, developing a unique understanding  of  users  need  and  delivering  proactive  results.  Embedded librarianship is one step forward towards  modern  librarianship.  
The  Central  Library,  Jawaharlal  Nehru  University  (JNU) is an example of distinguishing characteristic of  librarianship practice in India. The LIS professionals  in Central Library, JNU have found that by embedding  themselves  into  the  centre  and  the  schools  they  serve,  make  them  a  more  visible  and  integrated  part of the faculty they assist. This is an innovative  approach in the sense that reverses the medium of  teaching  to  the  user  and  proactively  fulfilling  their  needs. Librarianship is concerned with fulfilling need  of  the  users  coming  to  the  library  but  embedded  librarianship  involves  better  catering  to  the  needs  of  the  user  groups  via  outreach  programmes  and  initiatives organised and hosts by them. The Central  Library,  JNU  is  such  remarkable  example.  
2.   o bjEctIvEs 
The  objectives  of  this  research  work  are  to: 
Received 14 October 2014, Online published 19 November 2014 
•	 Examine 	 the 	 concept 	 of 	 embedded 	 librarianship 	 and 	 
its  future  prospects  in  academic  institutions.  •	 D e t e r m i n e 	 t h e 	 s c o p e 	 o f 	 e m b e d d e d 	 
librarianship. 
•	 Identify 	 the 	 requirement 	 of 	 competencies 	 into 	 LIS 	 
professionals for their involvement in embedded  
librarianship  practice. 
•	 Examine 	 the 	 role 	 played 	 by 	 LIS 	 professionals 	 
in Central Library, JNU and how it comes under  
the  purview  of  embedded  librarianship. 
3. 
MEtHodoLogy  
Since  the  basic  purpose  of  this  study  is  to  examine  the  concept  of  embedded  librarianship.  Literature  survey  method  was  found  suitable.  It  was  followed  by  a  case  study  on  Central  Library,  JNU  and  used  an  interview  method.  This  study  elicits  extensively  and  attempts  to  address  the  pivotal role of embedded librarians and their future  prospects. 
4. 
EMbEddEd  LIbrArIANsHIp 
According to Merriam Webster dictionary1, ‘librarian’  is a specialist in the care or management of library,  ‘Embed’ means to make something an integral part  of.  Thus,  the  dictionary  meaning  of  ‘Embedded  Librarian’  can  be  considered  as  ‘someone  who  is  an integral part in effective practice of librarianship’.  Also, the following library professionals have defined  ‘embedded  librarianship’  as: 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  6,  NOVEMBER  2014 
David Shumaker2  said that ‘Embedded librarianship  is a distinctive innovation that moves the librarians  out  of  libraries  and  creates  a  new  model  of  library  and information work. It emphasises the importance  of forming a strong working relationship between the  librarian and a   group  or  team  of  people  who  need  the  librarian’s  information  expertise.  Davenport  &  Prusak advocated that “librarians, or rather information  managers, must view themselves not as warehouse  custodians,  or  even  as  providers  of  centralised  expertise, but rather as overseers of a multi-media  network.” They  concluded  with  an  eight-point  plan.  The  first  two  are  foundations  for  the  embedded  model  which  are:  
(1)  ‘Get  out  of  the  library,  and  into  the  research  
and  academic.’  
(2)  ‘Actively  assess  who  needs  information,  and  
who  has  it—then  help  them  to  connect.’2 
However, academic librarians focus on embedded  instruction, contributing to the pedagogical mission  of  their  institutions. 
4.1   c onstituents  of  Embedded  Librarianship 
The concept of embedded librarianship includes  the  practice  to  move  librarian  out  of  the  traditional  library  setting  whether  physically  or  virtually.  It  is  analytical  and  integrated  in  its  approach.  It  involves developing a new framework for providing  library  service.  Embedded  librarianship  involves  revamping  and  re-shaping  the  role  of  librarians. It  is  a  distinctive  innovation  strategies  that  moves  the  librarians  out  of  libraries  and  creates  a  new  model  of  library  and  information  work,  which  were  absent  in  traditional  practice  of  librarianship.  It  aims  to  create  an  environment  in  which  research  requests  are  answered  uniquely  by  understanding  users  need  in  advance  and  providing  effective  results.  These  results  are  achieved  in  a  shared  contribution.  This  helps  in  building  a  relationship  between the users and embedded librarians. As the  relationship develops, the librarian’s knowledge and  understanding  of  the  group’s  work  and  objectives  grow which leads in turn to greater alertness to the  information and knowledge needs of the group. The  embedded librarian becomes just as engaged in the  work  of  the  team  as  any  other  team  member.  As  a  result,  he/she  develop  highly  focused,  targeted,  specialised  and  an  indispensable  member  of  the  group.  Concisely,  the  constituents  of  embedded  librarianship  are: 
(a) Developing  relationship  with  the  users (b) Understanding and catering to their information  
needs 
(c) Sharing  their  needs  (i.e.,  goals) 
(d) Providing adequate information for achievements  
of  those  needs. 
462 
(e) Customised, active and high value contribution  
towards  achievement  of  their  needs. 
(f) Becoming an integral part of information seeker  
group. 
4.2   c haracteristics 
(a) Embedded  librarianship  is  a  process  which  
builds relationship so that they can gain deeper  
insights  into  what  users  are  doing  and  how  
they  would  utilise  the  information  provided  by  
the  library. 
(b) Embedded librarians are anticipatory and suggest  
ways  of  accomplishing  tasks  that  others  on  
the  team  wouldn’t  think  of-ways  that  save  the  
team’s  time  and  effort. 
(c) Embedded librarian works in group and collaborate  
with  other  members  so  as  to  achieve  team’s  
efforts  instead  of  individual  interests. (d)  The embedded librarian uses the strong working  
relationship formed through participation in a team  
to  understand  the  team’s  needs  and  address  
them in a customised way and it is tailor-made  
approach  to  fulfilling  user’s  needs.  
(e) Embedded librarians are technocratic and build  
strong relationships and provide the value based  
services  to  the  user  concerned. 
(f) Embedded  librarian’s  work  is  measured  by  
impact  of  user  learning  outcomes  and  by  way  
of the team success and evaluated by more and  
more involvement of students in their research  
work  through  proper  fair  and  original  means. (g) Embedded librarianship builds partnerships and  
is more focused on achieving the desired ends  
mutually. 
4.3   p re-requisites 
As the libraries are transforming into knowledge  powerhouses and so the role of librarians is revamping  and reshaping into embedded librarians. No embedded  librarianship can work successfully unless it is based  on  a  sound  footing.  Some  pre-requisites3   are: 4.3.1  Ongoing  Working  Relationships 
The focus should be on cooperative and coordinated  working relationship within a team/group. Emphasis  on building cohesive and collaborative relationships  between  teachers-librarians  is  must.  So  that  trust  could evolve out of this approach between teachers- librarians.  
4.3.2  Knowledge  of  and  Commitment  to  Group’s  
Goals 
Embedded librarian must have a sound knowledge  of the area/research is taking place and harmoniously  work  to  achieve  the  desired  group  goals. 

========2========

TALWAR: EMBEDDED  L IBRARIANSHIP—NEW  H ORIzON Of LIBRARIANSHIP 
4.3.3  Highly  Valuable  and  Customised  
Contribution  to  the  Work 
Embedded librarian should be competent enough  to provide tailored, intensive information services to  a  research  group/team  with  he/she  is  integrated.  4.3.4  Attributes/Skills/Competencies 
One  important  pre-requisite  is  attributes/ competencies/skills embedded librarians must possess.  Success  of  embedded  librarianship  is  dependent  on  these  pre-requisites.  
(a) Attributes 
•	 To 	 acquire 	 tacit 	 knowledge 	 –which 	 is 	 subjective 	 
and  experience  based  knowledge  difficult  to  
articulate  or  write  down.1 
•	 To 	 be 	 efficacious 	 (effective 	 in 	 achieving 	 
results) 
•	 To 	 be 	 technocratic 	 (IT 	 savvy) 
•	 To 	 possess 	 information 	 ethics-(focuses 	 on 	 the 	 
relationship between the creation, organisation,  
dissemination  and  use  of  information  and  the  
ethical  standards  and  moral  codes  governing  
human  conduct  in  society). 
•	 To 	 be 	 circumspective 	 (thinking 	 carefully 	 about 	 possible 	 
risks  before  doing  or  saying  something).  •	 To 	 be 	 prudent 	 (careful 	 and 	 good 	 judgment). 
(b)  Skills  
•	 Generic  skills 
These are the ones which relate to communication  and  interpersonal  skills.  Generic  skills  refer  to  life  skills such as communication and interpersonal skills,  critical thinking, problem solving and teamwork which  allow individuals to function not only in disciplinary or  subject domains but also in employment and social  situations.  Generic  skills  Which  is  also  referred  to  as  ‘transferable  skills’  or  ‘graduate  attributes’4. •	 Communication  skills 
Embedded  librarian  needs  to  be  a  sound  communicator who could convey ideas and opinions  with  clarity.  
•	 Interpersonal  skills 
One particular relevance to the modern academic  library  is  the  observation  that  the  demand  for  interpersonal skills is a reflection of the “reality that  team-based  approaches  are  a  common  practice  in  digital  projects  and  interpersonal  skills  are  a  key  to  success  in  team  efforts”5.  
•	 Managerial  skills 
These  skills  are  associated  with  management  encompassing  cultural  leadership,  strategic,  and  restructuring  skills.  The  embedded  librarians  must  
be  cost  effective;  sound  decision  makers;  qualified  in TQM, MBO and so on. They have to take proper  strategies  as  per  need  and  condition  or  situation. •	 Technical  skills 
Embedded librarian must be equipped with ICT  and  computer  technical  skills. 
(c)  Competencies 
•	 Personal  competencies 
Choi & Rasmussen5   identify  from  the  literature  the following personal attributes as being important  in the LIS work environment: capacity for continuous  learning, flexibility, fostering change and the capacity  to  work  independently.  They  highlighted  adaptive  skills to keep up with changes and challenges within  library  and  information  environments. 
•	 People-centric  competencies 
•	 Facilitation 	 in 	 identification 	 of 	 patron 	 
needs; 
•	 Mentoring 	 and 	 guiding 	 patrons; 
•	 Consensus 	 building 	 in 	 a 	 group 	 /team; 	 and 
•	 Networking 	 via 	 development 	 building 	 of 	 
relationships. 
5. 
EMbEddEd  L IbrArIANsHI p  At  cENtrAL LIbrAry,  jNu 
The Central Library, JNU is one of the premier  resource centre of the academic research centre in  India. The distinguishing feature of the Library is that  it  facilitates  access  to  knowledge  and  information  to  all  information  seekers.  It  is  well  known  for  the  services and amenities it provides, which is unique  of  its  kind.  It  tries  to  build  relationships  with  the  schools/centre of the university and tries to integrate  and  embed  with  them.  It  tries  to  be  substantive  in  its  approach  towards  its  information  seekers. 
Central Library organised display of JNU faculty  and other University Publications in 21st New Delhi  World  Book  fair  held  from  3-10  february  2013  at  Pragati  Maidan,  New  Delhi.  About  200+  recent  publications  of  the  JNU  faculty  who  are  currently  on  roll  were  displayed  in  is  fair.  The  highlights  of  the  event  was  that  a  computer  with  a  presentation  about  JNU  Library  and  a  comprehensive  list  of  faculty  and  other  publications  was  also  placed  for  the  information  of  the  visitors  at  Stall.  Thus,  it  is  providing  a  medium  to  embrace  and  improve  the  relationship  between  the  faculty  and  Central  Library. 
Likewise  many  attempts  have  been  made  so  far  to  build  partnerships  between  the  faculty  and  central library and a couple of outreach programmes  such  as  monthly  lectures,  book  releases,  seminar,  conferences,  workshops  training  workshops,  and  orientation  programmes  have  been  organised  at  
463 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  6,  NOVEMBER  2014 
JNU. for example, training/orientation programme on  Assistive Technologies for Visually Challenged faculty/ Research Scholars and Students were organised on,  30th October 2013 and many events such as Book  Release/Book Talk Programme have been organised  by  Central  Library,  JNU  on  regular  basis. 
Many  events  have  also  been  organised  under  JNU  forum  for  Mutual  Learning:  for  example  A  lecture  on  Globalisation  of  R&D:  Trends  of  foreign  ICT  and  biotechnology  firms  in  India  and  China  on  22  September  2012  which  is  ultimately  going  to  facilitate  mutual  and  generic  partnerships  between  faculty  and  library.  This  all  have  become  possible  under  embedded  librarianship. 
It  has  become  evident  that  through  embedded  librarianship–they 	 have 	 been 	 able 	 to 	 establish 	 relationships  that  help  the  library  to  identify  the  user’s  unexpressed  information  needs.  
It  is  imperative  to  view  that  user  often  have  a  tough  time  to  articulate  what  exactly  he/she  need  to  know  and  many  time  they  don’t  articulate  at  all  and events such as User Education-cum-Orientation  programme on Digital Resources available at Central  Library, JNU organised by JNU twice on each year  and which is major help to users and catering many  of  their  problems  and  fulfilling  their  needs  too. 
These  practices  followed  by  Central  Library,  JNU  is  in  a  way  teaching  and  reaching  out  to  its  user  and  developing  strong  community  bond  as  well.  Thus  there  is  paradigmatic  shift  from  librarianship  to  embedded  librarianship  who  is  reactively answering research requests, developing a  unique understanding of users need and delivering  proactive  results  also. 
6. 
ExpErt  opINIoN oN   E MbEddEd  LIbrArIANsHIp 
Dr R.C. Gaur, University Librarian, JNU, who is a  pioneer in the field and is an embedded librarian was  interviewed. This interview revealed the application  and  implementation  of  the  embedded  librarianship  
Figure 1. central Library, jawaharlal Nehru university 
464 
practice. Dr. Ramesh C. Gaur is the Project Coordinator  for  a  project  ‘Development  of  Digital  Repository  of  Indian Cultural Heritage’ under the project ‘Centre for  Excellence on Digital Preservation’ of NDPP. Other  past  assignments  includes;  IGNCA,  TIfR  Mumbai,  CRRI,  MDI,  IMT  and  RIS. A fulbright  Scholar  (VT,  USA). Dr. Gaur has visited USA, Russia, Germany,  Japan, Thailand, Indonesia, Cambodia, Bangladesh,  Malaysia,  Singapore,  Sri  Lanka,  Hong  Kong  and  the  Netherlands  in  relation  to  various  assignments  related  to  Digital  Library  and  allied  areas.  He  has  been  confered  with  various  honours  &  awards:  IASLIC-S.M. Ganguly Best Librarian award  for year  2007;  Satkal Young  Librarian  award   for  year  2009  and  SRFLIS  india  Professional  Excellence  Award 2013.  He  is  the  member  of  many  national  and  international  professional  bodies  such  IfLA,  SLA,  NDLTD,  etc. 
While in conversation with Dr. Gaur, certain set  of questions were asked to elicit how Central Library,  JNU  sets  an   example  of  embedded  librarianship? Q-1.What  was  your  thought  behind  embedded  
librarianship? 
A-1. Embedded Librarainship encourage libraries to  
design  strartegies  to  develop  partnership  with  
its  users.  It  is  more  prevalent  in  academic  
libraries,where it deals with a strong partnership  
of  libraries  with  faculty  and  students.  
Q-2.How do you relate the embedded librarianship-  
as  an  art  or  a  science  of  librarianship? 
A-2. Embedded  librarianship  involves  a  systematic  
strategic  partnership  among  libraries  and  its  
users.This  partnership  requires  a  scientific  
approach  in  dealing  with  issues  concerning  
users.  Libraries  also  need  to  design  a  course  
curriculum  for  information  literacy  and  various  
kinds   of  user  workshops  on  issues  such  as  
plagiarism, reference management tools, research  
writings  and  data  analytical  tools. 
Q-3.Don’t  you  feel  that  embedded  librarianship  is  
rather excessively dependent on technological  
development? 
A-3. We are in electronic age, where librarianship is  
already  80  %  technology  and  20  %  traditional  
tools.  80  %  contents  are  already  available  in  
digital form. So we are already having the required  
IT infrastructure. But embedded librarianship is  
not  just  about  technology.  It  mainly  deals  with  
a  dialogue  between  libraries  and  its  users. Q-4.What  are  the  cost  factors  involved  in  the  
embedded  librarianship? 
A-4. As  such  there  are  no  additional  cost  factors  
involved in embedded librarianship .It just needs  
more  human  efforts,  further  engagement  and  
involvement of library staff with users,understanding  

========4========

TALWAR: EMBEDDED  L IBRARIANSHIP—NEW  H ORIzON Of LIBRARIANSHIP 
their need initially and later designing strategies  
and  implementing  policies  accordingly.  Q-5.Don’t you think this form of librarianship will increase  
the  work  load  for  LIS  professionals? A-5. Certainly, libraries need to devote extra time to  
implement policies and programmes concerning  
this  form  of  librarianship.  However,  we  are  
already  saving  time  of  both  the  users  as  well  
as of the staff by making them aware of library  
resources  and  problems  of  each  other.With  
the help of such programmes , we can reduce  
the time consumed in unwanted queries of the  
users. Through orientation and workshops, users  
can  be  trained  enough  to  find  out  the  most  
relevant  resources  in  their  area  of  interest.  
These  programmes  are  conducted  in  groups  
so, many individual queries regarding a certain  
topic  may  be  reduced  to  a  larger  extent.  
facing  problems  at  almost  all  levels  starting  from  the  resources  to  the  services.Also,  the  Central  Library  was  not  even  visible  from  outside  JNU.The  first  challenge  was  to  bring  people  back  to  library,  to  develop  a  trust  in  the  library  and  to  make  library  a  most  sought  after  place.  Another  biggest  challenge  was  to  create  a  good  ambience  and  make  library  a  comfortable  and  sorted  place.  Grouping  of  collections  according  to  convienence  of  user,  regrouping  of  subject  journals  and  thesis,  and  putting them together at one place, were some  of the initial tasks which saves a lot of time of  users. Revisting the procurement policies, what  libraries  are  purchasing  and  how  to  develop  a  cordial  engagement  of  faculty  and  students  were  added  concerns.  Schemes  such  as  earn  while  you  learn  were  introduced  for  better  engagement  of  students.’ 
engagement  in  embedded  librarianship? A-6. Immediately  after  my  joining,  I  realised  that  
there is lack of connectivity between library and  
users. To improve this, I started following library  
outreach programmes with faculty and students.  
The  Central  Library,  JNU  is  one  of  the  most  
modern  and  well  equipped  university  libraries  
holding the place of pride in the country. It is a  
nine-story tower building and has a carpet area  
of  about  one  lakh  sq.  ft.  It  is  situated  in  the  
midst of the academic complex of the University  
and  is  the  hub  of  all  the  academic  activities.  
All the Reading Halls are air-conditioned. Entire  
library is connected through LAN & Wi-fi. All the  
schools,  centres  and  offices  of  the  University  
are  connected  to  Library  through  intranet.  To  
meet the needs of the visually impaired students  
of  the  university,  a  special  unit  named  after  
Helen Keller has been established. Twenty four  
computers  have  been  installed  exclusively  for  
visually challenged students to access OPAC and  
online resources. Laptops have been provided to  
all visually challenged MPhil/PhD students. The  
Cyber library is located at the ground floor with  
200  computers  for  the  students  and  research  
scholars to access online resources. The faculty  
publications have also been showcased at the  
ground  floor.  Central  Library  has  undergone  
total re-engineering. Renovation, reorganisation,  
redesigning,  regrouping  and  reviewing  were  
5Rs  implemented  at  the  Library. 
Q-7. What challenges have you faced during the past  
years in practicing and creating the environment  
of  embedded  librarianship  in  the  institution? A-7. When  I  joined  Central  Library,  JNU  in  2011,  
‘I  realised  that  there  is  lack  of  trust  between  
faculty and students in the library. Library was  
Q-6.Could  you  talk  about  JNU  Central  Library’s  
Q-8.Apart from JNU users, how can other libraries  
and  professionals  of  LIS  can  benefit  from  it? 
A-8. This concept of ‘embedded librarianship’ may be  
linked with Ranganathan’s following statement  
‘library is a trinity of users , staff and resources/ 
collections’.  Now  in  changing  role  of  libraries  
and  librarians,  librarians  need  to  play  a  vital  
role  in  acting  as  a  knowledge  navigator.With  
advent  of  internet,  libraries  are  not  limited  to  
boundary walls and ample material is available  
all  across  the  globe. 
It is extremely difficult for a user to find out most  
relevant material in his/her area of interests as  
so  much  information  is  available  both  in  print  
and online. Here comes, the role of librarians to  
help them, to guide them in finding out relevant  
information in right time. Librarian needs to be  
creative  and  innovative.  They  are  required  to  
reach out the users wherever they are, and need  
to provide resources in most preferable option  
to  them.  Now  a  days,  it  is  not  important  that  
how  many  users  are  coming  to  library,  more  
important  is  to  how  many  are  you  reaching;  
wherever  they  are  and  providing  them  right  
information  in  a  right  manner  at  right  time”. 
7.  FINdINgs 
The study reveals the pivotal role of embedded  librarian  as  a  great  visionary  and  emphasises  the  need to transform the liaison role into strategicially  engaging and integrating ourselves into all operations  of the centre/school as JNU cenral library performs  so.  The  librarianship  should  be  taken  outside  the  walls  of  library. 
•	 Under 	 the 	 paradigm 	 of 	 embedded 	 librarianship 	 
professionals  should  perform  as  key  role  of  
465 

========5========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  6,  NOVEMBER  2014 
co-teachers  and  co-reserchers,  and  achive  the  
trustworthiness  between  faculty  and  library. •	 The 	 embedded 	 librarian 	 proves 	 to 	 be 	 an 	 asset 	 to 	 
any organisation and has become the nerve centre  
of  a  intellectual  development  of  a  nation.  •	 Embedded 	 librarian 	 would 	 indeed 	 help 	 and 	 make 	 
knowledge  but  sound  command  on  soft  skills,  thorough  knowledge  about  area  of  interest. they  are  considered  as  the  wizards  of  modern  librarianship practice. They are the ones who are  considered  to  be  the  managers  of  information  power  houses. 
Thus, in a changing scenario, there has been a  
seminars,  workshops. 
•	 It 	 would 	 inform 	 the 	 user 	 that 	 information 	 on 	 
user  aware  by  way  of  organising  symposium,  
transformation in the designation of LIS professionals  
not merely from librarian, deputy librarian, or assistant  
personal  use. 
•	 Information 	 users 	 must 	 be 	 taught 	 and 	 learnt 	 
the  internet  is  copyrighted  and  not  for  their  
librarian  as  to  knowledge  navigator,  knowledge  
disseminator  or  cybrarian.  Embedded  librarian  is  a  
skill blended manager who plays a proactive role and  tries to bulid strategic colloberative relationships with  
from  wrong  to  right  in  exploring  the  depth  and  its users. Embedded librarianship would encourage  
breadth  of  information  use. 
•	 In 	 light 	 of 	 shifting 	 technology, 	 it 	 focuses 	 on 	 
new  digital  initiatives  and  projects. 
•	 This 	 study 	 highlights 	 that 	 practice 	 of 	 embedded 	 
librarianship  is  attainable  and  achievable. 
The  mantra  behind  the  successful  embedded  librarianship  in  Central  Library,  JNU,  according  to  Dr  Ramesh  C.  Gaur  is  that  “in  this  new  world,  it  is  not  important  that  how  many  users  are  coming  to  library,  more  important  is  to  how  many  we  are  reaching out, wherever they are and providing them  right  information  in  a  right  manner  at  right  time”. 
The  successful  embedded  librarian  has  an  improved  version  in  librarian’s  role.  His  role  is  just  not  limited  to  providing  academic  research  or  managing information but its role has emerged into  anticipatory, technocratic and someone who provides  the value based services to the user concerned by  the most appropriate means available. That means  that  embedded  librarians  are  constantly  trying  to  work  themselves  out  of  a  job.  It  also  means  that  they  are  change  leaders,  not  change  followers.  It  means  that  they  are  in  a  position  to  experience  sustained success. Embedded librarianship tries to  get  deeper  and  integral  engagement  between  the  faculty and library and helps in finding and catering  their  respective  information  needs. 
8.  coNcLusIoNs/suggEstIoNs 
•	 Embedded 	 librarianship 	 is 	 an 	 evolved 	 version 	 of 	 
cohesive 	 engagement 	 between 	 teachers–librarians 	 and  help  them  to  develop  strong  partnership  in  learning  envrionment.  With  the  help  of  embedded  librarianship  practice,  trustworthiness  could  be  achieved and developed among the library and the  faculty.  Central  Library,  JNU  by  way  of  outreach  programmes and intiatives have been able to attain  and sustain strong-integrated relationships between  teachers-librarians.  
rEFErENcEs 
1. http://www.wow.com/Webster+Online+ 
Dictionary‎ 
2. Shumaker, David. Embedded librarians in special  
libraries. Information Today,  2012,  29(7), 32-34. http:// 
www.infotoday.com/it/jul12/Shumaker-Embedded- 
Librarians-in-Special-Libraries.shtml 
3. http://books.infotoday.com/books/Embedded- 
Librarian/Chapter-1.pdf 
4. Partridge,  Helen  &  Hallam,  Gillian.  Educating  
the  millennial  generation  for  evidence  based  
information  practice.   Library  Hi  Tech,   2006,  
24(3),  400-19 
5. Choi, Y. & Rasmussen, E. What qualifications and  
skills are important for digital librarian positions  
in  academic  libraries?  A  job  advertisement  
analysis. J. Acad.  Lib. ,  2009, 35(5),  457-67. 
About  the Author 
example  of  such  kind.  
•	 An 	 LIS 	 professional 	 does 	 require 	 any 	 specialised 	 
librarianship. It is greatly specialised and ‘User  
Ms Mehak talwar  is a MLISc student in Department  Centric’  in  approach.It  focuses  on  reaching  to  
of  Library  and  Information  Science,  University  of  the  users  and  catering  them  according  to  their  
Delhi.  She  did  her  BLISc  from  Department  of  needs.  It  has  wider  scope  in  near  future  for  
Library and Information Science, University of Delhi. those  academic  institutions  which  are  already  
She  obtained  her  BA  degree  in  Political  Science  practicing librarianship. JNU’s central library has  
(Hons.)  from  University  of  Delhi  and  MA  degree  adopted such form of librarianship and sets an  
in  Public  Administration  from  Jamia  Millia  Islamia,  
New  Delhi. 
466 

========6========

