DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 34, No. 6, November 2014, pp. 467-471 
  2014, DESIDOC 
  Embedded Librarianship in S&T Environment 
Alka Bansal and Dipti Arora 
    Defence Scientifc Information & Documentation Centre, Delhi-110 054 
E-mail: alka_bansal@desidoc.drdo.gov.in 
 Ab STrAcT 
The  utmost  priority  of  a  nation  is  to  manage  and  coordinate  its  nation-wide  S&T  activities. The  responsibility of the government of the a country lies in developing and promoting the scientifc endeavours/ activities/temper in advancement of S&T and ensuring economic growth by the use and commercialisation  of S&T. The S&T base involved in natural sciences, technological sciences and engineering technologies  of  the  country  covers  governmental  S&T  departments,  science  foundations,  scientifc  organisations,  academic  institutions,  R&D  organisations,  etc.  National  S&T  programme  system  includes  R&D  project  programmes,  S&T  capability  building,  S&T  supporting  environment  building,  S&T  base  construction,  S&T services, and so on. For successful performance of all these highly important tasks, information is  required, which may be suffcient to be only provided on day to day basis or from a distance, but the  time has come when it is to be provided by someone who understands the requirements (present and  future) of the projects being a proud part of the team carrying out the R&D as a team member in the  most effcient and effective manner. In other words, there is a dire need of embedded librarians in the  S&T environment. This paper highlights the requirement of embedded librarians and the changing role  they have to adopt and perform for the nation’s S&T development.  
Keywords:   Embedded librarianship, S&T in India, challenges for librarians 
1. INTrODUcTION 
To manage and coordinate its nation-wide S&T  activities  is  the  utmost  priority  of  nation.  Strategic  decisions are to be taken which affect the long term  performance  of  the  all  those  involved  in  the  S&T  activities  of  the  country  and  which  relate  directly  to  nation’s  aims  and  objectives  regarding  S&T  development and are based on the information of past  performances and needs. The government develops  and  promotes  the  scientific  endeavours/activities/ temper  in  advancement  of  S&T  and  ensures  the  economic growth by the use and commercialisation  of S&T. The government applies S&T and develops  mechanisms to improve the quality of life of people  by  good  governance  and  management  of  S&T.  
The  S&T  base  involved  in  natural  sciences,  technological sciences and engineering technologies  of the country covers governmental S&T departments,  science foundations, scientific organisations, academic  institutions,  R&D  organisations,  S&T  associations,  private S&T institutions, industries, S&T management  bodies, and so on. National S&T programme system  includes  R&D  project  programmes,  S&T  capability  building,  S&T  supporting  environment,  S&T  base  construction, S&T services, etc. Scientific information  is  key  to  success.  It  is  a  priority  to  strengthen  
the  links  between  higher  education,  research  and  business to drive innovation. The universities, research  organisations  and  industry  have  to  collaborate  for  S&T  generation,  knowledge  transfer  and  product  development  to  attend  social  needs  and  benefit  the  society. 
1.1 Indian  S&T  Scenario 
As per World Bank report, 2007, India has about  400  national  labs,  400  in  the  government  sector  R&D  institutions  and  about  1,300  industrial  sector  R&D  organisations.  About  4  Lakh  personnel  are  employed in R&D Estts. More than 300 multinational  companies have their R&D centers and labs in different  sector.  Each  year,  about  450,000  S&T  personnel  are  produced  from  more  than  300  universities  and  educational  institutions1.  
The  2007-2012  plan  covers  increasing  the  scientific manpower for changing and improving the  Indian  S&T,  encouraging  risk  taking  by  scientists,  improvement  in  education  system,  development  in  both basic and applied research and technology, and  encouraging scientists and industry to interact with  academia.  Any  country’s  bent  towards  the  growth  of  S&T  can  be  judged  by  the  indicators  covering  the  sanctioned  amount  of  R&D  funds,  expenditure  on  R&D  activities  and  higher  education,  personnel  
Received 10 August 2014, revised 22 October 2014, Online published 19 November 2014 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  6, NOVEMBER   2014 
devoted  to  R&D  activities,  and  output  in  terms  of  research  publications  and  patents  (including  from  collaborations  between  universities/industry/ R&D  institutions).  Foreign  investment  in  R&D,  the  impact of published papers (inclusion in high-quality  conferences or journals), and the number of highly  educated  citizens  that  return  from  abroad  to  work  and  live  in  India1all  are  indicators  for  commitment  of a nation towards development. Fig. 1 shows the  government organisations functioning under central  government  S&T  departments  in  India2. 
1.2  Embedded  Librarianship 
Since, long, the librarians/information scientists  have  been  working  for  scientists/R&D  community  in  R&D  projects  and  are  providing  specialised  services  to  the  researchers/scientists  by  way  of  selective dissemination of information (SDI) service or  current awareness services such as current currents,  newspaper clipping service, indexing services, etc.,  apart from regular services such as library facilities,  circulation,  searching,  interlibrary  loans,  etc. 
”Embedded librarianship takes a librarian out of  the context of the traditional library and places him/ her  in  an  “on-site”  setting  or  situation  that  enables  close coordination and collaboration with researchers  or teaching faculty. Here, librarians demonstrate their  expertise  as  information  specialists  who  can  have  a  direct  impact  on  the  research,  teaching,  or  other  work  being  done.  Embedded  librarianship  focuses  on the users and brings the library and the librarian  to  the  user,  wherever  they  are—office,  laboratory,  home,  or  even  on  their  mobile  device”3. 
”Embedded librarianship is an expanding trend  and  a  term  used  to  cover  a  range  of  initiatives  and  service  concepts.  The  development  of  new,  digital  information  resources  and  related  economic  and  administrative  changes  have  made  embedded  
Figure 1. government organisations under central  
government S&T departments in India2. 
468 
librarianship  critically  important  to  librarians  and  information  professionals”4. 
“The  term  ‘embedded  librarianship’  is  widely  used  in  the  professional  literature.  It  describes  a  variety  of  service  innovations  in  a  variety  of  organisational  settings.  It  is  used  to  describe  the  work  of  an  academic  librarian  who  participates  in  an academic course on an ongoing basis, teaching  information  literacy  skills;  work  of  librarians  in  a  research  institute;  or  corporation  whose  offices  are  moved  from  a  central  library  to  their  customer  groups,  so  that  they  can  work  more  closely  with  the  members  of  those  groups4.  
Shumakar4  in his report on models of embedded  librarianship  define  criteria  of  ‘embeddedness’  for  library  and  information  service  programmes.  He  analysed embedded librarians as success indicators by  collecting data about the practices followed in initiating,  operating,  and  evaluating  their  services.  He  also  developed guidelines to implement embedded services  for  the  librarians  in  research  environment.  
The Purdue University libraries have initiated a  strategy to embed its librarians on various projects.  These  designated  librarians  identify  their  faculty’s  research  needs  regarding  information.  Librarians  propose  faculty-librarian  collaborations  to  address  these  needs  and  then  to  help  secure  funding.  If  successful, librarians become partners in the particular  research  project  and  have  defined  responsibilities  and  activities  in  it.  The  embedded  librarians  in  the  Management  &  Economics  Library  at  Purdue  University  helped  in  preparing  the  support  through  various  information  literacy  programmes5.  
2.  S&T  KNOwLEDgE AND   L IbrArIANS 
To  build  and  maintain  S&T  capability,  there  is  a need of knowledge advancement. It will meet the  application  needs  for  innovation  support  systems  which will benefit the society. Innovation for industry  covers support for industries through technical and  financial support, collaboration support, etc., which  will lead to economic benefits such as employment,  food,  health,  increase  in  GDP,  etc.  It  also  needs  regulation  and  standards,  policy  decision  making  and  S&T  implementation,  strategic  and  operational  management  of  S&T  resources,  etc. 
To  achieve  the  national  strategic  goals,  S&T  knowledge  base  is  required  that  ensures  excellent  scientific,  technological  and  economic  R&D  and  related scientific activities. A nation has to perform  S&T at world-class levels of excellence by conducting  and  supporting  leading-edge  S&T  that  meets  high  standards  and  ensure  appropriate  multidisciplinary  links  across  the  natural  sciences,  social  sciences  and engineering. There is a need to integrate S&T  knowledge  base  of  a  country  to  meet  the  current  and future opportunities and challenges by creating  

========2========

BANSAL  &  ARORA: EMBEDDED LIBRARIANSHIP IN S&T ENVIRONMENT 
national knowledge management system and examine  the  requirements  for  advanced  foresight  capacity  based on existing practices and future issues for S&T  investments  and  use  the  resources  and  funds. 
The S&T knowledge base has to be connected  nationally and internationally by identify and collaborate  with  other  national  and  global  centres  of  scientific  knowledge;  address  gaps  in  S&T  capacity;  and  extend and enhance the recognition of collaborations  and contributions to national and international S&T- based  priorities.  The  S&T  knowledge  base  has  to  be  used  and  shared  for  greater  positive  impact  through  new  media,  enhance  dissemination  of  and  access  to  S&T  within  the  scientific  community  and  decision-makers;  develop  mechanisms  to  ensure  the  delivery  of  accurate  and  timely  knowledge  and  advice  to  enable  informed  decision  making  by  applying  the  knowledge  and  innovations  leading  to  products  and  technologies. 
Since long the librarians or information specialists  have been serving and contributing the S&T community  by developing and managing information resources  and  collections  of  books,  journals,  reports  (both  paper and electronic), as well as websites selecting,  acquiring  and  cataloguing  information;  automation  activities; database procurement and also development,  searching  and  delivering  information  managing  infrastructure; training and recruitment of specialised  and trained staff; budgeting and purchasing resources;  and  many  other  activities.  
For successful performance of all highly important  tasks  of  S&T  field,  information  is  required,  which  is  not  sufficient  to  be  only  provided  on  day  to  day  basis  or  from  a  distance,  but  the  time  has  come  when  it  is  to  be  provided  by  someone  who  understands  the  requirements  (present  and  future)  being  a  proud  part  of  the  team  carrying  out  the  R&D  as  a  team  member  in  the  most  efficient  and  effective  manner.  In  other  words,  there  is  a  dire  need of embedded librarians in the S&T environment  be it S&T organisations, institutions, labs, industry,  etc. They have to assist researchers with literature  searches  using  databases,  printed  resources  and  the  internet;  deliver  information  and  learning  skills  courses  for  those  engaged  in  scientific  activities  and  dealing  with  their  enquiries,  with  the  deep  understanding  of  their  project  requirements. 
3.   rOLE OF   Emb EDDED   L IbrArIANS IN   S&T  
ENvIrONmENT 
The  librarians  have  always  kept  pace  with  time  and  evolved  themselves  to  perform  better  and  sustain  over  a  period  of  time.  Traditionally,  the  libraries  are  inviting  users  in  their  domain  and  providing various services such as reading, referral,  document delivery,  documentation, database search  services—online and offline searching, ask a librarian  
service,  etc.  They  have  tried  to  reach  to  them  by  automation by creating their libraries websites, digital  libraries,  virtual  libraries,  mobile-enabled  library  homepages, Webopac, Web 2.0 tools such as social  networking  sites,  discussion  forums,  RSS  alerts,  chat,  news,  etc.,  and  using  them  successfully  to  give services to their patrons. For S&T community,  library  and  information  professionals  have  been  providing all these services by developing and using  S&T  databases  covering  full-text  journals,  abstract  journals,  numerical  data,  theses,  dissertations,  e-books, conference proceeding, patents, standards,  etc. They are developing customised digital libraries,  gaining expertise in search services, creating S&T  databases,  and  lots  of  other  services.  
As  embedded  librarians  in  S&T  environment,  they  have  to  take  themselves  a  step  further.  They  have to consider the client’s project holder’s domain  as  their  own  domain  by  considering  themselves  as  group/team’s  part.  Being  part  of  a  team,  they  have  to  help  researchers  at  every  step  of  their  research  programmes  or  even  beyond.  They  have  to adopt the role of cross-functional team member.  Their role may begin with literature survey to avoid  repetition of scientific research and to help experts  to  objectively  and  correctly  evaluate  novelty  of  scientific  achievements,  and  is  carried  out  by  the  institutions  with  corresponding  qualifications.  They  can  provide  information  retrieval,  and  information  analysis. They can provide information services for  S&T strategic decision-making by being an integral  part  of  nation’s  S&T  Think  Tank.  Following  steps  are  highly  important  for  an  embedded  librarian: (a) Understand  the  projects’  aims  and  develop  
systems to organise, manage, and deliver project  
documentation  or  other  needed  materials. (b) Regular meetings with project holders regarding  
their  information-related  needs  and  services  (c) Collaboration on or contribution to their project  
holders’s  work  to  expend  into  critical  areas  of  
his  interest,  i.e.,  customer  content,  analytical  
assumptions,  methods,  and  techniques (d) Supporting  the  group(s)  work  by  providing  
deeper  and  more  granular  insight  to  provide  
subject-focused  analysis  support 
(e) Attend meetings/conferences of users’ application  
areas to understand current project needs, and  
futuristic  requirements 
(f) Engaging in social interactions with the customer  
group  and  help  in  their  requirements  (E.g.,  
provide  study  material,  presentation  support,  
documentation of proceedings, etc., if they are  
conducting  a  course  or  seminar) 
(g) Meeting with user group management to review  
changes  in  requirements 
469 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  6, NOVEMBER   2014 
(h) Provide  awareness  and  user  training  about  
information resources or information management  
tools away from library, such as in laboratories,  
a  conference  room,  etc. 
(i) Developing  the  means  and  facilities  such  as 
e-communications and/or collaborative workspaces,  
including  e-mail,  wikis,  blogs,  and  other  web- 
based  workspaces  for  better  collaboration  and  
dissemination  of  information.  
(j) Act  as  knowledge  management  catalyst  by  
collecting the data/reports generated during the  
period of research project. They can disseminate  
• 
the  same  at  the  time  of  need  or  for  long-term  
preservation.  
4.  PrOFFErED rOLE OF   DESIDO c 
DESIDOC is one of the premier institute of DRDO  is involved in various activities such as publishing,  printing, database creations, institutional repository,  knowledge management, etc. It also provides S&T  information  service  using  LIS  sources,  to  its  HQrs,  and its various labs across India. DESIDOC is closely  working  with  various  academic  institutions,  R&D  centres and production agencies of S&T Ministries/ Deptts  in  Public  &  C ivil  Sector  including  Defence  PSUs  and  ordnance  factories6.  
 The information professionals/information scientists  can  play  a  vital  role  as  embedded  librarians  for  various projects in various labs. They can understand  the  requirements  of  their  R&D  community  and  tantamount between DESIDOC and other labs. For  accomplishing such aim, a coordination and collaboration  is  mandatory  between  DESIDOC  and  labs.  Along  with  its  world  class  services,  by  creating  national  S&T institution database related to defence science  & technology, R&D industry database, database on  S&T  experts  of  national  and  international  repute,  S&T  projects  database,  current  areas  of  research  and not only this but also integrate these databases  it  can  emerge  as  the  Centre  of  Excellence  and  innovation  for  defence  research.  
Embedded  librarian  can  work  in  the  following  directions  and  support  decision  makers,  strategy  scientists,  information  analysts  and  others  in  the  field  of  S&T  developments  trends  and  strategic  trends  by  following  ways: 
• Create  and  provide  information  services  for  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Keep track of current and new activities, new areas  of  research,  and  strategies  of  S&T  institutions  at  national  and   international  level 
Undertake research in understanding the market  in  same  and  allied  areas  of  research 
Analysis and evaluation of the critical trends, new  inventions, recent development in technologies,  S&T  policies,  and  future  directions 
Conduct scientometric studies and analyse the  defence  related  S&T  areas 
Create  a  federated  unified  platform  to  access  information  from  various  resources  including  strategy  policy  resources,  technology  industry  resources,  socio-economic  resources,  etc.  Explore  the  scientific  progress  of  different  countries,  i.e.,  S&T  labs,  academia  by  using  data  collection,  data  extraction,  text  mining,  data  harvesting,  etc. 
Undertake  tasks  such  as  documentation  for  patent initiation, filing, project approval, applying  for  awards,  etc. 
Initiate KM activities in the user group for their  application  areas 
Organise  awareness  programmes  regarding  publisher policies for submission of their research  for  wider  dissemination  their  work 
5.   c ONcLUSIONS 
The LIS professionals have proven themselves with  time. The information professionals should discover  for  new  role  and  pursue  it.  Where  there  is  a  will,  there  is  a  way.  Same  way,  for  any  R&D  project,  there  is  need  of  embedded  librarians  who  will  be  an  integral  part  of  the  project.  The  success  of  the  project  will  be  their  success.  They  will  be  a  team  player.  They  have  to  be  proactive,  knowledgeable,  hardworking  and  extremely  supportive  and  there  will  be  collaborative  relationship  development  and  strengthening  between  researchers  and  embedded  librarian. The only requirement is that they have to  work  hard  and  prove  themselves.  
The  librarians  have  to  demonstrate  their  value  to the research institutions in new way. At the same  time embedded librarians have to face the challenges  including the intricacies of learning management systems;  
advancement  in  S&T  critical  decision  making,  
multiple  and  changing  communication  strategies,  long  term  planning,  and  supporting  R&D  and  
technology  failures;  scientists’  and  researchers’  its  management  so  that  they  can  focus  on  
expectations and collaborations, increased workload,  
and competing demands. As an embedded librarian  
• 
research  rather  than  search 
Support innovative research models by combining  core  information  and  insight  content  of  the  organisation 
470 
model evolves, expends and matures these challenges  are  to  be  addressed,  solutions  identified,  and  best  practices developed. The embedded librarians have  to  transcend  traditional  roles  and  undertake  the  

========4========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  6, NOVEMBER   2014 
unique  value  only  they  can  add  as  part  of  library  and  information  centres  and  as  individuals.  They  can make innovative efforts, coordinated teamwork  and  more  accountability  through  value  addition,  expertise  and  knowledge  to  satisfy  their  patrons  and  create  delight. 
AcKNO wLEDgEmENTS 
The  authors  are  highly  thankful  to  Sh.  S.K.  Jindal,  Director,  DESIDOC  for  his  encouragement  
Research  Grant  2007.  2009.  http://hq.sla.org/ 
pdfs/EmbeddedLibrarianshipFinalRptRev.pdf  
(accessed  on  9  May  2014) 
5. Kirkwood,  Hal    &  Evans,  Kelly.    Embedded  
Librarianship  and  Virtual  Environments  in  
Entrepreneurship  Information  Literacy:  A  Case  
Study.10.1080/08963568.2011.630583. pp. 106- 
16 
6.  www.drdo.org  (accessed  on  9  May  2014) 
to  carry  out  the  study  and  permission  to  publish  
About  the Authors 
the  work  and  also  to  Sh.  Ashok  Kumar,  Scientist  
‘G’  for  the  technical  advice  during  the  preparation  
ms  Alka  bansal   is  working  as  Scientist  ‘E’  at  
of  the  paper. 
rEFErENcES 
1. S&T Strategies of Six Countries: Implications for  
the United States. Committee on Global Science  
and  Technology  Strategies  and  their  Effect  on  
US.  National  Security,  Standing  Committee  
on  Technology  Insight—Gauge,  Evaluate,  and  
Review.  Division  on  Engineering  and  Physical  
Sciences.  National  Research  Council  of  the  
National  Academies.  The  National  Academies  
Press,  Washington,  DC  2012.www.nap.edu 2. Indian  S&T  Landscape.  International  Science  
&  Technology Affairs  Directorate  (ISTAD) 
Council  of  Scientific  &  Industrial  Research  
(CSIR), India. 7/23/2009 http://www.newindigo. 
eu/attach/IndianSTLandscape.pdf 
3. Jake Carlson & Ruth Kneale. Embedded librarianship  
in the research context: Navigating new waters.  
College  &  Research  Libraries  News,  March  
2011, 72(3),  167-70 
4. Shumakar,  David  &  Talley,  Mary.  Models  of  
embedded  librarianship.  Final  Report.  SLA  
471 
Defence Scientific Information & Documentation Centre  (DESIDOC),  Delhi.  Her  qualifications  include  MSc  (Mathematics), BLISc, MLISc, all from University of  Delhi,  Training  course  in  Science  Communication,  NCSTC;  and  UGC-NET.  She  has  more  than  17  years  experience  in  the  field  of  documentation  and  database  development.  Presently,  she  is  the  Editor of DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information  Technology.  Her areas of interests include: Editing,  publishing,  digitisation,  and  journalism. 
ms  Dipti  Arora   is  working  as  Technical  Officer  in  Defence  Science  Library,  Defence  Scientific  Information  &  Documentation  Centre,  Delhi.  Her  qualifications include BCA, MSc (Computer Science),  BLISc, MLISc, UGC-NET, Training course in Science  Communication,  NCSTC.  She  is  also  pursuing  PhD  from  Nagpur  University.  She  has  more  than  13  years  experience  in  the  field  of  documentation  and  database  development.  Her  areas  of  interests  include: Scientometrics, semantic web applications,  digitisation,  and  multimedia  applications. 

========5========

