DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 35, No. 2, March 2015, pp. 82-89  DOI: 10.14429/djlit.35.2.8191 
  2015, DESIDOC 
MOOCs: Changing Trend Towards Open Distance Learning with  
Special Reference to India 
Faizul Nisha* and V. Senthil** 
Defence Scientifc Information & Documentation Centre (DESIDOC) 
Metcalfe House, Delhi-110 054 
E-mail: *faizul16k@gmail.com; **senthildrdo@gmail.com 
ABSTRACT 
This study provides an overview about massive open online courses (MOOCs), about how technology  has changed over the years the face of distance learning and how relevant and benefcial these courses  might be for distance learners. Studies related to MOOCs in India and world around have been reviewed.  It also furnishes the details of various MOOCs platform such as The Open University, Iversity, ALISON,  Open  Learning,  Coursera,  Udacity,  EdX  and  EduKart  available  free  of  cost  to  distance  learners. This  paper further provides availability of MOOCs in India and various institutions and companies associated  across  the  nation  providing  MOOCs  courses  to  academia.  Limitations  of  MOOCs  and  their  future  has  also been discussed. The paper concludes that MOOCs and online education has a huge potential which  would help in accelerating and ensuring social cohesion and sustainable growth. With little efforts by the  government of India, online education can successfully reach every individual. 
Keywords: MOOCs,  distance  learning,  Swayam,  Coursera,  edX,  Udacity,  massive  open  online    
  courses 
1. INTRODUCTION 
A massive wave of opportunity has knocked the  door  of  formative  education  in  the  form  of  MOOCs  which  stands  for  Massive  Open  Online  Courses.  This  revolutionary  step  towards  providing  versatile  education  has  yielded  some  impressive  results.  The  term  MOOC  was  derived  in  2008  by  Dave  Cornier  of  the  University  of  Prince  Edward  Island  and  Bryan  Alexander  of  the  National  Institute  for  Technology  in  Liberal  Education.  MOOCs  are  of  a  very  recent  origin  in  distance  education,  started  somewhere  around  mid  of  2011.  They  are  called  ‘massive’ because they are available for the masses.  These  courses  can  be  fully  taken  online  aimed  at  unlimited  participation  and  open  access  via  the  web.1  Initially, the movement began in North America  with  its  interests  rapidly  growing  across  the  world.  Proliferation  of  technology  helps  us  to  aid  to  the  growing  cost  of  traditional  higher  education  as  well  as  easy  access  to  it. A  staggering  fact  by  the  UNESCO estimates results which shows 80 million  more  people  seeking  higher  education  using  this  new  technology2. 
Due to the constricted budgets of the governments  across  the  world,  amplification  of  MOOCs  is  the  most viable option. It is economically, socially, and  politically  apt  step  towards  curbing  the  upsurging  number  of  students  across  the  world  efficiently.  
The  universities  are  rapidly  experimenting  with  online learning but the question is whether they are  using  a  coherent  strategy  for  the  same  or  running  downside  risks.  There  is  a  large  possibility  that  MOOCs  can  improve  the  quality  of  pedagogy.  The  pedagogic strategy of introducing MOOCs cannot be  worked  out  impeccably  because  some  universities  are  local  re-distributors  of  online  courses,  adding  tutorials  in  local  language  and  providing  a  local  credit  certification.  The  MOOCs  allow  the  learning  industry  to  un-bundle  courses  to  be  re-bundled  again  and  taught  as  internal  programmes.  Figure  1  shows  about  the  clear  picture  of  MOOCs. 
Figure 1. Massive open online course (MOOCs).3 
Received 26 November 2014, revised 9 February 2015, online published 20 March 2015 

========1========

NIShA  & S ENThIL: ChANgINg TREND TOWARDS OPEN DISTANCE LEARNINg WITh SPECIAL REFERENCE TO  I NDIA 
1.1 Types  of  MOOCs 
MOOCs  are  broadly  classified  into  C-MOOCs  and  X-MOOCs.  
(i)  C-MOOCs—They  are  based  on  connectivism.  It  is  a  creation  for  emphasising  connecting  learners  called  as  connectivist  MOOC  and  build  upon  the  idea  and  platform  originally  visualised  by  george  Siemens. 
(ii)  X-MOOCs—They  have  their  background  in  the  evolution of open courseware and open educational  resources.  X-MOOCs  are  generally  offered  by  universities  in  collaboration  with  a  commercial  organisation/company  whose  aim  is  to  gain  profit.  X-MOOCs are online versions of traditional learning  formats  (lecture,  instruction,  discussion,  etc.)  on  proprietary  specialist  software  platforms  owned  by  independent  firms.  They  attribute  legitimate  and  monetary  relationships  between  universities  who  create content, and technology providers, X indicates  the  MOOCs  which  are  content-based  and  follow  a  more  behaviourist  approach.  X  “emphasises  a  more  traditional  learning  approach  through  video  presentations  and  short  quizzes  and  testing  and  focus  on  knowledge  duplication.4   X-MOOCs  are  associated  mostly  with  the  three  largest  platform  providers  edX,  Udacity,  and  Coursera.5 
2.  LITERATURE REvIEw 
A  number  of  studies  had  already  been  done  worldwide  during  last  few  years  on  MOOCs.The  11th   Annual  report  on  tracking  online  education  in  the  US  by  Allen  &  Seaman6   explored  about  the  nature and extent of online education. Analysis was  carried  out  on  a  comprehensive  sample  of  active,  degree-granting  institutions  of  higher  education  in  the US Study showed that the percentage of higher  education  institutions  that  currently  had  a  MOOC,  increased  from  2.6  %  to  5.0  %  over  the  past  year.  The  majority  of  institutions  (53  %)  reported  that  they  were  still  undecided  about  MOOCs,  while  under   33  %  responded  they  have  no  plans  for  a  MOOC.   Only  23  %  of  academic  leaders  believed  that  MOOCs  represent  a  sustainable  method  for  offering  online  courses,  down  from  28  %  in  2012.  University  of  Pennsylvania7   conducted  a  survey  on  MOOCs  among  the  people  working  at  public,  private  not-for-profit,  and  for-profit  colleges  and  universities  in  the  US.  All  alumni  of  the  Executive  Doctorate program in higher education management  at the University of Pennsylvania  participated in the  survey. Results showed that half (51 %) of leaders  at  institutions  that  offered  MOOCs  were  talking  about   MOOCs  a  great  deal,  compared  with  9  %  of  senior administrators at institutions that did not offer  MOOCs.  Most  respondents  at  institutions  that  did  not  offer  MOOCs  reported  that  their  president  had  taken   no  public  stance  on  MOOCs  (77  %).  When  
compared, 60 % of respondents at institutions that  offered  MOOCs  reported  that  their  president  had  taken   a  public  stance  in  support  of  MOOC  and  more than half (57 %) strongly agreed that MOOCs  may be a potentially effective mechanism for raising  the  institutional  profile,  compared  with  32  %  of  respondents at institutions that did not offer MOOCs.  Many higher education leaders were uncertain about  the  benefits  for  students  or  institutions  and  found  doubtful  that  MOOCs  can  have  a  real  impact  on  reducing  the  high  costs  in  higher  education.  
Data  drawn  by  Beaven8,  et  al.,   at  Department  of  Languages  (The  Open  University),  UK  explored  the  interdependence  between  self-determination  and participatory literacy in relation to success in a  MOOC.  Results exhibited that a quarter of participants  chose   learning  more  about  Open Translation Tools  (OT12),  while  a  similar  percentage  indicated  that  they  simply  wanted  to  learn  or  to  complete  the  course  and  activities  (15  %).  Most  participants  had  identified  ‘learning  about  translation’  as  their  main  motivation  for  joining  the  course.  For  some  participants,  the  experience  of  taking  part  in  the  OT12  MOOC  provided  unexpected  benefits.  For  one student the course had prompted a willingness  ‘to  take  up  some  voluntary  translation  on  a  small  scale,’  with  another,  taking  ‘the  chance  to  get  himself  in  as  a  translator.’  Minority  of  respondents  felt they  had  acquired  online  communication  skills  and  gained  confidence  by  taking  part  in  OT12,  hence   increasing  their  participatory  literacy  skills.  The majority, however, found that the course allowed  them to discover new tools and practices and helpful  in  extending  their  networks.  
Kassabian9  explored the expectations of Columbia,  Duke, and harvard Universities with MOOCs in the  areas of higher learning and how they had assessed  progress  towards  achieving  these  goals.  Results  reported revealed that three universities expressed  their   interest  in  improved  access  to  education,  but  did not focus on MOOCs as a way to achieve cost  control at their own university or broadly within the  higher education industry; they also did not emphasise  on  improvements  to  college  completion  through  MOOCs.  Instead,  their  expectation  from  MOOCs  was  to  contribute  towards  their  mission  plans  in  the  areas  of  education  and  outreach,  and  to  study  the  ways  in  which  higher  education  might  evolve  in  the  internet  age.  Another  finding  displayed  that  when  it  comes  to  MOOCs,  the  goals  of  university  faculty  and  administration  often  differed.  hollands  & Tirthali10   at  Columbia  University  investigated  the  objective of institutions creating MOOCs, integrating  them  into  their  programmes,  and  reviewed  the  current evidence regarding whether and how these  goals   were  being  achieved,  and  at  what  cost.  The  authors observed that colleges and universities have  adopted several different stances towards engaging  
83 

========2========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  2,  MARCh  2015 
with  MOOCs  and  were  using  them  as  vehicles  to  pursue multiple goals. Costs of developing MOOCs  were very high and the process demanded a great  deal of personnel time and effort. Course design and  delivery  had  shifted  from  a  solo  endeavor  to  team  efforts  including  administrators  in  offices  of  digital  technology,  instructional  designers,  instructional  technologists, videographers, and project managers.  Faculty members themselves were also being vastly  underpaid for devoting their time to develop MOOC  content. While their primary intentions were to improve  opportunities  for  the  educationally  underserved,  they were  perhaps  most  effectively  subsidising  the  salaries of other employees at their own institutions  or  at   the  MOOC  platform  providers.  
Salisbury11   explored  the  impact  of  MOOCs  on  higher education institutions including UT Arlington,  Stanford  University,  hong  Kong  University,  and  Davidson  College. he  was   of  the  view  that  higher  education  is  becoming  more  digital  and  inspite  of  being   criticised  MOOCs  are  making  a  way  out  and  playing a role of a catalyst in developing education  programmes. The MOOCs have increased institutional  consciousness and people are evaluating, debating,  and visualising about the role of MOOCs in defining  future  models  of  higher  education.  MOOCs  have  upgraded  the  status  of  teaching  and  faculty  were  appreciated  for  being  equipped  with  tremendously  rich body of research on course design and learning  science. For creating and designing MOOCs team-based  courses  were  drafted  with  the  help  of  Instructional  designers, software developers, learning researchers, librarians, and videographers. It was also found that  the organisational structures designed around MOOC  creation  provided  safe  spaces  for  experimentation  and  innovation  in  teaching  and  learning. Pujar  &  Bansode12  in their study explained about the concept  of  MOOCs  and  their  contribution  towards  library  science education. They discussed the lead MOOCs  providers  such  as  Udacity,  Cousera  and  Edx.  This  study also uncovered various areas such as choice- based  classes, cooperation in constructing courses,  flipped classrooms, continuing education, etc.,where MOOCs  have an important role to play in improving  LIS  education.  The  authors  concluded  that  inspite  of  being  experimental  in  nature  MOOCs  would  really  be  of  great  significance  for  librarianship  and  provide  a  scope  of  revamping  the  status  and  skills  of library professionals by enumerating the feasible  working  domain  in  developing  nations.  
Clarke13  analysed the rapid development of the  MOOCs  and the implications for business education.  he  analysed  the  origins,  structure  and  orientation  of the MOOCs, assessed their future trajectory and  compared  this  development  with  earlier  waves  of  e-learning. Massiss14  examined the current discussion  of  MOOCs  and  the  library's  involvement  in  this  worldwide  movement.  The  study  identified  that  
84 
MOOCs  may offer colleges the opportunity to accept  the  democratisation  of  learning  for  all  who  wish  to  engage.  User  behaviour  in  the  courses  offered  by  a  MOOC  provider  was  studied  by  Brinton15, et  al.  The aim of this study was to improve the quality of  learning via the online discussion forums, namely by,  (a) sustaining forum activities and (b) enhancing the  personalised learning experience. It was observed that  the teaching staff’s active participation in discussion  increased  the  discussion  volume  but  did  not  slow  down the decline in participation. The BIS report16 furnished an overview of recent reports, writings and  opinion on MOOCs. It assessed available literature  from various sources, including academic research  articles  and  formal  comprehensive  reviews;  blog  posts;  commentary  and  journalistic  coverage.  
Wu17  outlined the recent development of MOOCs,  their  unique  characteristics,  benefits  of  MOOCs  on  higher  education,  strength  and  weakness  and  analysed the potential connection between academic  libraries and MOOCs by reviewing current literature  and  personal  observations.  Analysis  revealed  that  MOOCs have the ability to produce global learning  associations through which students and universities  both  will  be  benefitted.  Simultaneously,  it  poses  many challenges and opportunities before academic  institutions  and  libraries.  
3. MOOCS   PLATFORM 
The  following  MOOCs  platforms  are  available  for  distance  learners  free  of  cost: 
3.1 ALISON 
• • 
• 
• 
ALISON  is  considered  to  be  the  first  MOOC. It is a non-profit world’s leading provider of free  online  courses  with  certificates  providing  600  courses  to  4  million  online  learners  registered  worldwide. 
Commenced  in  2007,  it  provides  free,  high- quality resources to help working class; students  expand  needed  certified  workplace  skills.  The  mission  of  ALISON  is  to  enable  people  anywhere in the world, to learn and get certified  new  skills  among  hundreds  of  free  courses  to  adopt  from  business  &  enterprise,  languages,  personal  development  and  IT  using  their  free,  interactive  multimedia.18 
3.2  Coursera 
• Commercial company initiated by USA professors  
Andrew  Ng  and  Daphne  Koller  from  Stanford  
University  in  2013.  It  is  considered  to  be  the  
largest  MOOC  provider. 
• It collaborates with top universities and organisations  
in the world to offer free courses online for anyone  

========3========

NIShA  & S ENThIL: ChANgINg TREND TOWARDS OPEN DISTANCE LEARNINg WITh SPECIAL REFERENCE TO  I NDIA 
• 
Figure 2. Screenshot of Coursera.19 
with  the  aim  to  make  world-class  education  accessible  to  distance  learners.  It  is  equipped  with  lectures  taught  by  world-class  professors,  where  learners  may  learn  at  their  own  pace,  evaluate their knowledge, and rejuvenate concepts  through  interactive  sessions.  (Fig.  2) Their  technology  enables  their  associates  to  teach  millions  of  students.20 
3.    EdX 
• EdX  is  a  non-profit  online  initiative  taken  by  
harvard and MIT during May 2012 which seeks  
to provide highest quality education, both online  
and in the classroom for students and institutions  
through  cutting-edge  technologies,  innovative  
• 
instructions,  and  demanding  courses. 
• It  offers  free  interactive  online  courses  and  
MOOCs  in  collaboration  with  world’s  best  
universities  including  MIT, harvard,  Berkeley,  
etc.,  in  areas  of  biology,  business,  chemistry,  
computer  science,  economics,  statistics,  etc.  
(Fig.  3) 
• There are almost 415 courses available on edX  
till  date. 
3.4  EduKart 
• EduKart.com is India’s leading online education  
company  started  in  2011. 
Figure 3.  Screenshot of EdX.21 
• 
• 
It  delivers  high  quality  and  industry  relevant  online  distance  learning  degree,  international  programs  and  certificate  courses. 
All  the  courses  are  supported  by  telephonic  doubt-solving and certification at affordable pricing  in  collaboration  with  leading  industrial  bodies,  so  that  working  professionals  and  students  pursuing  higher  education  can  easily  learn  relevant  industry  required  skills  and  become  a  more  valuable  workforce.22 
3.5  Iversity 
• European online platform started working in 2011,  
and  furnished  a  new  direction  to  the  existing  
teaching methods and formats by providing online  
interactive  teaching  and  distance  learning.  • It  works  in  close  association  with  universities,  
individual  course  instructors  and  knowledge- 
based  companies  to  build  high-quality  open  
courses covering a range of subjects comprising  
computer  science,  design,  economics,  law,  
medicine,  physics,  and  philosophy.  
• Any  registered  individual  may  watch  lecture  
videos,  interact  and  participate  in  quizzes  and  
exams and discussions may be made with fellow  
colleagues  and  professors.  
Iversity  platform  provides  an  organised  course  
environment  that  features  multimedia  teaching  
materials; assessment features such as multiple  
choice and peer review in order to keep students  
occupied  and  provide  them  with  quantitative  
and  qualitative  feedback;  a  discussion  board  
where  students  can  engage  in  peer-to-peer  
learning  by  interacting  questions  or  sharing  
links,  references  and  general  observations23. 
3.6  Open  Learning 
Open  Learning  is  a  MOOC  platform  began  in  2012  in  Australia  that  allows  any  individual  to  design,  run,  and  join  a  course.  
• It  is  hosted  by  University  of  New  South  Wales  
with a mission to give learner the freedom and  
the flexibility to create a community, communicate  
his/her  creativity  and  explore  himself/herself  
through  education.  
• It  supplies  courses  in  marketing,  programming  
and  writing  skills24. 
3.7  The  Open  University 
• 
• 
It is UK’s largest distance learning and research  University  founded  by  Royal  Charter. 
It  provides  high-quality  distance  learning  to  people  of  every  age,  different  backgrounds  whether school students, school leavers, people  desire  to  develop  or  update  their  expertise,  
85 

========4========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  2,  MARCh  2015 
• 
• 
• 
and  retired  people  who  need  to  explore  new  interests  and  wish  to  acquire  higher  education  regardless  of  their  locality  and  place.  Does  not  require  any  prerequisites  for  formal   university  founded  by  Royal  Charter 
It  provides  high-quality  distance  learning  to  people  of  every  age,  different  backgrounds  whether school students, school leavers, people  leavers,  people  desire  to  develop  or  update  their  expertise,  and  retired  people  who  need  to  explore  new  interests  and  wish  to  acquire  higher  education  regardless  of  their  locality  and  place. 
It  doesn’t  require  any  prequisites  for  formal  entry  to  start  a  course. 
25 
3.8  Udacity 
• 
• 
• 
Udacity  is  a  for-profit  educational  organisation  founded by Sebastian Thrun, David Stavens, and  Mike  Sokolsky  contributing  towards  MOOCs.  Started in 2013 at USA, Udacity is the offshoot  of  free  computer  science  classes  offered  in  2011  through  Stanford  University.  
Its  mission  is  to  bring  accessible,  affordable,  engaging,  and  highly  quality  higher  education  to  the  world  and  seek  to  empower  students  to  advance  their  education  and  careers.  Udacity  are reinventing education for the 21st  century by  bridging the gap between real-world skills, relevant  education,  and  employment.26   A  comparative  study  of  all  the  MOOCS  provider/platform  are  shown  in  Table  1. 
4. MOOCS  IN  INDIA  
Connecting, informing, composing and educating  would be some of the referring words that would be  suitable  to  add  when  we  would  talk  about  MOOCs  in  the  near  decade.  MOOCs  can  be  the  next  big  thing. Already down the line it has been doing some  great  work  impressive  enough  to  influence  people.  India  is  the  only  economy  to  have  such  a  rapid  change  and  one  leap  ahead  it  can  be  by  joining  
Table 1.  Comparison among MOOCs providers/platform 
Platform 
Country 
Year of  foundation 2007 2013 2012 2011 2012 2012 2013 2011 
No. of students 
ALISON 
Coursera edX 
Iversity 
Open Learning The Open University Udacity 
Edukart 
Ireland USA USA germany Australia UK USA India 
4 millon 10 million+ 3 million+ 5 million+ 
NA 
3 million+ 1 million+ 
NA 
86 
hands  with  the  futuristic  idea  about  the  MOOCs  education. The biggest problem of our country now  is  about  how  to  make  education  available  to  the  scanty  villages  spread  all  around  the  nation  and  the  solution  to  this  problem  has  been  seen  in  the  form  of  MOOCs  education  system.  
Birla  Institute  of  Technology  and  Sciences  (BITS)  Pilani  has  collaborated  with  the  MIT  &  harvard’s  MOOC  platform  edX  to  offer  MOOCs  to  its  own  on-campus  and  off-campus  students  as  well  as  students  outside  BITS.27 Online  education  company  Coursera  had  also  announced  Coursera  Learning hubs which offered people physical spaces  where  they  can  access  its  MOOCs  for  free.  In  India,  Coursera  has  alliance  with  Lady  Sri  Ram  College (New Delhi), Learning Links Foundation and  Bluebells  Schools  International  (New  Delhi).  Such  an  initiative  goes  off  well  in  India,  where  a  large  population still don’t have access to reliable internet  connections. Jaaga, a Bangalore-based company had  begun Jaaga study, a one-year course on computer  programming,  which  uses  MOOCs  from  numerous  sources (Codecademy, TeamTreehouse, CodeSchool,  Udacity,  Stanford,  harvard  and  MIT  )  online  to  manage classes offline.Visvesvaraya Technological  University (VTU) in alliance with Microsoft research  had  also  started  the  trial  of  supplying  free  online  certification  to  Engineering  students  on  algorithm,  design  and  analysis.28   The  Indian  Institutes  of  Technology (IITs) Chennai, Delhi, guwahati, Kanpur,  Kharagpur,  Mumbai  and  Roorkee  and  the  Indian  Institute  of  Science  Bangalore  (IISc  Bangalore)  as  a part of a project National Program on Technology  Enhanced Learning (NPTEL) funded by the Ministry  of  human  Resource  Development  (MhRD)  have  joined hands to deliver MOOCs.29  NPTEL  has  also  launched  the  NPTEL  Online  Certification  (NOC)  in  collaboration with google and National Association  of Software and Services Companies (NASSCOM).  It  is  equipped  with  two  new  courses  at  present,  namely,  ‘Introduction  to  Programming  in  C’,  and  ‘Electrical Circuits’. These courses are unpaid. The  respective  IITs  will  provide  an  optional  certificate  for  them  on  the  basis  of  the  scores  acquired  in  
No. of  courses 600 839 415 300 NA 230 198 NA 
Certifcation fee 
For proft 
Yes (Nominal) Yes Yes No Nominal Nominal Yes Yes 
No Yes No No Yes No Yes Yes 

========5========

NIShA  & S ENThIL: ChANgINg TREND TOWARDS OPEN DISTANCE LEARNINg WITh SPECIAL REFERENCE TO  I NDIA 
online  assignments  by  paying  small  amount  of  fee.30   For  promoting  MOOCs,  The  National  Virtual  Academy for Indian Agriculture was launched on 05  September 2014 at the International Crops Research  Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) which  facilitates  access  to  quality  agricultural  education.  The MOOCs will be enhanced through the National  Virtual  Academy  for  Indian  Agriculture,  an  online  platform  created  on  OSS  ‘Open  edX,’  to  integrate  the  requirements  particularly  of  India’s  agricultural  education  system,  where  more  than  70  %  of  the  population  is  involved  in  agriculture  directly  or  indirectly  and  available  resources  are  deficient  comparative  to  the  extremely  large  public.31 
India and USA are likely to enter into a partnership  to launch MOOCs courses through an online platform  named as Study Webs of Active-Learning for Young  Aspiring  Minds  (SWAYAM),  a  web  portal  that  will  offer  online  courses  in  heterogeneous  subjects.  It  is expected that SWAYAM is going to use OpenEdx  as  its  MOOCs  platform.  Video  lectures  of  the  American  universities  will  be  made  available  for  the  SWAYAM  portal  free  so  that  Indian  students  can  access  them  at  nominal  charges.  Under  this  joint  venture,  the  SWAYAM  server  will  be  placed  in  India  while  US  universities  will  be  welcomed  to  present academic programmes on the platform. The  hRD ministry and the National Science Foundation  (NSF),  USA  that  promotes  science  and  research,  are expected to initiate a programme called global  Initiative of Academic Networks (gIAN) where faculty  members  from  US  institutions  would  deliver  their  time teaching in academic and research institutions  across  India.32 SWAYAM   is  supposed  to  comprise  three different courses. Among these three courses,  two courses would be contributing from IIT Mumbai  on  ‘Introduction  to  Computer  Programming’  and  ‘Thermodynamics’ and one basic conceptual course  from  UC  Berkeley’s  on  ‘Quantum  Mechanics  and  Quantum  Computation’.33 
5. LIMITATION  OF  MOOCS  
Providing  timely  support  and  assessment  of  students  has  become  a  challenging  task  as  far  as  MOOCs are concerned. Professors or academicians  
might be able to design and deliver online lectures  but at the same time they may not be able to connect  and evaluate the thousands of students world around  
who  are  the  participants  of  their  course. 
6. FUTURE  OF  MOOCS 
Future  is  a  thought  of  probability  and  chance,  and probability always has a risk of happening or not  happening,  same  way  it  can  be  seen  that  MOOCs  as  a  risk,that  turn  out  to  be  an  asset  or  a  failure.  There is no doubt that MOOCs have shown its scale  of  outcomes  that  have  been  hugely  positive  which  needs to be thoroughly evaluated and regarded and  
considered  by  faculties,  administrators  and  policy  makers.  The  MOOCs  providers  have  huge  funds  that  can  be  put  to  great  use  if  they  are  invested  unbiased with the thought of betterment. Following   suggestions  might  be  helpful  as  futuristic  idea  of  MOOCs  studies: 
(a) The MOOCs companies and investors should be  
more  subtle  in  their  own  ways  and  not  act  as  
typical business people or die hard educationists  
because they need to be a mixture of both and  
should stop trying to sell their products thinking  
they  would  be  the  ultimate  way  out  for  all  the  
education  problems.  This  example  might  help  
understand,  should  the  MOOC  approach  really  
be  all  about  students  who  have  remediation  
and  other  learning  defaults  and  who  lack  the  
basic  skills  of  making,  writing  and  arithmetic. (b) With  the  apt  amount  of  financial  resources  at  
their counters, MOOCs companies should reform  
and develop more apprenticeship inclined course  
materials  that  can  be  used  in  a  more  blended  
online  format  rather  than  fully  online  formats.  
In  fact  in  the  near  future  as  we  see  MOOCs,  
it might indeed be probable to lie with blended  
learning that allows only meaningful involvement  
of  faculty.  To  do  so,  they  might  even  have  to  
jettison  the  MOOCs  brand  because  their  final  
product  layout  may  not  be  huge  and  bulky  in  
terms  of  hundreds  and  thousands  of  students  
enrolments and also might not be open or free.  
Rather,  the  course  providers  and  developers  
might  rebrand  themselves  as  providers  of  high  
quality content givers and give an option to the  
faculties  as  to  how  in  the  best  way  they  could  
use  their  materials.  
(c) MOOCs being private enterprise need to figure  
out a way to return their investments and make  
a profit out of everything. The last five decades  
of  instructional  software  providers  are  filled  
with  hundreds  of  companies  went  bankrupt.  It  
is just like survival of the fittest. At some point  
of  time,  the  initial  investment  will  run  out  and  
then  the  companies  would  be  in  a  need  to  
generate revenue. In turn, it is likely that some  
will  survive  but  would  not.  This  turns  out  to  
be  a  major  conundrum  for  MOOCs  developers  
that  distinguishes  them  from  departmental  and  
instructional design competitions at colleges who  
develop  their  own  online  course  materials  on  
modest budgets primarily for teaching purposes  
and  not  with  the  thought  of  earning  a  profit. 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
The  MOOCs  are  the  future  of  today’s  distance  learning.  They  have  made  the  education  easily  accessible  to  anyone  anywhere  anytime  around  the  globe  and  made  people’s  life  more  improved  
87 

========6========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  2,  MARCh  2015 
by  providing  flexible  and  quality  learning  as  it  was  earlier.  They  have  made  a  difference  by  providing  free courses and enabled people and students world  around  to  participate,  interact,  discuss  and  learn  from  the  renowned  faculty  of  this  world  thereby  improving  people’s  live  and  bring  out  real  change  to communities as a whole. Moreover, there should  be  a  cost  effective  and  clever  management  for  running MOOCs and a well adopted strategy which  fits  the  universities  and  institutions.34   The  MOOCs  and  online  education  have  huge  potential  which  would  help  accelerate  and  ensure  social  cohesion  and sustainable growth.With little efforts by the India  government,  online  education  can  be  extended  to  every  individual.  The  education  system  managed  through  advanced  technologies  and  online  studies  will  definitely  help  India  to  nurture  its  growth.35  MOOCs  could  help  make  science  and  technology  education  accessible  to  masses  but  require  to  develop  technical  skills  among  students. The  thirst  for MOOCs is invasively burgeoning among Indians  and  they  have  opted  MOOCs  for  making  global  classrooms a reality. For Indians, who have a thirst  for  quality-based  western  education,  MOOCs  are  proved  exemplary  in  this  direction.  
REFERENCES 
1. OpenupEd. http://www.openuped.eu/openuped- 
temp/60-about-moocs (accessed on 10 October  
2014). 
2. Berg,  Dirk  J.  Why  MOOCS  are  transforming  
the  face  of  higher  education.  The  Blog.  http:// 
www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/dirk-jan-van-den-berg/ 
why-moocs-are-transforming_b_4116819.html  
(accessed  on  2  February  2015). 
3. MOOC: Every letter is negotiable. https://www. 
flickr.com/photos/mathplourde/8620174342/sizes/l/in/ 
photostream/  (accessed  on  2  February  2015). 4. Siemens,  g.  MOOCs  are  really  a  platform  
[Web  log  post].  http://www.elearnspace.org/ 
blog/2012/07/25/moocs-are-really-a-platform/  
(accessed  on  2  February  2015). 
5.   Jones, Marshall g.  Types of MOOCs: C-MOOCs  
and X-MOOCs. http://oertools.weebly.com/types-of- 
moocs.html  (accessed  on  2  February  2015). 6.    Allen, I.E. & Seaman, J.  grade change: Tracking  
online  education  system  in  the  United  States.  
ROBSON Survey Research group. http://www. 
onlinelearningsurvey.com/reports/gradechange. 
pdf  (accessed  on  2  February  2015). 
7. University  of  Pennsylvania.  What’s  ahead?  
Key trends in higher education. http://www.gse. 
upenn.edu/pdf/ahead/whats_ahead/01_moocs. 
pdf  (accessed  on  2  February  2015). 
8. Beaven,  T.,  et  al .  MOOCs:  Striking  the  right  
balance between facilitation and self-determination.  
MERLOT J. Online Learn. & Teah., 10(1). http:// 
88 
jolt.merlot.org/vol10no1/beaven_0314.pdf (accessed  
on  2  February  2015) 
9. Kassabian,  Dikran  W.  The  value  of  MOOCs  to  
early adopter universities. EDUCAUSE  Review  
Online.  http://www.educause.edu/ero/article/value- 
moocs-early-adopter-universities  (accessed  on  
2  February  2015). 
10.   h olands, F.M. & Tirthali, D. MOOCs: Expectations  
and reality. Full Report. Center for Benefit-Cost  
Studies of Education Teachers College, Columbia  
University.  http://www.academicpartnerships.com/ 
sites/default/files/MOOCs_Expectations_and_Reality. 
pdf  (accessed  on  2  February  2015). 
11. Salisbury, Allison  Dulin.  Impacts  of  MOOCs  on  
higher  education.  Inside  Higher  Edu.   https:// 
www.insidehighered.com/blogs/higher-ed-beta/ 
impacts-moocs-higher-education  (accessed  on  
23  February  2015). 
12. Pujar, Shamprasad M. & Bansode, Sadananda Y.  
MOOCs and LIS education: A massive opportunity  
or challenge. Annals of Lib. and Inf. Stud ., 61,  
74-8. 
13.  Thomas,  Clarke.  The  advance  of  the  MOOCs  
(massive open online courses): The impending  
globalisation of business education?  Education  
+  Training,   2013,  55(4/5),  403-13. 
14. Bruce, E.M. MOOCs and the library. New Library  
World, 114(5/6),  267-70. 
15. Brinton,  Christopher g., et  al.  Learning  about  
social learning in MOOCs: From statistical analysis  
to  generative  model.  Workshop  on  Information  
in Networks, New York University;  October  4-5,  
2013.   http://arxiv.org/pdf/1312.2159v1.pdf. 16. The  maturing  of  the  MOOC:  Literature  review  
of  massive  open  online  courses  and  other  
forms of online distance learning. BIS research  
paper  number  130,  Department  for  Business,  
Innovations & Skills. https://www.gov.uk/government/ 
publications/massive-open-online-courses-and- 
online-distance-learning-review  (accessed  on  
2  February  2015). 
17.  Wu,  Kerry.  Academic  libraries  in  the  age  of  
MOOCs. Ref.  Ser.  Rev.,   2013,  41(3),  576-87. 18. ALISON: Free online courses. http://alison.com/  
(accessed  on  10  October  2014). 
19. Coursera.  https://www.coursera.org/  (accessed  
on  10  October  2014). 
20. SQLearn  e-learning  experts.  Is  Coursera  the  
beginning  of  the  end  for  traditional  higher  
education?  http://www.sqlearn.gr/is-coursera- 
the-beginning-of-the-end-for-traditional-higher- 
education  (accessed  on  2  February  2015). 21. edX.  https://www.edx.org/  (accessed  on  10  
October  2014). 
22. About Edukart. http://www.edukart.com/ (accessed  
on  10  October  2014). 

========7========

NIShA  & S ENThIL: ChANgINg TREND TOWARDS OPEN DISTANCE LEARNINg WITh SPECIAL REFERENCE TO  I NDIA 
23. Iversity  online  courses.  https://iversity.org/  
(accessed  on  10  October  2014). 
24. OpenLearning: Teach and online for free. https:// 
www.openlearning.com/ (accessed on 10 October  
2014). 
25. The  Open  University.  http://www.open.ac.uk/  
(accessed  on  10  October  2014). 
26. UDACITY.  https://www.udacity.com/  (accessed  
on  10  October  2014). 
27.  Rai University. Future of MOOCs in India. http:// 
www.raiuniversity.edu/blogs/future-moocs-india/  
(accessed  on  10  October  2014). 
28. Mukherjee, Ridhi. BITS Pilani ties-up with edX to  
offer open online courses. http://www.medianama. 
com/2014/07/223-bits-pilani-edx/  (accessed  on  
10  October  2014). 
29. Indian  Institute  of Technology  (IITs)  and  Indian  
Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore join hands  
to deliver MOOCs.  India Today , 11 October 2014. 
http://indiatoday.intoday.in/education/story/indian- 
institute-of-technology-iits-and-indian-institute- 
of-science-iisc-bangalore-join-hands-to-deliver- 
moocs/1/381101.html (accessed on 10 October  
2014). 
30. Massive  Open  Online  Courses  for  Agricultural  
professionals  to  usher  in  classrooms  without  
boundaries. International Crops Research Institute  
for the Semi-Arid Tropics. http://www.icrisat.org/ 
newsroom/news-releases/icrisat-pr-2014-media27. 
htm  (accessed  on  10  October  2014). 31. Open online course for India’s agri-professionals  
launched. Agriculture Today. In  7 
th 
 International  
Agriculture  Leadership  Summit,  2014.  http:// 
agriculturetoday.in/AT-October.pdf (accessed on  
10  October  2014). 
32. India  may  soon  launch  MOOCs  with American  
Universities.  Elets  News  Network  (ENN)  8  
October, 2014. http://digitallearning.eletsonline. 
com/2014/10/india-may-soon-launch-moocs-with- 
amedian-universities/#sthash.hRCUqU9t.dpuf  
(accessed  on  10  October  2014). 
33. India announces official MOOC platform SWAYAM.  
https://www.class-central.com/report/swayam- 
india/  (accessed  on  20  October  2014). 
34. Nair,  Malini.  MOOCs  click  with  Indians.  18  
Aug  2013.  http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/ 
home/stoi/deep-focus/MOOCs-click-with-Indians/ 
articleshow/21890105.cms  (accessed  on  10  
October  2014). 
35. Kollner,  D.  Online  learning:  Learning  without  
limits. Keynote presentation at  19th  Annual Sloan  
Consortium  Conference  on  Online  Learning.  
Orlando, FL. http://statewidecareerpathways.org/ 
sites/default/files/Keynote_The%20Online%20 
Revolution-Learning%20Without%20Limits.pdf. 
        (accessed  on  10  October  2014). 
About  the Authors 
Dr Faizul Nisha  is working in E-Journal Consortium  group, Defence Scientific Information & Documentation  Centre (DESIDOC), New Delhi since 2010. She holds  BSc  in  Zoology,  MSc  in  Environmental  Sciences,  MLISc  and obtained Doctorate from Aligarh Muslim  University, Aligarh. She has published over 25 papers  in  various  national  and  international  journals  and  presented over 15 research papers in many national  and  international  conferences.  She  is  a  member  in  the  Editorial  Board  of  International  Journal  of  Information  Sources  and  Services.  her  areas  of  interest  includes:  E-journals,  e-resources,  digital  library  and  IT  application  in  libraries. 
Mr v. Senthil  is working as Scientist ‘D’ in DESIDOC.  he has obtained his MSc in Electronics and MLISc  in Library and Information Science. Presently, he is  head, Knowledge Management Division, DESIDOC. he  has  received  many  awards  for  his  professional  contributions including ‘Scientist of the Year’ award  in  2006  and  2013.  he  has  published  10  papers  in  various  journals  and  presented  papers  in  many  national and international conferences. his areas of  interests include: Library automation, digital library,  institutional  repository,  e-journals  consortium  and  website  design  &  hosting. 
89 

========8========

