DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 35, No. 4, July 2015, pp. 287-292 
  2015, DESIDOC 
   Institutional Repositories Initiated by Indian Institutes of Technology and  
Indian Institutes of Management: A Case Study 
Santosh C. Hulagabali Nagindas Khandwala College Malad West, Mumbai- 400 064 
 ABSTRACT 
The contribution of Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) and Indian Institutes of Management (IIMs)  has  immensely  helped  fourish  the  Indian  socio-economic  and  cultural  sectors. The  credit  goes  to  the  quality of teaching and research pursuits of faculty, curriculum, facilities, scope for research and publication  activities, etc., at IITs and IIMs. The IITs and IIMs are active in producing scholarly literature in the form  of research projects, research papers, in-house publications etc. But such intellectual literature/output is  not  fully  available  in  public  domain  though  they  are  public-funded  establishments.  Identifying  this  gap,  institutional  repositories  (IRs),  the  online  platform  for  archiving  and  sharing  of  institutional  intellectual- content, initiated by the IITs and IIMs were explored. The fndings of the study show that out of 16 IITs, 8  IITs have initiated IRs and of which 2 are accessible online and 7 on intranet. On the other hand, out of  13 IIMs, IRs of 3 IIMs are accessible online. The paper also highlights the number and type of documents  archived, software platforms used for launching the IRs, accessibility and quality of links of the IRs.  
Keywords: Institutional  repositories,  Indian  institutes  of  technology,  Indian  institutes  of  management,  
open access, open source software  
1. INTRODUCTION 
The  Indian  Institutes  of  Technology  and  Indian  Institutes of Management are the premier educational  institutes of India. Their global acclaim is resounding  in  terms  of  producing  the  best  human  resources,  highly  competent  for  the  developmental  initiatives,  in  any  sector  across  the  globe.  In  Indian  context,  “…nearly  half  of  the  India  Inc’s  professionals  are  in  chief  executive  role  who  hail  from  the  country’s  elite institutes— IIT and IIM”.1  Such is the distinction  of  these  institutes.  The  striking  point  is  that  the  knowledge generated in these establishments, in the  form  of  research  reports,  publications,  innovative  lectures and teaching methods are worth referring to  for further research and learning, for all those who  do  not  belong  to  these  institutes  in  any  capacity.  
These  institutes  are  established  and  are  being  funded by public money, yet their intellectual output  is not fully available in public domain. The ‘openness’  needs  to  percolate  down  from  all  such  publicly- funded  educational  institutes  wherein  the  research  and publication activities are much valued and take  place  regularly.  
In regard to institutional repositories (IRs), they  are  the  best  platform  for  sharing  the  institutional  intellectual output accessible either to their stakeholders,  who  access  on  intranet,  or  to  public  that  accesses  remotely and openly. Being an incredible medium for  
sharing scholarly literature, many IITs and IIMs have  initiated  to  launch  their  IRs.  However,  IRs  “..could  become a useful and important tool (for the academic  institutes)  but  not  every  institution  has  the  means  to create and maintain its own repository”.2  This  is  one of the fundamental questions that arises when  one  expects  every  institute  to  have  its  repository.  The  reasons  for  the  same  are  varied.  Thus  the  moot  point  of  this  paper  is  that,  the  IRs  ought  to  be  in  open  access  domain.  With  this  concern,  the  study  has  identified  the  IITs  and  IIMs’  initiatives  and  allied  issues  of  their  IRs.  
2. LITERATURE  REVIEW 
The  literature  review  was  undertaken  to  find  out  the  conceptual  framework  of  IR,  trends  in  IR  initiatives (both at national and international levels),  issues related to technological platforms, challenges  and  opportunities  to  IR  initiatives  especially  in  IITs  and  IIMs.    
Jandoo  &  Vedamurthy3   discussed  the  utilities  of  the  open  access  to  scholarly  literature  but  do  not  discuss  about  some  IR  initiatives  though  title  of  the  paper  states  to  review  some  initiatives.  Surinder Kumar 4  discussed IRs but more emphasis  is  given  on  National  Digital  Repository  System  (NDRS).  However,  no  initiatives  from  IIMs  and  IITs  are  specifically  stated  in  the  paper.  Jotwani’s5     in  his  paper  gave  an  idea  about  how  the  IITs  are  
Received 29 November 2014, revised 6 February 2015, online published July 2015 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  4,  JuLy  2015 
marketing  their  e-resources.      
MIRE6  states that in countries where government  bodies,  or  consortia  collaborations  of  institutions,  embarked on IR projects, directly affecting a number  of institutions, there is a high uptake of IR platforms  today”.  The  statement  is  true  but  in  the  case  of  IITs  and  IIMs,  the  IR  initiatives  are  not  that  impressive.  
Highlighting  more  on  content  and  preservation  techniques of IRs, Jones7    says, building technological  infrastructure  is  not  hard  but  “deciding  on  what  content and preservation approaches are the matter  of concern”. Many other sources are referred specially  to check the technological know-hows for launching  IRs  and  they  revealed  the  fact  that  technological  unawareness  are  leading  to  poor  IR  initiatives.  
A list of IR initiatives by IITs was prepared by IIT  Hyderabad8  was helpful to some extent. Considering  the non-availability of exclusive study on IR initiatives  by  IITs  and  IIMs,  the  following  objectives  were  framed  and  the  study  was  executed.    
3. OBJECTIVES 
The  knowledge  generated  in  the  IITs  and  IIMs  are  invaluable  and  if  those  are  accessible  openly,  then  that  shall  indirectly  support  further  research  and publication activities in other academic institutes  and also the allied and non-allied sectors. With this  understanding, the study was aimed to find out the  IR initiatives of IITs and IIMs including the different  types and number of IR collection, their availability  in  open  access  domain,  quality  of  IR  links  (uRLs)  and  ease  of  accessibility.  
4. METHODOLOGY 
There are 16 IITs and 13 IIMs9  imparting technical  and  management  education  in  India.  These  29  institutes  constitute  as  universe  for  this  study.  All  these  institutes  were  selected  as  samples.  The  scope  of  the  study  was  limited  to  the  status  and  allied  issues  of  IR  initiatives  of  IITs  and  IIMs.  The  name  of  the  open  source  software  (OSS)  used  to  launch  the  IRs  was  checked. 
Websites of each sample were accessed individually  and  the  status  of  IRs  availability,  type  and  number  of  collection  they  hold,  ease  of  accessibility,  and  quality  of  the  links  of  IR  sites  were  recorded.  All  the  websites  were  accessed  individually  during  12  Sept.  2014-  28  Oct.  2014.  
To ensure the correctness of the documented- facts: (a) E-mails were sent to all the IR managers/ Librarians  of  the  institutes  to  provide  the  actual  status  of  their  IR  initiatives.  This  helped  to  form  three categories ,viz., the launched-projects, projects- in-progress  and  projects  that  are  accessible  on  intranet. (b) During this process the links that were  not working were checked on different web browsers  viz.  Internet  Explorer,  Google  Chrome  and  Mozilla  
288 
Firefox  for  possible  compatibility  with  any  of  these  web browsers. (c) The data was then analysed and  the  findings  with  suggestions  were  proposed.  (d)  Draft of this paper was mailed to all the IR managers  of  IITs  and  IIMs  to  verify  the  facts  (at  their  end)  enumerated  in  the  draft  copy.  (e)  Later,  the  facts  and  suggestions  given  by  the  IR  managers  were  incorporated  appropriately  in  the  draft  . 
5. 
RESULTS AND   DISCUSSION S 
5.1  Availability  of  IRs  
The  availability  of  the  IR  initiatives  by  IITs  and  IIMs  were  checked  on  their  respective  websites.  Three  forms  of  availability  status  of  IRs,  viz.,(a)  availability  of  IRs  on  internet,  and  (b)  intranet  are  discussed  under  the  following  heads.  
(a)  IITs:  Out  of  16  IITs,  2  IITs  have  hosted  their  IRs  online,  7  are  accessible  on  intranet  and  the  remaining IITs have not initiated IR projects (Table 1). (b) IIMs:  There  are  only  3  IIMs  that  have  hosted  their IRs online.  Table 2  and 3 gives the availability  status  of  those  institutes.    
5.2  Details  of  IR  Initiatives 
5.2.1  Initiatives  by  IITs 
Table  4  states  the  names,  uRLs  and  number  of  records the IRs of IIT-B and IIT-D hold. Apart from  the  above  details,  the  following  information  was  gathered  from  the  IIT  websites. 
(a) IIT-B’s DSpace@IIT-Bombay gives full-text access  to  the  selected  documents.  It  has  listed  out  the  
Table  1.  IITs’  IR  initiatives  and  their  availability 
 S. No. Name  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
IIT Bombay IIT Bubaneshwar IIT Delhi IIT Gandhi Nagar IIT Guwahati IIT Hyderabad IIT Indore IIT Jodhpur IIT Kanpur IIT Kharagpur IIT Madras IIT Mandi IIT Patna IIT Roorkee IIT Ropar IIT Varanasi 
Short name Availability of  
IRs    IIT-B Internet IIT-BBS - 
IIT-D Internet IIT-GN Intranet IIT-G Intranet IIT-H Intranet IIT-I - 
IIT-J Intranet IIT-K - 
IIT-KGP Intranet IIT-M - 
IIT-Mandi Intranet IIT-P - 
IIT-R Intranet IIT-RPR - 
IIT-BHu - 

========2========

HuLAGABALI: INSTITuTIONAL  R EPOSITORIES  I NITIATED By INDIAN INSTITuTES OF TECHNOLOGy  
AND INDIAN INSTITuTES OF MANAGEMENT 
Table  2.  IIMs’  IR  initiatives  and  their  availability 
S. No. 
Name  
Short names 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
IIM Ahmedabad IIM Bangalore IIM Calcutta IIM Indore IIM Kashipur IIM Kozhikode IIM Lucknow IIM Ranchi IIM Raipur IIM Rohtak IIM Shillong IIM Tiruchirapur IIM udaipur 
IIM-A IIM-B IIM-C IIM-I IIM-Kas IIM-K IIM-L IIM-Ranchi IIM-Raipur IIM-R RGIIM-S IIM-T IIM-u 
Availability  of IRs  Internet Internet - 
- 
- 
Internet - 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Table  3.  Overall  accessibility  statusof  IRs  of 
          IITs and IIMs 
Name of Insti tute 
Total 
IITs 
16 
IRs on IRs only  Open  
Partially inter- on inter- ac- 
open net net cess 
IRs 
2 7 - 2 
IIMs 
13 
3 
1 
- 
3 
Table  4.  Names,  URLs  and  number  of  
                    records  of  IRs  of  IITs 
IITs 
IR name 
URLs 
IIT-B 
http://dspace.library. iitb.ac.in/jspui/ http://eprint.iitd.ac.in/ 
Total  no. of  records 15912 
IIT-D 
DSpace@IIT  Bombay Eprint@IITDelhi 
3035 
open  access  resources  separately  that  helps  the  readers  tap  the  scholarly  databases  and  OERs  (open  educational  resources).  Though  there  is  a  separate ‘ETD’ web page,  they are not included in  the  IR. This  page  neither  comprises  the  guidelines  for  submission  of  ETDs  (electronic  theses  and  dissertations)  nor  full-text  or  bibliographic  list  of  ETDs.  The  webpage  states  that  it  has  archived  working  papers,10   but  such  sub-community  is  not  listed  on  its  IR. 
(b)    IIT-D’s  Eprint@IITDelhi  has  given  search  interface to its ETDs under ‘Search’ webpage. Around                                                                                              four thousand ETDs are accessible at bibliographic  level. The search interface is user-friendly and can  be  searched  by  title,  scholar,  supervisor,  year  and  accession  number.  The  readers  get  well-formatted  results  comprising  all  access  points  of  the  ETDs.  The library’s website also includes the list of latest  
faculty  publications  provided  by  Scopus.  It  has  also  listed  open  access  resources  that  are  useful  for  its  readers.  Apart  from  MOOC  (Massive  Open  Online  Course)  and  Open  Courseware,  it  gives  an  exclusive  list  of  around  1800  CD-ROMs  available  in  the  library11. 
(c) Others: The IIT Ropar’s library webpage states  that  their  IR  is  yet  to  be  implemented12   where  as  IIT-BBS  has  given  the  list  of  bibliographic  records  that  are  listed  under  ‘Research’  web  page.  IIT-GN  has initiated IR and is accessible on intranet. The IR  would be made online in couple of months. (inputs  given  by  the  IIM-GN  Librarian  on  2  Sept.  2014)   IIT-Mandi’s  IR  is  built  on  DSpace  and  available  on  intranet.  The  faculty  publications  are  added  on  to  the  same  (inputs  given  by  the  Deputy  Librarian,  IIT-M  on  3  Sept.  2014). 
5.2.2  Initiatives  by  IIMs 
Three  IIMs  have  initiated  IRs.  The  details  are  stated  in  Table  5.  Apart  from  the  above  details,  the  following  facts  and  information  were  gathered  from  the  IIMs’  official  websites.  
(a) IIM-A’s Institutional Repository13  has the highest  number  of  records  (11709)  in  its  IR.  The  records  are  well  arranged.  It  has  listed  299  ETDs  on  its  IR  but  access  to  the  full-text  theses  is  restricted.  A  reader  can  request  for  the  full-text  ETD  from  the  ‘responsible  person’  using  the  ‘request  a  copy  of  the  document’  option.  Most  of  the  other  type  of  documents  including  (2027)  working  papers  is  accessible at full-text level. Furthermore, IIM-A has  given  bibliographic  list  of  their  faculty  publications  under  ‘Faculty  and  Publications’  web  page,  those  are  well  formatted  and  listed  meticulously.  (b) IIM-B’s Research@IIMB is accessible on intranet  and internet. The IIM-B does not have a mandated  open access policy (as yet) for its faculty publications,  except  working  papers.  ETDs  are  accessible  at  abstract  level.  The  self-submissions  by  students  and  faculty  is  yet  to  be  enabled  (inputs  given  by  the  IIM-B  Librarian  on  15th  Oct.  2014  via  e-mail).  The  communities  are  created  on  the  name  of  their  subjects  and  the  collections  of  different  types  of  documents  are  listed  systematically  under  each  community.  
Table  5.  URLs  and  number  of  records  of  
              IRs of IIMs 
IIMs IRs name URL Total   
records IIM-A IIMA Institutional  http://vslir.iimahd. 11709* 
Repository  ernet.in:8080/xmlui/ 
IIM-B Research@IIMB http://research.iimb. 439 
ernet.in:8080/xmlui/ 
IIM-K DSpace@IIMK http://dspace.iimk. 538 
ac.in/ 
  *also  includes  8254  bibliographic  records  of  the  faculty 
289 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  4,  JuLy  2015 
(c) IIM-K’s DSpace@IIMK14  has given full-text access  to  its  collection.  However,  ETDs  are  not  listed  under  its  IR.  The  IR’s  arrangement  and  listing  of  the  communities,  sub-communities  and  collections  need to be improved. The IR has given bibliographic  list  of  their  faculty  publications  under  ‘Faculty  and  Research’  web  page  that  are  well  presented.  The  abstracts  of  the  working  papers  or  case  studies  can  be  downloaded.  For  full-text  access  of  the  same,  user/public  needs  to  contact  the  Research,  Conference  and  Publication  Office  of  IIM-K.    (d) Others: IIM-I does not have IR but has archived  the abstracts (also comprising the table of contents)  of  the  selected  doctoral  theses.  Majority  of  the  abstracts  are  of  the  recent  past.  Same  way,  IIM- Ranchi  does  not  have  IR  but  has  added  a  list  of  faculty  publications.  IIM-u   has  given  access  to  the  list  of  research  papers,  working  papers  and  ongoing  research  projects.  Some  of  the  research  papers are accessible at full-text level too. Many of  the working papers are accessible through SSRN15 (Social  Science  Research  Network)  eLibrary  portal  and  is  a  good  initiative.  It  has  also  listed  out  the  journal articles, book chapters, book reviews, case  studies, books, conference proceedings and working  papers  under  ‘Publications’  web  page.  IIM  Raipur  has  also  listed  faculty  publications  under  ‘Faculty  and  Research’  webpage. 
5.3  Types  of  IR  Collection 
Total  28  type  of  documents  excluding  ‘others’  category  were  prepared  initially  and  the  IRs  were  searched to trace the type of documents. Overall, it  is  found  that  the  IRs  have  18  types  of  documents.  Among them, working papers, conference proceedings,  and  ETDs  lead  the  list  of  collections.  But  it  is  also  observed that IRs do not have archived books, book  chapters,  course  materials,  newspaper  clippings  and  newsletters  (Table  6). 
5.4 Application  of  OSS 
It  was  important  to  note  the  technological  platforms  used  by  the  samples  in  implementing  the IRs. The IRs of the following institutes are built  on  DSpace  OSS  except  IIT-Delhi  that  has  initiated  IR  on  E-prints  platform.  
Attempts  were  made  to  find  out  the  OSS  of  those  IRs  that  are  accessible  on  intranet.  It  is  found  that  all  these  IITs  have  also  initiated  IRs  on  DSpace  platform.  This  means  DSpace  is  the  most  preferred  OSS  in  initiating  IR  projects  at  IITs  and  IIMs  (Table  7). 
6. FINDINGS AND  SUGGESTIONS 
(a) The  IR  initiatives  at  IITs  and  IIMs  are  in  developmental  stage  though  IRs  became  popular  in  the  past  decade. The  findings  reveal  that  out  of  16 IITs, 8 have taken initiatives to launch their IRs.  
290 
Table  6.  Types  of  collection  of  IRs  of  IITs  and  IIMs 
Type of Collection         IITs 
IIT-B IIT-D Annual Reports - - Book Reviews √ - Bibliography √ - Editorials √ 
Invited Lectures √ - Cases √ - Convocation Ad- - √ dresses 
Conference √ - Proceedings 
ETDs - √ Letters √ 
Meeting Abstracts √ 
Multi-media  - - News Reports - - Newsletters - - Project Reports - - Reports √ - Research √ √ 
               IIMs IIM-A IIM-B √ - - - √ - 
IIM-K √ - - 
- - - 
- - - 
- - - 
√ 
- 
√ 
√ - - √ √ - √ - - 
√ - - - - - √ - - 
- - - - - √ - - - 
Papers/Articles Working Papers Reprints 
- √ 
√ - 
√ - 
√ - 
√ - 
Table  7.  OSS  used  by  IITs  and  IIMs 
IITs IIT-B IIT-D 
OSS DSpace E-prints 
IIMs IIM-A IIM-B IIM-K 
OSS DSpace DSpace DSpace 
However, IR portals of only two IITs (IIT-B and IIT-D)  are accessible online and seven are accessible on  intranet.  On  the  other  hand,  out  of  thirteen  IIMs,  only  three  IIMs  i  (IIM-A,  IIM-B,  IIM-K)  have  got  active IRs. This is a matter of concern as the total  number  of  IR  initiatives  is  not  impressive.  In  such  a status, the Government of India’s National Digital  Library (NDL) initiative (to be launched through IIT  Kharagpur) could be a possible solution. The NDL  aims to bring all the digital contents of educational  institutes on one platform. This initiative would prove  positive only when open access to all public-funded  research and publication works (of Indian academic  institutions)  are  made  available  on  NDL,  with  no  more  delay.  The  IITs  and  IIMs  need  to  speed-up  launching  their  IRs  individually,  instead  of  waiting  for  NDL’s  official  launch,  as  NDL  has  a  limitation  of  taking  only  50  institutes  in  its  first  phase16.    (b) Among all the type of documents/records archived  

========4========

HuLAGABALI: INSTITuTIONAL  R EPOSITORIES  I NITIATED By INDIAN INSTITuTES OF TECHNOLOGy  
AND INDIAN INSTITuTES OF MANAGEMENT 
on  IRs,  working  papers,  conference  proceedings,  ETDs lead the list of collections. However, the type  of documents like journals, e-books, book chapters,  course  materials  and  newspaper  clippings  were  hardly  found.  Moreover,  the  IITs  and  IIMs  need  to  give  access  to  their  institutional  journals  too.  (c) The  significant  finding  of  the  study  is  about  open  access  to  the  IRs.  The  IRs  are  partially  accessible at full-text level. This means none of the  IR  is  in  fully  open  access  mode. This  is  where  the  IITs  and  IIMs  need  to  focus  as  full-text  access  to  their  collection  enhances  research  and  publication  activities by anyone who accesses them. Considering  the  demand  for  making  public-funded  institutions’  intellectual work open, the IITs and IIMs need to be  the  front  runner.  The  Government’s  NDL  initiative  is  possibly  a  good  sign  to  address  this  issue. (d) It is found that DSpace OSS is the first choice  of IITs (including the IITs whose IRs are accessible  on intranet) and IIMs that have initiated IRs, except  IIT-Delhi  that  has  used  E-prints  platform.  (e) All  the  IRs  have  been  listed  under  library  web  pages of the respective institutes. It is a good move  by the library and information professionals/centres  that  they  are  taking  key  initiatives  in  planning,  installing,  designing  and  implementing  the  IR  on  the  websites  of  IITs  and  IIMs.  
(f) The faculty and students’ research and publications  are  well  represented  on  almost  all  the  websites  of  IITs  and  IIMs.  Many  IITs  and  IIMs  (including  those  don’t  have  their  IRs)  have  added  the  bibliographic  list  of  faculty  publications  and  student  projects  under  the  separate  web-pages  like  ‘Research’  or  ‘Publications’  or  ‘Faculty  Publications’.  Such  lists  are  not  put  under  library’s  webpages,  except  IIT- Delhi,  but  the  usage  of  the  lists  would  be  more  when  they  are  put  under  the  library  webpages.  
7. CONCLUSIONS  
The  IRs  are  the  useful  sources  of  scholarly  communication.  Institutes  that  initiate  repositories,  are valued in view of sharing the research oriented  and  public-funded  literature.  The  IRs  are  popular  among the Indian educational institutes, especially,  higher educational institutes. But the implementation  of  the  IR  needs  to  be  boomed.  In  the  context  of  this, the number of IR initiatives of IITs and IIMs is  not that impressive. This can be attributed to many  reasons  as  “repositories  are  expensive  and  time  consuming,  and  they  demand  specific  knowledge  of  programming,  content  management,  metadata  applications,  publicity,  and  internal  marketing  to  researchers”.2   The  research  institutes  especially  libraries  are  also  facing  scarcity  of  funds.  As  it  is  rightly said, “the ability to judge a nation's scientific  standing  is  vital  for  the  governments,  businesses  and trusts that must decide scientific priorities and  funding”17.  This  is  what  echoed,  in  the  recent  past,  
by Dr. C N R Rao18, the recipient of Bharata Ratna  award.  So,  funding  needs  to  be  given  importance  for  such  activities.  IITs  and  IIMs    should  not  be  an  exception  to  this.  Their  initiatives  need  to  be  supported with infrastructural, technical and financial  support. 
The IITs and IIMs are working hard to build their  own IR, if not on internet, but on intranet. However,  the centralised initiative of all these institutes is direly  needed. Government of India’s NDL initiative could  be a possible solution. But this proves positive only  when  open  access  to  all  public-funded  institutions  put  their  digital  contents  on  this  master  portal.  Till  the  NDL  officially  emerges,  the  higher  educational  institutes  need  to  strive  hard  to  launch  their  IRs  and  then  share  the  same  on  the  NDL  platform  or  any  other  centralised  platform.  
Acknowledgement 
The author acknowledges the support and help  extended  by  the  Library  staff  of  IITs  and  IIMs  to  write  this  paper.  
REFERENCES 
1. Live  Mint.  IIT,  IIM  alumni  form  half  of  India  
Inc’s  CEO  tally.  23rd March,  2009.  http://www. 
livemint.com/Politics/r8ejgMQD8tiW2uCVW43LEP/ 
IIT-IIM-alumni-form-half-of-India-Inc8217s-CEO- 
tally.html  (accessed  on  12  September  2014) 2. Sterman, L. Instituional repositories: An analysis  
of  trends  and  a  proposed  collaborative  future.  
College  and  Under-graduate  Libraries,  2014,  
21(3-4),  3. 
3.    Jandoo,  Tarveen  &  Vedamurthy,  A.  B.  Open  
access  to  scientific  information:  A  review  of  
initiatives. DESIDOC J. of Lib. and Infor. Tech.,  
2012, 32(3),  255-60. 
4.      Kumar,  Surinder.  Establishment  of  institutional  
mechanism  for  building  national  repository  in  
health sciences.  DESIDOC J. of Lib. and Infor.  
Tech.,  2012, 32(3),  277-88. 
5.    Jotwani, Daulat. Marketing of electronic resources  
in  IIT  libraries, DESIDOC  J.  of  Lib.  and  Infor.  
Tech,  2014, 34(2),  162-69. 
6.    MIRE.  Institutional  repository  in  2010  and  
beyond. In  Online Information Conference 2009,  
2  December  2009.  pp  1-8.  http://www.atmire. 
com/presentations/.../Repositories-in-2010.pdf  
(accessed  on  13  September  2014) 
7.    Jones,  C.  Institutional  repositories:  Content  
and  culture  in  an  open  access  environment.  
Chandos  Publishing,  Oxford,  2007. 
8.    IIT-Hyderabad.  http://library.iith.ac.in/pgnhome/ 
pgn.htm  (accessed  on  25  September  2014) 9. MHRD.  http://mhrd.gov.in/higher_education  
(accessed  on  28  September  2014) 
10. IIT-B. http://dspace.library.iitb.ac.in/jspui/ (accessed  
on  28  September  2014) 
291 

========5========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  4,  JuLy  2015 
11. IIT-D. http://library.iitd.ac.in/index.php/srch/vid-lib  
(accessed  on  29  September  2014) 
12. IIT-RPR. http://www.iitrpr.ac.in/library# (accessed  
on  2  October  2014) 
13. IIM-A.  http://vslir.iimahd.ernet.in:8080/xmlui/  
(accessed  on  2  October  2014) 
14. IIM-K.  http://dspace.iimk.ac.in/  (accessed  on  3  
October  2014) 
15. http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/JELJOuR_Results. 
cfm?form_name=journalbrowse&journal_id=2165542  
(accessed  on  8  October  2014) 
16. Nandi,  K.  IIT-Kharagpur  Working  on  National  
Digital  Library. The  Hindu,  4th August,  2014. 17. King, David A. The scientific impact of nations.  
292 
Nature,  2004, 430(6997),  311-16.  
18. Hindustan Times. C N R Rao is right to demand  
more funds for basic research. 18th November,  
2013. 
About  the  Author  
Mr  Santosh  C.  Hulagabali   is  working  as  a  Librarian  at  Nagindas  Khandwala  College,  Mumbai.  He  started  his  career  as  Intern  at  RBI’s  IGIDR,  Mumbai  in  2004  and  British  Council  Library,  Mumbai  2005.  He  has  published  22  papers  and  edited  4  conference  proceedings.  He  is  Project Head of Indian Conference-Abstracting Database  (ICon-AD), and Coordinator of Certificate Course in Online  Information  Sources,  Tools  and  Techniques  (COIST)  for  research  scholars.  

========6========

