DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 35, No. 2, March 2015, pp. 100-105  DOI: 10.14429/djlit.35.2.8306 
  2015, DESIDOC 
Awareness and Use of Internet Resources by Visually-impaired Students  
in Kerala: Case Study of Thiruvananthapuram District 
V.S. Midhula Soman* and K.G. Pillai Sudhier** *Department of Library & Information Science,  University of Kerala 
E-mail: vs.midhulasoman@gmail.com 
   **Library & Knowledge Centre, School of Distance Education 
University of Kerala, Thiruvananthapuram–695 034 
E-mail: kgsudhier@gmail.com 
ABSTRACT 
The aim of the study is to investigate the awareness and usage of internet resources among visually  challenged  students  in  Thiruvananthapuram  district,  Kerala.  Survey  method  and  questionnaire  tool  were used to collect data from 74 visually challenged students, who are studying in various schools of  Thiruvananthapuram. Analyses revealed that 59.46 % students are computer literates and are aware of  online resources. However, internet usage is very less among the computer literates due to the lack of  proper training. Among the respondents, a good number of students are aware of assistive technologies,  even though many of them are not using them. The mostly used assistive technology is screen reader. It  is found that students are depending on internet resources mainly for their academic purpose. Responses  shows that lack of proper training creates a big barrier in using internet and only 25.67 % are using it  very confdently. The results of the study would be helpful in getting a fairly good idea of the student’s  awareness  level  of  internet  resources  and  assistive  technologies. The  outcome  of  the  study  helps  the  school  authorities,  librarians  and  the  government  to  provide  adequate  services  and  training  to  visually  challenged students to access information without any barriers. 
Keywords: Internet  resources,  assistive  technology,  visually-impaired, Thiruvananthapuram,  
  Kerala  
1. INTRODUCTION 
Until  recently  Braille  was  the  only  option  for  visually  challenged  people  to  access  the  required  information.  Even  though  Braille  products  are  still  widely  in  use,  the  information  and  communication  technology (ICT) paved way for visually-challenged  in  new  means  of  solution  through  software  and  equipments. New hopes are streaming with the help  of assistive technology. Nowadays, they can access  the internet resources with assistive devices. As there  are  limitations  in  the  availability  of  Braille  books,  visually  challenged  students  are  now  depending  on  internet  resources  more  to  access  the  required  information. The electronic information world empower  them  to  complete  tasks  independently  which  they  would  normally  not  be  able  to  accomplish  without  the  help  of  others. 
 Access to ICT for visually-challenged students  may  require  more  resources  than  are  provided  for  other  differently-abled  students.  It  has  impacted  greatly  in  education  for  visually-challenged  in  a  number  of  ways.  They  are  electronic  technologies  
used for accessing processing, gathering, manipulating  and presenting or communicating information. The  introduction of ICT in education accelerates, enriches  and  deepens  basic  skills  in  reading,  writing  and   it  can  motivate  and  engage  students  to  learn  as  they become more independent and responsible for  their  learning.  Moreover,  ICT  helps  to  encourage  students  to  become  active  participants  in  social,  cultural,  and  economic  developments.  ICT  can  be  multi-media  for  instructional  delivery.  It  can  be  delivered  in  textual,  audio,  visual,  and  audio- visual  forms.  
The use of internet and e-resources are increasing  worldwide  day-by-day.  The  Web  environment  is  creating a new gateway for visually-challenged people  to access information quickly and easily without any  barriers  and  support  from  others.  Introduction  of  ICT  has  impacted  the  traditional  education  system  of  visually-challenged  students.  Hence,  an  attempt  is  made  to  study  whether  the  visually-challenged  students are aware of these advanced technologies  and  whether  these  services  provided  by  assistive  
Received 26 December 2014, revised 16 February 2015, online published 20 March 2015 

========1========

SOMAN  & S UDHIER: AWARENESS AND  U SE OF  I NTERNET  R ESOURCES By THE  V ISUALLy-IMPAIRED  S TUDENTS IN  K ERALA 
devices are reaching them properly. To know about  the role of internet in education,  is  also  an  aim  of  the  study.  
The study investigates the awareness and usage  of  internet  resources  among  visually-challenged  students in Thiruvananthapuram, the capital of Kerala.  Among the four Government schools for blind students  in  Kerala,  one  is  situated  in  Thiruvananthapuram  district.  
2. REVIEW  OF  LITERATURE 
Various studies were carried out to find out the  ICT  skills,  awareness  about  assistive  devices  and  information  needs  of  visually-challenged  students.  The use of ICT by the visually-impaired students who  are  studying  in  the  Calicut  University,  Kerala  was  examined by Haneefa & Syamili1. Findings revealed  that most of the students who participated in the study  are computer literates, and they use mobile phones  frequently. It was also found that even though most  of the students have knowledge in using computer,  majority of them requires training in using internet.  Role of ICT in meeting the information requirements  of visually-challenged people is highlighted by Midhula  Soman  &  Sudhier2.  The  major  assistive  devices  available for visually- challenged users were presented  the conclusion was that utilization of ICT has made  a  remarkable  shift  in  the  structure  of  information  sources  for  visually-challenged  people. 
Adetoro3   carried  out  a  survey  study  to  assess  the provision of information materials in alternative  formats, in the aspect of its availability, access and  level of use by the visually-impaired in public libraries  in  Southwestern  Nigeria.  The  result  revealed  that  alternative  format  availability  was  inadequate  and  e-resources  were  not  available.  According  to  the  findings  of  the  study,  Braille  was  the  most  utilised  format. A study conducted by Kumar and Sanaman4  to  find  out  the  preference  of  e-resources  used  by  visually  challenged  users  in  the  leading  National  Capital Region of India revealed that ICT developed  a  positive  impact  in  the  lives  of  differently-abled  people and it helps them to live independently. The  authors came to the conclusion that, internet is the  most preferred medium used by visually-challenged  users  in  accessing  information.  
 Fichten 
5, et al., 
  made  a  study  to  find  out  how  ICT  related  needs  of  differently-abled  students  are  being  met  at  higher  educational  institutions  and  at  home.  The  study  was  conducted  among  differently-abled  students  in  Canadian  University  and  junior/community,  colleges.  The  finding  show  that  students’  ICT  related  needs  are  generally  well  met on campus than at home and at colleges than  at universities. Singh6   investigated whether Indian  libraries  are  friendly  for  visually-challenged  users.  He  conducted  the  study  among  100  users  using  
prominent  libraries  in  Delhi.  The  study  observes  that ICT gadgets are becoming the true companion  of visually-challenged users. The study tried to find  out the major barriers that visually challenged users  are facing while seeking information, and the major  reasons found were lack of audio and Braille books,  and the lack of computers to read electronic text and  use internet resources. This shows that internet and  e-resources  are  playing  a  major  role  in  their  lives.  Another  study  conducted  by  Singh7   analysed  the  information seeking behaviour of visually-challenged  people in selected libraries in Delhi. To identify the  available  information  sources  for  these  users  in  the  selected  libraries  and  to  correlate  the  sources  available  with  their  information  needs.  Analysis  revealed  that  most  of  the  users  use  both  Braille  and  audio  books  in  the  form  of  audio  cassettes  more  than  any  other  sources.  
Pufflen8 focused  on  the  relationship  between  the  ICT  trainings  offered  to  the  visually-challenged  people and their competencies in online information  processing. The study tried to analyse how visually  challenged  people  perceive  their  participation  in  society  through  ICT.  Sharma9   in  her  study  looked  at  the  library  and   information  services  offered  to  visually-challenged students in Rajasthan University  library. Through the study, she suggests the adequate  service that has to be offered to visually-challenged  users,  which  helps  them  in  accessing  information  without  barriers 
It is clear from the literature that awareness about  computer and related technologies among visually- challenged users were very low. But nowadays with  the  advancement  of  technologies,  ICT  became  a  part  of  day  today  life  of  visually-challenged  people.  Awareness and use of internet and multimedia resources  are  increasing  among  visually-challenged  people.  The  review  of  studies  shows  that  there  is  scarcity  of studies related to the information requirements of  visually-challenged  in  Kerala.  Literatures  should  be  encouraged in this area, which will help to give additional  information  about  the  needs  of  visually-challenged  and  how  they  can  be  met.  
3.  OBJECTIVES  
The  objectives  of  the  study  are  to: 
• Determine  the  students  awareness  about  the  
internet  and  electronic  resources 
• Know  the  usage  of  internet  resources  among  
visually-challenged  students 
• Find out the awareness level and use of assistive  
technologies  among  students 
• Find  out  the  popular  internet  resources  for  the  
visually-challenged  students  and 
• Identify  the  technologies  available  for  
visually-challenged students to reduce the barriers  
and  access  to  information 
101 

========2========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  2, MARCH   2015 
4. METHODOLOGY 
The study is based on a questionnaire based survey  of visually-challenged students in Thiruvananthapuram  district. The study included 74 respondents from 12  Government  schools,  including  one  special  school  for  blind  in  Thiruvananthapuram  district.  Students  studying in high school and higher secondary sections  are included in the study. A structured questionnaire  was designed for the purpose of data collection and  distributed among the students. As the respondents  are visually-challenged, data required for the study  was personally filled up through interacting with them.  The collected data was analysed using latest version  of  MS-Excel  for  appropriate  statistical  analysis. 
5. 
ANALYSIS 
5.1  Gender-wise  Distribution 
Majority  of  the  students  participated  in  the  study  are  females  (52.70  %)  and  47.30  %  are  male  students.  
5.2  Awareness  of  Computer  and  Internet        
Facility 
In this information technology age, it is essential  to analyse the awareness of computer and internet  facility among these students. Students were asked  to indicate their awareness of computer and internet  facility  and  the  result  reveals  that  44  students  (59.46 %) responded positively that they are aware of  computer and related technologies, but 30 (40.54 %)  are  not  aware  of  internet  resources.  
5.3 Place  of Access 
Among the 44 students who are using computer  and  internet,  26  students  are  accessing  it  from  their  home.  18  responded  that  they  are  using  internet  from  the  school  IT  lab  and  no  student  is  accessing  internet  from  internet  café  or  other  outside  sources.  
5.4  Medium  of  Using  Internet 
This question was intended to know the medium  that  students  are  more  comfortable  for  accessing  online  resources.  The  study  also  aimed  to  find  out  their  level  of  knowledge  in  technologies  that  helps  them  to  access  internet  in  mobile  phones.  It  shows  that  no  student  is  using  mobile  phone  to  access  internet  and  only  5  students  are  using  laptops. Among the 44 students who have computer  literacy, 39 are using desktop computers to access  online  information.  
5.5  Frequency  of  Using  Internet 
Only  (59.46  %)  are  aware  of  internet.  Among   them only 12.16 % are using it daily. Students who  are  using  internet  monthly  (31.08  %)  are  greater  than  that  of  using  it  weekly  (16.22  %)  and  daily  
102 
Table 1. Frequency of using internet 
S. No. 1. 2. 3. 4. Total 
Frequency Daily Weekly Monthly Rarely 
No. of respondents 9 ( 12.16% ) 12 (16.22%) 23 (31.08%) 30 (40.54%) 74 (100%) 
(Table  1).  30  students  (40.54  %)  are  not  using  internet.  The  inconsistency  in  using  internet  may  be  due  to  the  lack  of  proper  training  and  lack  of  knowledge  in  using  internet. 
5.6  Purpose  of  Using  Internet 
As the population under study belongs to student’s  category,  it  is  essential  to  know  the  purpose  of  using  internet.  As  Braille  was  the  only  medium  to  access  information  till  recently;  the  analysis  helps  to  know  the  influence  of  internet  in  education  for  visually-challenged  students.  As  shown  in  the  Table  2,  majority  of  students  (38)  uses  internet  for  their academic purpose which is a positive response  towards the influence of internet in education. Even  though  there  are  44  students  who  responded  that  they  have  knowledge  in  using  internet,  only  16  students are using internet to check their e-mail. It  is also revealed from the study that only 16 students  are  having  e-mail  id.  11  students  responded  they  are  using  internet  to  read  online  magazines  and  newspapers. Even though most of the students are  aware of social networking sites like Facebook, Twitter,  etc.,  only  6  students  are  using  it.  9  students  are  using  internet  for  other  purposes  and  no  students  are  using  internet  for  reading  E-books.  As  books  are changing to E-Books nowadays, training should  
Table 2. Purpose of using internet 
S. No. Purpose 
1. 
Academic purpose 
No. of  respondents 38 
2. 3. 
Check email 
Check online magazines/ newspapers/ journals E-books 
Check social networking sites Others 
16 11 
4. 5. 6. 
0 6 9 
be given to visually challenged students to use and  access E-Books which they can use without the help  of  any  other  person.  As  the  question  was  type  of  multiple category and the respondents were allowed  to  tick  more  than  one  choice,  so  the  percentage  exceeds  100. 
5.7  Confidence  Level  in  Internet  Use 
Table  3  represents  the  confidence  level  of  students in using internet and related services. The  

========3========

SOMAN  & S UDHIER: AWARENESS AND  U SE OF  I NTERNET  R ESOURCES By THE  V ISUALLy-IMPAIRED  S TUDENTS IN  K ERALA 
Table 3. Confdence in using internet 
S. No 
Purpose 
 Excellent 
1. 
Surfng internet 
19 (25.67 %) 
2. 
Searching with keywords 
21 (28.38 %) 
3. 
Using e-mail 
11 (14.86 %) 
4. 
Playing audio/ video online 
9 (12.17 %) 
5. 
Downloading fles 
24 (32.43 %) 
6. 
Using social networking sites 
5 (6.76 %) 
analysis reveals that majority of the students shows  their  confidence  level  is  poor  in  using  internet.  
Among  the  44  %  students  who  are  aware  of  internet  very  few  (25.67  %)  are  confident  in  using  it.  To  download  files  students  require  capability  of  searching  with  keywords  in  search  engines,  and  students who have average capability (31.08 %) in  using it is greater than that of those who are using  it  excellently  (28.38  %).  As  discussed  earlier  only  21.62  %  students  are  using  email  services,  and  14.86 % are using it excellently. 32.43 % responded  that  their  level  of  confidence  in  downloading  files  from  internet  is  excellent,  while  22.98  %  indicated  that  their  level  of  confidence  in  downloading  files  as  average.  63.51  %  stated  that  they  are  not  confident  in  playing  videos  and  games.  Though  Facebook, twitter and other social networking sites  are  becoming  part  of  our  lives,  only  8.11  %  are  using  it. Among  them  only  6.76  %  responded  their  confidence  level  in  using  it  as  excellent.  
5.8 Awareness  of Assistive  Technologies 
Assistive  technologies  are  devices  that  helps  visually challenged people to access information in  alternative  formats  easily. There  are  many  devices  for  visually  challenged  people  that  help  to  access  computer and internet without the support of others.  So, the awareness of assistive technologies among  visually challenged is an important aspect that shows  their  knowledge  in  ICT  and  recent  advancements.  
Table 4. Awareness of assistive technologies 
S. No. 
1. 2. 
Total 
Awareness No. of  
respondents Aware of assistive technologies 42 (95.45 %) Not aware of assistive  2 (4.55 %) technologies 
44 (100 %) 
Average 
Poor 
Total 
25 (33.79 %) 
30 (40.54 %) 
74 (100 %) 
23 (31.08 %) 
30 (40.54 %) 
74 (100 %) 
5 (6.76 %) 
58 (78.38 %) 
74 (100 %) 
18 (24.32 %) 
47 (63.51 %) 
74 (100 %) 
17 (22.98 %) 
33 (44.59 %) 
74 (100 %) 
1 (1.35 %) 
68 (91.89 %) 
74 (100 %) 
Table 4 reveals the level of knowledge of assistive  technologies among visually challenged students. It  is  clear  from  the  study  that  42  students  (95.45  %)  are  aware  about  assistive  technologies  and  online  software’s, which shows a positive attitude towards  new  technologies. 
5.9  Use  of Assistive  Technologies 
Table 5 presents the assistive technologies and  adaptive  devices  that  visually-challenged  students  prefer  mostly  to  access  information.  The  study  shows that 52.27 % students prefer screen reader,  which  helps  them  to  access  information  that  is  being  displayed  on  the  screen.  Screen  reader  keeps  track  of  what  the  computer  is  doing  and  speaks  or  magnifies  the  necessary  information  that  user  needs  to  use  the  computer.  Among  the  rest  of  the  respondents,  15.91  %  depends  screen  magnifier  that  allows  them  to  enlarge  text  and  graphical  information  displayed  on  the  screen.  31.82 % students responded that they prefer other  assistive  devices  like,  DAISy   books,  text  readers,  magnification  devices,  audio  books,  etc.  Through  the  study  it  is  found  that  students  are  depending  on recorders like angel players for their educational  purposes  mostly.  It  is  also  revealed  that  most  of  the  students  are  aware  of  software’s  like  ORCA,  JAWS,  and  other  technologies  that  enables  them  to  access  information  online.  Even  though  there  were  options  like  adaptive  keyboards  and  speech  synthesisers,  no  student  responded  to  it. 
Table 5. Use of assistive technologies 
S. No. 1. 2. 3. Total 
Adaptive devices Screen Reader Screen Magnifer Others 
No. of respondents (%) 23 (52.27 %) 
7 (15.91 %) 
14 (31.82 %) 
44 (100 %)   
103 

========4========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  2, MARCH   2015 
5.10  Method  of  Learning  Assistive  
  Technologies  
 The visually-challenged students require special  training in using internet and assistive technologies.  They were asked to indicate the methods of learning  computer,  internet  and  assistive  technologies.  
From the responses mentioned in Table 6, it is  clear that out of the 44 computer literates, majority of  the students 26 (59.09 %) got training from the school  authority, and 13 (29.55 %) students stated that they  attended short term courses for learning internet and  to get knowledge about assistive technologies. Very  few  students  (6.81  %)  got  assistance  from  friends  and family members and 2 students responded that  they  studied  it  without  the  help  of  anyone. 
Table 6. Method of learning assistive technologies 
S. No. 1. 2. 3. 
4. Total 
Method of learning No. of respondents  Self learning 2 (4.55 %) Short-term courses 13 (29.55 %) Through friends and family 3 (6.81 %) members 
Formal schooling 26 (59.09 %) 
44 (100 %) 
5.11  Opinion  on  Use  of Assistive      
  Technologies 
The students were asked to express their opinion  and  to  rate  themselves  about  their  ability  to  use  assistive  technologies.  No  student  was  confident  enough about their ability to use internet resources  and  assistive  technologies.(Table  7) 
Only 19 (43.18 %) students opined that they have  average knowledge in using assistive technologies.  14  (31.82  %)  students  indicated  their  ability  to  use  it  is  good,  where  as  7  opined  that  they  are  not  confident  and  are  bad  in  using  it. 
6. DISCUSSIONS AND  SUGGESTIONS 
The  findings   of  the  study  agreed  with  the  results  of  the  study  of  Kumar  &  Sanaman  that  internet is the most preferred medium of access to  
Table 7. Opinion on the use of assistive technologies 
S. No. 
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Total 
Ability to use assistive  No. of  technologies respondents Very good 0 
Good 14 (31.82 %) Average 19 (43.18 %) Bad 7 (15.91 %) Very bad 4 (9.09 %) 
44 (100 %) 
104 
information among the majority of visually-challenged  people.  It  is  found  from  the  study  that  a  majority  (59.46 %) of visually-challenged students are aware  of  internet  resources  and  assistive  technologies  that  help  them  to  access  information.  But  lack  of  proper  training  in  using  internet  and  e-resources  and  non-availability  of  resources  is  still  a  barrier  to  access  information  for  the  visually-challenged  students. Lack of computer literacy among the rest  (40.54  %)  shows  a  negative  impact  towards  the  influence  of  ICT  in  their  world.  It  is  observed  that  there is no student who participated in the study is  using mobile phones to access internet. It is analysed  as  a  contradictory  fact  that  visually-challenged  students  studying  in  university  level  are  using  mobile phones frequently and use internet whereas  students in formal schooling who participated in the  study  are  not  even  aware  of  mobile  technologies  available to them. The significant factor that hinders  the  use  of  assistive  devices  among  students  who  are  aware  of  assistive  technologies  is  the  low  level  of  skills  in  using  them.  It  is  also  found  that  a  good  number  of  students  are  not  aware  of  the  assistive  devices  that  help  to  access  information  in  alternative  formats  easily.  
The  findings  of  the  study  have  enabled  the  investigators  to  offer  some  feasible  suggestions: • Proper  computer  training  should  be  given  to  
visually-challenged students, which reduces the  
barriers  in  accessing  information.  
• Proper training should be provided to make them  
aware  of  the  softwares  and  tools  available  in  
the  mobile  phones  to  access  internet. 
• The authorities should take initiatives in providing  
awareness about assistive technologies and to  
develop  confidence  in  using  them. 
• The  authorities  need  to  review  their  policies  
and school curriculum by including technological  
development  so  that  it  will  be  beneficial  to  
students in accessing information with the help  
of  latest  technologies. 
• Students should be given motivation by conducting  
awareness  programmes  in  using  internet  and  
electronic resources which helps to increase their  
confidence  level  in  using  these  resources. 
7.   CONCLUSIONS 
The  study  reminds  that  the  priority  needs  of  these students are not special, they are basic. Even  though  most  of  the  students  are  computer  literate  they are not enjoying the benefits of ICT, due to the  unavailability  of  resources. Today,  various  types  of  assistive  devices  are  available  to  help  the  visually  challenged  to  use  mobile  phones,  but  no  student  who  participated  in  the  study  is  aware  of  mobile  technologies.  Technology  can  reduce  the  effects  

========5========

SOMAN  & S UDHIER: AWARENESS AND  U SE OF  I NTERNET  R ESOURCES By THE  V ISUALLy-IMPAIRED  S TUDENTS IN  K ERALA 
of  impairment  by  improved  activity  and  greater  participation  to  promote  inclusion  of  differently- abled  students.  It  is  revealed  that  no  student  was  confident enough about their ability in using internet  resources  and  assistive  technologies. 
The  school  authorities  must  take  initiatives  in  introducing  internet  resources  and  assistive  technologies  to  visually-challenged  students  and  they  should  get  proper  training  in  using  it.  Then  only,  they  can  participate  in  the  general,  cultural  and  societal  activities.  It  can  be  concluded  that  even  in  this  digital  world,  the  real  challenge  is  not  the  production  and  storing  of  information,  but  the  dissemination  of  information. 
REFERENCES 
1. Haneefa,  K.  Mohammed  &  Syamili,  C.  Use  of  
information  and  communication  technology  by  
visually impaired students: A study in University  
of  Calicut,  Kerala.  DESIDOC  J.  Lib.  &  Inf.  
Technol.,   2014,  34(4),  342-48.  
2. Midhula  Soman,  V.S.  &  Sudhier,  K.G.  Role  of  
information  and  communication  technology  in  
meeting the information needs of visually impaired.  
In  E-resources and e-learning: Challenges and  
opportunities for libraries edited by Abdul Azeez  
T.A.  et  al.  University  of  Calicut,  Calicut,   2013,  
250-54. 
3. Adetoro,  Niran.  Information  provision  to  the  
visually impaired in alternative formats in Nigeria:  
Are  public  libraries  up  to  the  task?  J.  of  Inf.  
Sci.  Theo.  &  Pract. 2014, 2(2),  48-58. 4. Kumar,  Shailendra  &  Sanaman,  Gareema.  
Preference  and  use  of  electronic  information  
and resources by blind/visually impaired in NCR  
libraries in India. J. of Inf. Sci. Theo. & Pract.  
2013, 1(2),  69-83. 
5. Fichten,  Catherine  S.,  et  al.  Information  and  
communication  technology  related  needs  of  
college and university students with disabilities.  
Res.  in  Learning  Technol.,   2012,  20,  323-44.  6. Singh, K.P. & Moirangthem, Easther. Are Indian  
libraries VIP-friendly? Information use and information  
seeking  behaviour  of  visually  impaired  people  
in  Delhi  libraries. Lib.  Philoso.  &  Pract., 2010  
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/libphilprac/374/  
        (accessed  in  January  2014). 
7. Singh,  K.P.  Information  seeking  behaviour  of  
visually challenged people: A case study of select  
libraries  in  Delhi.  In  Library  and  information  
8. 
9. 
science in digital age-essays in honour of  Prof.  M.P.  Satya  edited  by  Jagatar  Singh,  et  al.  Ess  Ess  Publications,  New  Delhi,  2009,102-113. Pufflen,  C.V.  ICT-related  skills  and  needs  of  blind and visually impaired people. SIGACCESS  Newsletter,   2009,  44-48. 
Sharma, Prabha. Library and information services  in  higher  education  for  visually  challenged  students:  Study  of  the  Rajasthan  University  library,  Jaipur.  In   Challenges  for  South  Asian  resources  and  information  services:  Essays  in  honour  of  Dr  Ravindra  N.  Sharma,  edited  by  Rajwant  Singh  Chilana.  Concept  Publishing  Company,  New  Delhi,  2008,  pp.132-41. 
About  the Authors 
Ms.  Midhula  Soman   is  a  Research  Scholar  in  the  Department.  of  Library  &  Information  Science,  University  of  Kerala.  She  obtained  her  MLIS  from  the  University  of  Kerala  and  BSc  Botany  from  the  University  College,  Thiruvananthapuram.  She  has  presented  7  research  papers  at  national  and  international  conferences,  LIS  journals  and  books.  Her  areas  of  interest  includes:  Digital  reference  service,  user  studies,  assistive  technologies  and  digital  libraries. 
Dr  Sudhier  K.G.  Pillai  is  presently  working  as  Librarian in the School of Distance Education (SDE),  University  of  Kerala.  He  obtained  his  MSc,  MLIS  and  PhD  (LIS)  from  the  AMU,  Aligarh  and  the  University  of  Kerala  respectively.  He  worked  as  a  Librarian  in  the  various  teaching  and  research  departments  of  the  Kerala  University  for  several  years  and  Assistant  Professor  in  the  Department  of  Library  &  Information  Science.  He  is  having  18  years  of  Experience  in  the  field  of  LIS  profession.  He is a Research Guide of the University of Kerala  and M.S. University, Tirunelveli since 2008. He has  published  32  research  papers  in  refereed  journals  and 55 papers in the seminar and conferences, as  book  chapters  and  popular  articles  and  edited  one  book.  Based  on  the  Scopus  database,  his h-index  is  5.  His  areas  of  interest  include:  Scientometrics,  bibliometric  laws,  citation  analysis  and  institutional  productivity. 
105 

========6========

