DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 35, No. 2, March 2015, pp. 106-112  DOI: 10.14429/djlit.35.2.8312 
 2015, DESIDOC 
 Study of Employability and Needed Skills for LIS Graduates 
    Sanghamitra Pradhan  
            Department of Library and Information Science, Faculty of Arts 
    The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda 
    Vadodara, Gujarat - 390 002 
AbStrAct 
This paper discusses the employability of LIS graduates, its trend, and the skills needed to enhance  employability. It is based on a study conducted on the employability of LIS graduates of the Maharaja  Sayajirao  University  of  Baroda  over  a  period  of  ten  years.  Findings  show  that  employability  of  LIS  graduates is nearly 100 %. Employability trends can be traced to changes in the nature of employers,  salary and designation in recent years. Further, communication skills and IT skills are found to be very  indispensable  employability  skills  that  the  LIS  graduates  should  possess. This  fnding  has  implications  towards  regular  revamping  of  LIS  curriculum  design  in  a  way  that  would  enable  the  LIS  graduates  to  meet the expectations of changing information job market. 
Keywords: Employability, employability skills, employability trend, LIS graduates 
1. INtroductIoN 
Library  and  information  science  (LIS)  schools  throughout the world are increasingly challenged to  develop  such  human  resources  who  could  fit  the  changing  information  environment.Today,  LIS  job  market, driven by social and technological changes,  calls  for  a  new  cadre  of  skilled  and  competent  professionals  to  deliver  information  effectively  to  all.  India,  one  of  the  rapidly  growing  economies  of  the  world,  needs  to  be  concerned  about  this  trend  and  must  focus  on  quality  LIS  education.The  LIS  schools  are  required  to  appraise  the  employability  status  of  their  products  in  the  job  market  and  accordingly develop new competencies to enhance  employability  of  their  LIS  graduates.  A  review  of  trends relating to employability of LIS professionals  on  regular  basis  needs  to  be  done  to  understand  the  employability  status  of  the  graduates  and  their  relevance; changing requirements of the job market;  and  the  corresponding  changes  to  be  made  in  the  curriculum.  
1.1  LIS  Education  in  India 
During it’s more than 100 years of journey, LIS  education in India has witnessed many revolutionary  changes. Once started as a vocational library course,  it  has  now  transformed  into  a  fully-fledged  library  and  information  science  discipline  incorporating  various  multidisciplinary  ideas  and  emerging  information  and  telecommunication  technologies  that  can  withstand  the  challenges  thrown  upon  by  the  digital  environment.  
Received 26 December 2014, online published 20 March 2015 
Most of the library schools in India have redesigned  their  curriculum  several  times  to  accommodate  the  contemporary  information  management  practices.  No  longer,the  libraries  are  required  to  perform  traditional  jobs  only. An  array  of  modern  practices  and services based on technology are implemented  in  the  recent  past  which  actually  transitioned  the  libraries  in  India  and  also  helped  in  elevating  the  status  of  LIS  professionals  to  some  extent.  Efforts  have been made to adapt the basic framework for LIS  courses as well as the model curriculum prescribed  by the Curriculum Development Committee (CDC) of  UGC (University Grant Commission, 2001)1  by most  of  the  LIS  schools.  A  balance  between  traditional  and  technological  components  is  observed  in  their  syllabi  to  fulfill  the  objectives  to  develop  both  core  professional  skills  and  IT  skills  among  the  LIS  job  aspirants. 
At  present  there  are  various  levels  of  LIS  education  starting  from  one  year  basic  bachelor  of  LIS and one year master in LIS degree programme  to higher level research programs in LIS are being  imparted  mostly  in  university-level  institutions,  in  few  training  institutes,  library  associations,  etc.  A  survey  of  websites  of  Indian  universities  reveals  around 120 universities offer one year BLIS, 70 offer  one  year  MLIS,  21  offer  two  year  integrated  MLIS,  16  offer  MPhil  and  63  offer  PhD  programmes. The  passed-out  students  from  these  large  number  of  universities constitute the available human resources  every  year  and  expected  to  be  absorbed  in  the  LIS  job  market. 

========1========

PRADhAN: STUDy OF EMPLOyABILITy AND NEEDED SkILLS FOR LIS GRADUATES 
1.2 Employability  of  LIS  Graduates  
It  is  undoubted  that  to  be  employable  in  the  today’s  libraries  and  information  centres  the  LIS  graduates have to equip themselves with the necessary  advanced knowledge, skills and attitudes. however  employability of LIS graduates in India is governed  by a number of factors. First, India, being a populous  country  and  the  largest  democracy  of  the  world,  requires  huge  number  of  libraries  and  information  centres which can deliver information for the inclusive  development  of  all  the  citizens.  Demand  for  an  equally  large  number  of  LIS  professionals  is  there  to  manage  these  libraries  located  in  academic,  industrial, and government sectors. Further, libraries  exist  in  many  forms:  many  with  just  a  solo  post  to  run  the  show  on  one-man-ship  basis  to  a  large  number of specialised positions to extend an array  of information services. A glance at the employment  portals  suggests  that  there  is  an  increasing  need  of LIS professionals to manage libraries of all sizes  and  forms.  Second,  if  one  looks  at  the  supply  side,  there  is  an  unplanned  proliferation  of  library  schools  and  many  offer  LIS  education  without  any  heed  to  accreditation7.  Curriculum  designing  is  inefficient  in  many  schools  since  they  hardly  make  effort to keep pace with the changing competencies  owing  to  development  in  ICT,  interdisciplinary  research,  and  diverse  user  expectations.  Further,  the  problem  becomes  more  complex  when  these  schools produce surplus number of graduates than  the required manpower. Then, obviously one would  question: Are the graduates coming out from these  schools  employable?  Since  employers  expect  the  job aspirants to be equipped with the skills suitable  to the changing information environment doubts are  raised  about  the  quality  of  LIS  graduates;  of  them  how  many  could  grab  the  opportunity.  
To deal with the above situation implications are  there  for  the  LIS  educators  to  design  the  curricula  which  can  develop  the  necessary  knowledge  and  skills. At the same time the LIS professionals should  be  aware  of  the  changing  job  requirements  and  should  learn  to  build  up  certain  competencies  not  only  to  be  employable  but  also  to  maintain  the  job  as  well  as  to  contribute  qualitatively  towards  the  LIS  profession.  
2. LItErAturE   r EvIEw 
A  review  of  literature  on  employability  of  LIS  graduates reports that a sizeable number of studies  have been carried out to explore employability skills,  compatibility  of  LIS  education  and  employability,  employers’  expectations,  employability  trends  and  so  on.  
Okamoto & Polger5   carried out a content analysis  of  149  job  advertisements  meant  for  Canadian  and  American  academic  libraries  and  found  that  
marketing  and  promotional  skills;  responsibilities  such as public relations/liaison; outreach activities;  and web communications are increasingly important  employability  skills  for  academic  librarians. 
Opinion of LIS professionals in Pakistan in relation  to the LIS curricula and its relevance to market needs  was analysed by Warraich & Ameen.8  The  findings  show  that  analytical  capabilities,  decision-making  skills, technological skills, and communication skills,  are indispensable to enhance the employability of LIS  professionals.  But  the  challenge  lies  in  translating  these skills into curricula and its proper implementation  to  transfer  them  among  students.  This  finding  has  gathered  support  from  findings  of  similar  studies  like that of Buarki, hepworth  & Murray1,  Safahieh   & Asemi6,  and  Missingham4.  Communication  skills  and  ICT  skills  have  been  recognised  as  essential  qualities  for  LIS  graduates’  employment  as  found  in  these  studies.  
krishankumar  &  Sharma3   pointed  out  some  of  the  major  issues  that  affect  the  employability  of  fresh  LIS  graduate.  (1)  internal  promotion  policy,  (2) proxy librarians-teachers are made as librarians  and (3) entry of non- professionals (IT professionals)  into  professional  positions  
Chakravarty & Sarkhel2  studied the compatibility of  LIS education with the today’s market demand for LIS  professionals in India and found that there is a gap  between them. Lack of placement cell and medium  of  instruction  often  proved  to  be  major  hindrances  in  getting  jobs.  Unlike  other  professional  courses  LIS  course  providers  rarely  offer  any  placement  opportunity. Further, LIS students with non-English- medium  schooling  background  do  not  fare  well  in  the  job  market  as  the  LIS  job  world  has  become  more sophisticated where communication skills matter  much. Career counseling and placement opportunities  for  passed  out  students;  industry-LIS  interface;  development of soft skill and information literacy as  a  part  of  LIS  curriculum;  and  better  infrastructure  to  impart  core  and  technological  skills  are  some  of  the  recommendations  made  by  the  authors  to  enhance  employability  of  LIS  graduates.  
A  synthesis  of  these  reviews  provides  an  understanding  that  studies  on  employability  of  LIS  graduates were mostly conducted either to find the  employability  skills  in  current  context  or  to  explore  the  gap  between  the  LIS  curricula  and  the  market  needs; and to provide an insight into the employability  trend which has been affected by certain issues as  raised by experts. however these studies could not  help much in understanding the employability of LIS  graduates  of  any  particular  Indian  library  school.  Thus the present study is an attempt to find out the  employability of LIS graduates of Maharaja Sayajirao  University  of  Baroda  which  has  been  taken  as  the  sample  for  conducting  this  study.  
107 

========2========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  2,  MARCh  2015 
3.   o bjEctIvES 
The  objectives  of  the  present  study  are  to: • Find  out  employability  of  LIS  graduates  of  
Maharaja  Sayajirao  University  of  Baroda • Explore  the  employability  trends  of  LIS  
graduates 
• Explore  the  employability  skills 
• Suggest  how  to  enhance  employability  of  LIS  
graduates 
4. MEthodoLoGy  
The  present  study  was  based  on  a  survey  of  fresh  LIS  graduates.  A  total  of  84  students,  who  completed  their  Master  of  Library  and  Information  Science (MLIS) degree course during 10 academic  years (from 2003-04 to 2012-13) and graduated from  the Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, Vadodara  were taken in this study. These passed out students  took jobs in different library and information centres  at local, state and national level. All of them, i.e., 84  fresh LIS graduates were the target population and  at  the  same  time  they  also  constituted  the  sample  group. Data for the study was collected in two phases: Phase 1: Data on first employment of the fresh LIS  graduates was collected from the records maintained  in  the  Dept.  of  Library  and  Information  science,  Maharaja  Sayajirao  University  of  Baroda.  As  it  is  a  continuing  trend  that  the  passed  out  students  immediately  get  employed,  it  is  easy  to  track  and  keep their employment details when they are still in  contact with their alma mater. however, employment  details of 79 out of 84 LIS passed out graduates could  be collected for the study. The rest, five graduates  could  not  get  back  to  the  department  regarding  their employment information.Therefore, employment  details  of  79  graduates  were  collected  to  explore  the  employability  of  these  LIS  graduates. Phase 2: To examine the trend in employability and  to explore the employability skills a follow up survey  was  carried  out.  however,  all  the  passed  out  LIS  graduates  of  ten  years  could  not  be  contacted  for  this  round  of  data  collection.  
A  brief  structured  questionnaire  was  designed  to  administer  among  the  LIS  graduates  who  have  moved on in their career. In phase 2, data from the  LIS  graduates  was  collected  mainly  through  e-mail  contacts  maintained  in  the  department  records.  In  some  cases  data  was  collected  personally  from  the  participants  and  phone  call  was  made  for  follow  up  as  well  as  for  updating  data.  Although  the  questionnaires  were  distributed  among  all  the  79  LIS  graduates  through  e-mail,  only  few  i.e.,  40  responded  to  that.    
The  scope  of  the  present  study  is  to  explore  the  employability  of  LIS  graduates  through  the  analysis  of  employment  details  of  LIS  graduates,  
108 
who have passed out the MLIS degree course from  the  Maharaja  Sayajirao  University  of  Baroda  over  a  period  of  ten  years  only.  
5. ANALySIS 
Following  four  aspects  have  been  analysed:  (a)  LIS  graduates  profile,  (b)  Employability  of  LIS  graduates; (c) Employability trends of LIS graduates  and  (d)  Employability  skills. 
5.1 LIS  Graduates  Profile 
Demographic  information  of  a  total  of  84  MLIS  students, passed out during the ten academic years  2003-04  to  2012-13  from  the  Dept.  of  Library  and  Information  science,  Maharaja  Sayajirao  University  of Baroda is presented. Table 1. The ratio of female  students is more than the male students in the LIS  department. There were 60 (71 %) female students  while  male  students  were  24  (29  %)  of  the  total  passed  out  students.  It  can  be  interpreted  that  librarianship  is  a  preferred  profession  among  the  female  students  than  the  male  students. 
5.2 Employability  of  LIS  Graduates 
Employment  data  about  the  LIS  graduates  shows  that  they  had  joined  the  profession  shortly  after their course completion. Most of them got jobs  immediately  after  they  passed  out.  Many  got  the  privilege  of  securing  jobs  even  when  their  MLIS  degree  result  was  yet  to  be  declared.  Majority  were absorbed within one or two months after they  completed  their  graduation.  This  trend  is  observed  throughout  the  tenure  of  ten  years.  This  fact  can  be  interpreted  that  employability  of  LIS  graduates  is  high  and  there  is  a  better  scope  for  them  in  the  LIS job market in India. Table 2 provides details of  the  first  job  taken  up  by  the  fresh  LIS  graduates  in  different  types  of  libraries.  
table  1. total    no.  of  LIS  graduates  during  the  years  
2003-04 to 2012-13 
S. No. Academic  
year 1 2003-04 2 2004-05 3 2005-06 4 2006-07 5 2007-08 6 2008-09 7 2009-10 8 2010-11 9 2011-12 10 2012-13 total 
Female Male total no. of  
students 3 2 5 
4 1 5 
3 2 5 
6 4 10 8 1 9 
10 0 10 8 2 10 5 5 10 5 5 10 8 2 10 60 (71 %) 24 (29 %)  84 (100 %) 

========3========

PRADhAN: STUDy OF EMPLOyABILITy AND NEEDED SkILLS FOR LIS GRADUATES 
Table 2. Details of frst employment of the LIS graduates 
S. No. 
year of passing 
college uni- library versity  
library 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 
No. of  
em- 
ployed  
School students  
library out of  
total 
5 (5) 
5 (5) 3 4 (5) 
9 (10) 1 9 (9) 3 10 (10) 4 9 (10) 2 
            Employment in different types of libraries 
1 
3 2 2 5 
1 1 1 
8 
2011 
9 (10) 
2 
5 
1 
9 10 total 
2012 2013 
10 (10) 9 (10) 79 (84)  
2 1 18 
5 4 26 
5 
designa- tion* 
Salary range 
higher  Ed. Insti- tutes 
Public  sector  library 
Private/  industri- al sector  library 
1 
1 
3 
2 2 
3 2 3 2 1 1 
1 
L L, LA L, DO L, LA L, AL, LA L, AL, LA L, AL, LA,  LT L, AL, LA,  LT L, AL, LA LT L, AL, LA LT 
Rs. 4000-6000 Rs. 4500-8000 Rs. 5000-10000 Rs. 5000-12000 Rs. 8000-12000 Rs. 8000-14000 Rs. 8000-16000 
1 
Rs. 8000-16000 
3 4 11 
Rs. 8000-16000 Rs. 8000-18000 
6 
13 
* L: Librarian; AL: Assistant Librarian; DO: Documentation Offcer;  LA: Library Assistant; LT: Library Trainee 
From  Table  2,  it  is  evident  that  out  of  total  84  LIS  graduates  79,  i.e.,  94  %  had  secured  jobs  as  per  record.  These  students  had  got  their  first  job  immediately  within  two/three  months  after  their  result  was  out.  Details  of  5  graduates  only  were  not  available.  Table  2  also  shows  the  number  of  graduates  employed  in  different  types  of  libraries  which  are  divided  into  six  categories,  i.e.,  libraries  in  school,  college,  university,  higher  educational  institutes,  public  sector  and  private  sector.  Out  of  the  total  79,  eighteen  were  employed  in  school  libraries;  26  in  libraries  of  engineering  college,  medical  college,  management  college,  pharmacy  college, etc.; 5 in university libraries; 11 in libraries of  higher  educational  institutes  like  IIMs,  IITs,  DA  IICT,  etc.; and 6 graduates had their first jobs in public  sector libraries including government run libraries  and  state-sponsored  research  libraries.  The  rest  13  graduates  out  of  total  employed  graduates  got  absorbed  in  private  sector  libraries  such  as  Paramount, L&T, ONGC, TCS, and others. The LIS  graduates were appointed under various designations  (Table  2).  Librarian  (L), Assistant  Librarian  (AL),  Library Assistant (LA), Documentation Officer (DO)  were  the  first  job  designations  for  most  of  the  LIS  graduates  and  later  on  many  of  them  also  employed  as  Library  Trainee  (LT).  First  salary  drawn by these graduates ranged from Rs. 4000  to  10000  during  the  years  2004-2006,  Rs.  8000  to 12000 during the years 2007-10 and from 2011  onwards  it  was  Rs.  8000  to  18000  per  month.  Over  the  years,  there  is  a  slight  improvement  in  salary  drawn  by  fresh  graduates.  
5.3   Employability  trends  of  LIS  Graduates 
  To  explore  the  employability  trends  of  LIS  graduates  passed  out  from  the  university  over  the  years,  a  comparison  of  the  job  profile  of  the  earlier batches and that of the recent batches with  respect to employers, job designation, and salary  drawn  has  been  provided  as  follows 
5.3.1  Trends  with  Respect  to  Employers 
Table 2 provides an understanding that schools  and  private  industrial  organisations  in  and  around  the  city  were  the  major  employers  in  the  period  2004  to  2006.  Mostly  job  opportunities  were  there  either  in  school  libraries  or  in  libraries  of  private  industrial  organisations,  i.e.,  3  and  8  respectively  out  of  a  total  of  14  employed  graduates  during  those years. Although employment scope in private  industrial  organisations  was  drastically  declined  thereafter, but school libraries still have recruitment  offers  for  LIS  graduates.  
Further,  as  there  was  a  growth  in  the  number  of  colleges  and  higher  educational  institutes,  job  opportunities for the graduates have increased over  the  years. At  present,  majority  of  the  LIS  students  take  jobs  in  these  places  immediately  after  they  pass out. Figure 1 shows the employment trends of  LIS  graduates  through  the  percentage  analysis  of  total employment in different categories of libraries.  College  libraries  emerged  as  the  major  employer  with  33 % followed by school libraries which constitute  23  %  of  total  employment.  Only  6  %  of  total  LIS  graduates got  jobs  in  university  libraries.    
109 

========4========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  2,  MARCh  2015 
Figure 1. Employment trends of LIS graduates with  
respect to employers 
5.3.2  Trends  with  Respect  to  Job  Designation 
The schools and the industrial organisations, which  were  viewed  as  the  major  sources  of  employment  a  decade  back,  ironically  were  having  just  a  lone  position  as  Librarian  (L)  to  manage  their  libraries  single-handedly. Assistant Librarian (AL) and Library  Assistant (LA) were the other job designation of LIS  graduates in libraries where more than one position  existed.  Later  on  employment  opportunities  for  the  graduates  went  better-off  as  newly  established  colleges and higher educational institutes of national  importance  started  to  offer  more  number  of  LIS  positions.  Apart  from  these  designations  the  term  ‘Library  Trainee’  (LT)  has  been  increasingly  used  recently to appoint fresh LIS graduates (21 of them)  in  institutes  like  IIMs,  IITs,  NID,  INFLIBNET,  DA  IICT,  and  others.    
5.3.3    Trends  with  Respect  to  Salary  Drawn 
The  first  salary  drawn  by  the  graduates  during  the  years  2004  to  2007  was  not  at  very  attractive  i.e.,  at  that  time  a  graduate  could  get  a  job  with  a  minimum  of  Rs.  4000  and  the  maximum  was  Rs.10000. Thereafter, when the technical colleges and  higher educational institutes of national importance  appeared  in  the  picture  this  development  was  actually  instrumental  in  realising  a  decent  pay  for  librarians. Therefore, during the years 2008 to 2013  the minimum salary was Rs. 8000 and the maximum  was  Rs.  18000.  Mostly  this  amount  of  salary  was  offered by good schools, universities, institutes like  IITs, IIMs and DA IICT. however, libraries of private  colleges  and  organisations  still  do  not  offer  good  salary.  During  the  years  2011-2013,  most  of  the  fresh  LIS  graduates  (twelve  of  them)  were  offered  a  salary  of  Rs.  16000  or  more.  
5.4  Employability  Skills 
For better employment, certain skills are expected  from  the  job  aspirants.  Therefore,  to  explore  the  employability  skills  the  young  professionals  one  questionnaire  was  developed  to  gather  data  on  
110 
their  perception  on  employability  skills  and  was  administered  among  all  the  79  LIS  graduates  who  have  now  moved  on  in  their  career.    40  out  of  79  LIS  graduates  responded  to  the  questionnaire.  The  collected  data  helped  to  explore  a  number  of  professional skills as well as generic skills that are  required  to  be  employable  in  today’s  libraries  and  information centres. Table 3 presents the perception  of  these  LIS  professionals  on  employability  skills.  These  skills  are  categorised  under  seven  broad  groups: Communication skills; good academic record;  professional skills; IT skills; research skills; customer  service;  and  interpersonal  skills. 
Analysis of data indicates that generic skills or  soft skills like communication skill was emerged as  the  most  sought  after  employability  skill  followed  by  IT  skills.  Presentation  skills,  proficiency  in  English  language  and  interview  skill  are  viewed  as  the  most  important  skill  by  all  40  (100  %)  respondents.  Today  since  most  libraries  operate  with  IT  applications,  competencies  in  IT  skills  are  very much essential for LIS graduates to grab good  offer.  Equally  important  are  the  professional  skills  (90 %) which equip them with technical competencies  to  systematically  organise  knowledge  in  libraries  through proper classification, cataloguing, indexing,  collection  management,  etc. 
table 3.  Perception of LIS professionals on employability  
skills 
S. No. 
Employability skills 
No. of re- sponses (%)  
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
Communication skills (presenta- 40 (100 %) tion skills, profciency in English  
language, interview skills) 
Subject knowledge (good aca- 36 (90 %) demic record) 
Professional skills (cataloguing /  36 (90 %) classifcation / indexing, collection  
management, etc.), 
IT skills (online searching &  38 (95 %) retrieval, digitalisation, database  
management, web- page design,  
etc.) 
Research skill (report/ review writ- 26 (65 %) ing) 
Customer services (help to users, 26 (65 %) outreach, creating awareness  
about information literacy) 
Interpersonal skills (team work,  32 (80 %) leadership, problem solving apti- 
tude,  interaction with management/ users) 

========5========

PRADhAN: STUDy OF EMPLOyABILITy AND NEEDED SkILLS FOR LIS GRADUATES 
The other important skills are: Good understanding  about  the  subject  domain;  ability  to  serve  users  in  innovative  ways;  research  aptitude  for  information  analysis and writing research reports and reviews; and  interpersonal skills necessary for good organisational  behavior, aptitude for team work and problem solving.  The  respondents  were  of  the  view  that  the  above  mentioned  skills  are  very  imperative  for  the  LIS  professionals  to  seek  and  maintain  good  jobs  in  today’s  competitive  information  job  market.  
6. FINdINGS 
On  the  basis  of  the  above  analysis  of  data  on  employability  of  LIS  graduates  the  following  observations  have  been  emerged:  
•  
•  
Employability of LIS graduates of the Maharaja  Sayajirao  University  of  Baroda  is  satisfactory.  The  placement  of  these  graduates  is  nearly  hundred percent and they get jobs immediately  after they graduated. This finding has implications  to  the  LIS  curriculum  of  the  university.  The  curriculum  gets  revised  regularly  incorporating  the  latest  developments  in  the  LIS  field  and  its  design  reflects  the  competencies  and  skills  as  per  the  expectations  of  the  job  market.  Efforts are being made to implement these skills  through seminar presentation, topical assignment,  group  discussion,  team  work  oriented  project,  practical  work  in  real  library  situation,  web- page designing, extensive hands on training in  database  management  and  creation  of  digital  libraries  through  proprietary  and  open  source  library  management  software. 
Further employability of LIS graduates can also  
•  
•  
to  handle  increasing  workload  in  libraries  on  permanent  basis.  Thus  the  employers  have  adopted  this  kind  of  temporary  arrangement.  Salary  drawn  by  the  LIS  graduates  was  not  satisfactory in the beginning years of the sample  period  of  the  study.  Lower  pay  was  associated  with employment in private sector libraries. This  situation improved over years as growing number  of  academic  institutions  started  to  offer  good  salary  to  the  librarians  as  per  their  teachers.  This  development  in  salary  could  be  attributed  to  the  fact  that  young  LIS  professionals  with  right attitude and IT skills entered the profession  which in turn changed the stereotype of librarians  and  helped  in  creating  awareness  about  the  worth  of  the  LIS  profession.  
Good  communication  skill  is  found  to  be  very  indispensable  to  enhance  employability  of  LIS  professionals.  Proficiency  in  spoken  English  and clarity in presentation help in getting good  placement.  The  IT  skills  are  also  indisputably  the  crucial  skill  that  the  LIS  graduates  should  possess  to  meet  the  challenges  of  changing  information job market. Further demonstration of  professional competencies, analytical capabilities,  practical problem solving, etc. is expected from  the  LIS  graduates  and  regarded  as  equally  important  employability  skills  which  the  LIS  graduates  should  acquire.  
7. GENErAL   Su GGEStIoNS   to  E NhANcE 
EMPLoyAbILIty  
In  the  light  of  the  above  analysis  of  data;  experience  of  the  author  as  a  teaching  faculty  in  
be linked to the fact that the Maharaja Sayajirao  LIS; and the review of related literature in the area  University of Baroda is the only English medium  the  following  suggestions  are  made  to  enhance  university  in  the  state  of  Gujarat  and  hence  employability. 
•  
its  LIS  graduates  have  an  edge  over  their  
• competitors  from  other  universities  in  Gujarat  when  it  comes  to  job  prospects  in  the  state- level. 
Academic  institutions  emerged  as  the  major  employment  source.  It  is  a  trend  that  most  of  the  graduates  get  their  first  jobs  in  academic  libraries  although  in  earlier  years  libraries  of  private sector were the leading employers. The  designation for the library jobs offered to the LIS  graduates differ from library to library. The most  traditional one is ‘Librarian’ followed by Assistant  librarian. Library trainee which is relatively a new  designation concept is increasingly used now to  accommodate  fresh  LIS  graduates  for  a  fixed  period  on  temporary  basis.  This  development  
• finds  reason  in  government  policy  that  most  of  the  sanctioned  library  posts  are  not  filled  up  regularly  and  additional  posts  are  not  created  
LIS  curriculum  generally  gets  revised  on  regular  interval  by  all  the  Indian  universities  to accommodate new developments in the field.  however  theoretical  knowledge  of  academic  subject is not sufficient for the LIS job aspirants  to survive; they have to develop certain important  employability skills such as communication and  ICT skills. Thus the LIS schools have to accept  the challenge of how to incorporate these skills  into the curriculum design and ensure its proper  implementation so that those can be transferred  to the students. To impart soft skills among the  students specially designed workshop/programs  should  be  an  important  aspect  of  academic  schedule. 
Further the LIS schools should practice regular  curriculum  audit  and  gap  analysis  exercises  at  the  time  the  syllabus  is  revised.  Extensive  surveys  should  be  conducted  to  evaluate  the  
111 

========6========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  2,  MARCh  2015 
• 
current employment need and accordingly market  oriented  competencies  should  be  developed. Industry-LIS interface which provides a platform to  assess employers’ needs, unfortunately generally  does  not  constitute  a  part  of  LIS  curriculum.  however  this  kind  of  interface  in  any  form  should be encouraged so that LIS departments  
2.    Chakravarty,  S.  &  Sarkhel,  J.k.  LIS  education  
in  India:  An  appraisal  of  the  parity  between  
the  syllabus  and  the  market  demands.  Paper  
presented  as  World  Library  and  Information  
Congress:  75th   IFLA  General  Conference  and  
Council, 23-27 August 2009, Milan, Italy. http:// 
www.ifla.org/annual-conference/ifla75/index.htm  
(accessed  on  21  October  2014). 
can  make  their  students  aware  of  the  cutting  
3.   k rishan  kumar  &  Sharma,  J.  Library  and  
• 
edge  of  the  stock-of-trade  and  prepare  them  to  develop  suitable  competencies  accordingly.  The  LIS  schools  rarely  make  any  aggressive  
attempt  for  placement  of  their  students  unlike  
4. 
other  professional  courses.  Establishment  of  
placement  cell  and  career  counseling  for  LIS  
5. 
students should be considered as an obligation  for the LIS schools.  Fresh LIS graduates should  not only look for the employment possibilities from  
libraries as in this study) rather they should also  get  exposure  to  explore  other  profitable  and  exciting avenues such as big corporate houses,  
known  sources  (for  example  only  in  academic  
6. 
information  science  education  in  India.  har  Anand  Publications,  New  Delhi,  2009. Missingham, R. Library and information science:  Skills  for  twenty-first  century  professionals.  Library  Management,  2006,  27(4/5),  257-68. Okamoto, k. & Polger, M.A. Off to market we go:  A  content  analysis  of  marketing  and  promotion  skills in academic librarian job ads. Lib. Learn.  Manag.,  2012, 26(2),  1-20.  
Safahieh, h. & Asemi, A. Computer literacy skills  of librarians: A case study of Isfahan University  libraries, Iran. Electronic Library,  2010,  28, 89- 99.  
publication  houses,  research  and  statistical  
7.  University  Grant  Commission.  UGC  model  
institutes,  multinational  organisations,  etc. 
8.    coNcLuSIoNS 
The  LIS  course  like  any  other  professional  courses would find takers, if it assures the graduates’  employability.  Through  this  study  it  is  concluded  that  employability  of  LIS  graduates  is  promising.  Nevertheless to be employable LIS graduates need  to develop certain set of market oriented and multi  dimensional skills to meet the changing demands of  the information job market. As communication skills;  professional  competencies;  analytical  capabilities;  problem solving skills; and ICT skills are considered  to  be  the  important  employability  skills,  the  LIS  schools  should  take  note  of  this  development  and  revamp  their  curriculum  in  such  a  way  that  it  will  enable  the  LIS  products  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  job  market. 
rEFErENcES 
1. Buarki, h.; hepworth, M. & Murray, I. ICT skills  
and employability needs at the LIS programme,  
kuwait: A literature review. New Library World ,  
2011, 112(11/12).  
112 
curriculum:  Library  and  information  science.  
2001.  http://www.ugc.ac.in  (accessed  on  11  
October  2012). 
8.  Warraich, N.F. & Ameen, k. Employability skills of  
LIS graduates in Pakistan: Needs and expectations.  
Library  Management,  2011,  32(3),  209-224. 
About  the Author 
dr  Sanghamitra  Pradhan  is  a  full-time  faculty  member in the Department of Library and Information  Science  of  the  Maharaja  Sayajirao  University  of  Baroda  of  BLIS  and  MLIS  courses  for  the  last  twelve years. She has written one book, co-compiled  another,  and  published  many  research  articles  in  national  and  international  journals.  She  has  been  awarded  with  ‘Ranganathan  Medal  for  the  Best  Article  2012’  by  IASLIC. her  area  of  interest  are:  human  resource  management,  LIS  education  and  IT  applications  in  LIS. 

========7========

