DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 35, No. 2, March 2015, pp. 124-131  DOI: 10.14429/djlit.35.2.8396 
  2015, DESIDOC 
Design and Development of an Online Exhibition on the Tangkhul Tribe  
Festivals 
Somipam R. Shimray* and Chennupati K. Ramaiah** Department of Library & Information Science, School of Media and Communication 
Pondicherry University, Puducherry - 605014  
E-mail: *srshimray@yahoo.com; **ckramaiah.lis@pondiuni.edu.in 
ABSTRACT 
Growth in information technologies in the area of multimedia, content production and the internet  have  opened  new  opportunities  to  online  exhibitions,  which  could  now  hit  on  the  exciting  medium  of  world wide web (WWW) to make these exhibitions more reachable to people anywhere on the globe. The  WWW is a vibrant place and has emerged as, an educational tool in today’s instructive environment. An  online exhibition on ‘Tangkhul Tribe Festivals’ was developed using web design tools following ‘Prototype  Development  Method’.  While  developing  an  online  exhibition,  one  has  to  keep  the  basic  objectives  of  the HCI (human-computer interaction) in mind. Top priority should be given to the user interface design  and  related  issues. The  main  purpose  of  this  paper  is  to  design  and  develop  an  online  exhibition  on  ‘Tangkhul Tribe  Festivals’  and  evaluate  the  same  with  its  real  time  users  so  that  gaps  or  drawbacks  could  be  identifed. An  evaluation  study  was  carried  out  using  a  questionnaire  tool  with  closed-ended  and opened-ended questions. The evaluation of this exhibition reveals that majority of the users are very  much comfortable with the HTML version of online exhibition.  
Keywords: Online exhibition, user interfaces, user interface design, evaluation method 
1.      INTRODUCTION 
Shift  from  the  physical  to  the  online  format  has  provided  the  visitors  an  altogether  different  understanding  and  experience  that  is  not  offered  by the physical medium. Online exhibitions present   useful and cost effective solutions when time, distance  and  space  are  limited.  Instead  of  being  open  to  the  public  at  certain  times  of  the  day,  they  are  available round the clock via internet, i.e., 24x7. An  extra  benefit  is  people  need  not  travel  all  the  way  to  the  exhibition  site  to  see  it.  Online  exhibition  is  distributed  right  up  to  their  homes  and  classrooms  or  everywhere  via  internet.  The  maintaining  cost  can  be  cut  by  keeping  those  objects  in  digital  form.  New  materials  can  be  added  easily,  while  existing  materials  can  be  updated  with  less  effort.  This  lessens  the  time  and  avoids  costly  physical  space  required  to  mount  an  exhibition.  An  online  exhibition  can  display  through  internet  which  is  accessible  to  everyone  and  reach  beyond  physical  exhibitions.  Online  or  virtual  exhibition  is  the  best  way  of  disseminating  information  in  digital  form.1 
Remarkable  advancement  of  the  internet  was  introduced during 1990s. Change from the physical  to  the  online  presentation  has  offered  the  visitors  an  overall  diverse  acceptance  and  experience  that  
Received 2 February 2015, online published 20 March 2015 
is  not  available  in  the  physical  medium.  Exhibition  comprises  of  commercial  and  non-commercial  exhibitions. Physical exhibition communicates directly  with  the  visitors  whereas  online  exhibition  can  be  viewed  from  anywhere  and  anytime  via  internet  connection. Through exhibition maximum exploration  of  occasions  and  events  can  be  done.  Exhibitions  act  as  a  bridge  between  the  anticipated  audience  and an organisation. For any exhibition user interface  play  an  important  role  for  successfully  delivering  its  output. 
1.1  Information About  Tangkhul  Tribe  Festivals 
The  Tangkhul  tribe  is  one  of  the  oldest  and  principal tribes in Manipur and is located in Ukhrul  district.  The  Tangkhul  tribe  is  well  known  for  their  colourful dresses and costumes, and for their lively  folk  dance  and  music.  Light  and  dark  brown  is  a  formidable  color  combination  that  easily  identifies  the  Tangkhuls  from  other  tribes.  Even  before  the  arrival  of  Christianity,  the  Tangkhul  tribe  believed  in the existence of divine being and its power over  humanity or nature. According to them, Reisangchonmi  is the creator of universe, Kameo refers to spiritual  being, Ameowa is the master of all spiritual beings  and  Varivara  is  the  almighty  God2. 

========1========

SHIMRAy AND  R AMAIAH: DESIGN AND  D EVELOPMENT OF AN  O NLINE  Ex HIbITION ON THE  T ANGKHUL  T RIbE  F ESTIVALS 
Every  step  of  cultivation  process,  there  is  an  accompanying form of ceremony or ritual and celebration.  The  major  festivals  celebrated  by  contemporary  Tangkhul  are3: 
(a) LUIRA—This  festival  is  celebrating  during  the  
period of January to March months. It is a seed  
sowing  festival  and  virgin  dance  is  present  in  
this  festival.  This  festival  is  celebrated  with  
dedication  at  Longpi  (name  of  village)  and  
Hungpung  (name  of  village). 
(b)   y ARRA—This festival falls in the months of April  
to  May  and  called  as  anti-cultivation  festival.  
This  festival  is  widely  celebrated  by  youth. (c) MANGKHAP—It  is  a  festival  of  post-plantation  
and  is  celebrated  in  the  month  of  July.  This  is  
a  festival  of  asking  for  timely  rain  to  have  a  
fruitful  harvest.  
(d) DHARREO—It means plucking of the new crop  
is  celebrated  at  pre-harvest  time.  During  this  
festival,  first  crop  come  out  of  the  fields  are  
sold  during  this  festival. 
(e) CHUMPHA—This  festival  is  celebrated  as  
a  thanksgiving  for  fruitful  crop.  The  mother  
undertakes  offerings  to  the  God  of  crop  and  
the  guardian  of  the  storeroom.  It  is  celebrated  
in  the  months  of  November  and  December.  (f) THISHAM—It  is  celebrated  as  a  remembrance  
to  the  dead  in  the  month  of  January.  This  
festival  marked  the  end  cycle  of  the  year  and  
final  ceremony  is  done  for  the  dead3. 
1.2  Benefits  of  Online  Exhibition  on 
Tangkhul  Tribe  Festivals 
• 
• 
Some  advantages  of  online  exhibition  are: The contents of an online exhibition are useful  for the school students, academics researchers,  teachers  (and  who  can  use  the  content)  for  their  educational  and  research  works. This  online  exhibition  will  increase  the  public  
The  online  exhibition  design  and  development  can be considered as a software engineering project,  because the final output is 100 % software-based4.  In  the  design  and  development  of  a  project  there  are  following  four  major  stages/phases:  
(a)  Requirement analysis: It defines the target user  
population, examining the user’s needs, setting  
the  objectives  of  the  system,  determining  user  
tasks to be performed, getting familiar with the  
environment  in  which  the  system  will  operate,  
and also understanding the constrains in which  
the  system  will  be  implemented. 
(b) Design: It helps in preparing the system design  
specifications document from the user’s requirements.  
Design  must  be  an  integral  part  of  the  online  
exhibition,  to  make  the  website  effective. (c)  Implementation:  Implementation  translates  the 
design  specifications  into  the  final  working  
product. 
(d)  Testing  and  user  evaluation:  Testing  and  user  
evaluation  are  quality  control  mechanisms  in  
which the final product confirms to the software  
requirements specified in the design document. Here  
the final product confirms to the user requirements  
and  also  meets  their  expectations. 
2.1 System  Development 
A structural approach is necessary in the design  and  development  of  a  system  because  the  user  requirements and the system complexity increase in  the process of project development. An appropriate  development model may be used, taking into account  the  nature  of  the  software  project  and  strategies  needed to meet the user’s expectations and needs.  The  major  system  development  models  are:  (a)  Cleanroom Model; (b) Component-based model; (c)  Hacking model; (d) Incremental model; (e) Prototyping  model;  (f)  Spiral  model;  and  (g)  Waterfall  model. 
The model selected for this project is ‘Prototyping’.  It  is  one  of  the  development  methodologies  used  
awareness  about  the  rich  Tangkhul  tribe  
to  develop  online  exhibitions.  Prototyping  is  a  
new  and  continuously  emerging  methodology  to  
• 
• 
festivals. 
To  brings  out  the  historical  background  and  importance  of  Tangkhul  tribe. 
To  possesses  new  knowledge  and  skills  in  
the  use  of  technologies  and  tools  for  online  
• 
exhibitions. 
2.    METHODOLOGY 
Methodology  is  a  distinctive  hypothetical  investigation  to  an  area  of  study.  It  is  connected  with  a  subdivision  of  information  and  comprises  ideas  such  as  pattern,  hypothetical  prototype  and  stages  of  development. 
software development. The advantages of prototyping  development  methodology5   are:  
• Users  play  a  critical  role  in  the  development 
User can understand the system as prototyping  
development  is  an  operational  method. • Mistakes  can  be  identified  with  ease 
• Reaction from user is received at early stage thus  
leading  to  development  of  improved  system • Important  menus  can  be  recognised  and; • Identifying  unclear  and  problematic  menus  is  
easy  
125 

========2========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  2,  MARCH   2015 
Since, user’s requirements study was not done  before or not clear to the researcher, the same was  taken from literature review. Therefore, prototyping  model  was  chosen  for  the  development  of  this  project.  Initially,  the  project  was  started  with  story  boarding which is a graphical depiction of the outward  appearance  of  the  intended  system,  without  any  accompanying system functionality. These prototypes  helped  to  get  the  inside  mind  of  the  users  in  a  better  way.  Adobe  Dreamweaver  CS6,  is  used  to  build  a  quick  prototype  which  was  tested  with  the  real  users.  The  mockup  prototypes  provide  better  interactivity,  and  helped  the  user  to  express  his/ her  ideas  more  clearly.  To  modify  the  prototype,  user’s  inputs  are  used  and  this  process  continued  iteratively as a cycle until an acceptable prototype is  finally achieved for the complete system or product  is  developed.  
2.2  System  Evaluation 
Evaluation  is  to  find  out  what  users  want  and  what  problems  they  experience  while  using  the  system6.  Evaluation  is  the  process  by  which  the  interface is tested against the needs and practices  of the users. In evaluation, the attitudes of the users  toward  the  system  are  measured  based  on  their  feedback. The possible approaches for evaluating the  design are: (a) Cognitive walkthrough approach,(b)  Heuristic evaluation, (c) Review-based evaluation,(d)  Questionnaire,(e)  Observation  of  task  performance  and,  (f)  Co-operative  evaluation. 
Heuristic  evaluation  technique  combined  with  questionnaire is used for the evaluation of the online  exhibition  system.  Heuristic  evaluation  technique  
questionnaire-based  survey  method  was  used  to  
technique  is  to  evaluate  the  early  stage  of  design,  
that  are  identified,  provide  quick  and  relatively  
are  gathered  in  a  standardised  way  and  relatively  quick  to  collect  information. 
3.  DESIGN  AND  DEVELOPMENT  
User  is  the  centre  of  the  design  universe  and  the  design  decision  should  aim  to  make  the  user’s  tasks  easier.  The  design  of  the  online  exhibition  was  based  on  the  user  requirements.  There  is  a  need  to  understand  who  the  users  are,  what  task  they  will  perform  and  how  they  will  be  using  the  exhibition10. 
3.1  Design 
In this online exhibition, content was considered  first,  the  layout  appearance  was  second,  and  the  navigation  was  the  last.  Design  issues  concerning  to  the  online  exhibition  include  interfaces  design,  content coverage, and organisation, system structure,  and  screen  layout  was  used  in  the  design. 
3.2  Interface  Design 
Nowadays, most of the systems support higher  resolution,  i.e.,  1366  x  768  pixel  resolution,  so  the  same  was  used  in  designing  this  online  exhibition.  A  mixture  of  image,  audio  and  video  elements  were  used  keeping  in  mind  that  user  wants  an  interactive  HTML  web  interface.  Each  image  could  be  zoomed  into  a  detailed  image  by  a  click  on  it.  The  Tangkhul  tribe  festivals  online  exhibition  contains  audios,  videos  and  more  than  70  images  in  all  the  festivals. 
3.2.1  Information  Organisation 
The  festivals  are  given  in  chronological  order  
is  used  for  evaluating  the  design  phase  while  
with respect to month in which the celebration was  
starting form Luira (January) to Thisham (December)12.  evaluate  during  the  implementation  of  the  system.  
Drop-down  menus  are  provided  in  festivals  page,  The  purpose  of  choosing  the  heuristic  evaluation  
which is hierarchical and yet sequential in the order  
of period of celebration. In this exhibition, hyperlinks  so  that  it  is  easier  to  fix  many  usability  problems  
are  also  provided  to  other  webpages,  following  
associative structure (Fig. 1). This online exhibition  inexpensive  feedback  to  designers,  and  can  test  
has  got  six  functional  sub-panels  represented  on  potential usability issues. There are ten principles in is  further  divided  into  sub-sub-panels.  The  panels  
the home page. The functional panel of the festivals  were  considered  while  designing  the  system,  the  
are  organised  as  follows  (Fig.1): 
main  and  the  essential  heuristics  that  play  a  vital  (a) Home panel—welcome the user and provide a list  
heuristics evaluation technique. Not all the heuristics  
role on the human computer interaction (HCI) have  been chosen9. Those principles include: Speaking the  user's language, simple and natural dialog, making  information  appear  in  a  logical  order,  minimise  the  user's memory load by making objects, actions, and  options visible, easily retrievable, flexibility, efficiency  of  use  and  aesthetic  and  minimalist  design,etc. 
Questionnaire  tool  was  used  to  get  the  user’s  feedback directly  and to reveal issues, which have  not  been  considered  during  the  design  phase.  Questionnaire is an inexpensive and simple; responses  
126 
of festivals, with helper links to the corresponding  
pages. 
(b) About  panel—describe  the  aim  and  objectives  
of developing Tangkhul tribe festivals, an online  
exhibitio  copyright  and  acknowledgements. (c) Festivals  panel—it  is  further  divided  into  four  
sub-panels, i.e., occasion, season and duration,  
entertainment,  costume  and  objectives. 
(d) Gallery  pane—consists  of  images,  audios  and  
video. 

========3========

SHIMRAy AND  R AMAIAH: DESIGN AND  D EVELOPMENT OF AN  O NLINE  Ex HIbITION ON THE  T ANGKHUL  T RIbE  F ESTIVALS 
Figure 1. Navigation structure of the exhibition. 
(e) Contact  panel-consist  of  developer’s  contact  
details. 
(f) Site  Map  panel-provides  complete  structure  of  
the  website  to  the  users. 
To help the users in identifying the functions of  the  icon  when  the  users  move  the  mouse  over  the  icons,  they  display  its  functionality.  Unidirectional  arrows  indicate  sub-panels  whereas  bidirectional  arrows  indicate  navigational  panels. 
3.2.2  System  Structure 
Navigational design has been given top importance  while constructing the site. Introduction page provide  background to Tangkhul tribe and festivals celebrated  festivals  celebrated  by  contemporary  Tangkhul.  
The first pull-down menu entitled ‘Home’ welcome  the user and provides a list of festivals names and  by  clicking  each  menu  link  takes  user  directly  to  respective  festival.  This  page  welcomes  the  users  to  Tangkhul  Tribe  festivals  online  exhibition  (Fig.  2).  This  page  gives  information  about  the  purpose  of  the  exhibition  and  each  exhibition  includes  text,  photographs,  audio  and  video  on  Tangkhul  Tribe  festivals.  Luira  festival  is  shown  in  the  Fig.  3.  
Figure 2. Home page of Tangkhul tribe festivals. 
Figure 3. Luira festival. 
Figure 4. Exhibition site map. 
The  sixth  sub-exhibit  entitled  ‘Site  Map’  panel  (Fig.  4)  provides  the  users  the  complete  structure  of  the  website.  Through  Site  Map,  users  will  be  able to easily access the online exhibition and find  out  the  required  information. 
3.2.3  Screen  Layout 
Screen  design  guidelines  and  the  screen  size  is  limited  to  one  to  one  and  half  screens  size.  Lengthier pages are avoided by splitting the screens  into smaller chunks wherever possible. All webpages  are  provided  with  a  consistent  top  navigational  panel throughout the website. Drop-down menus on  ‘Festivals’ panels are arranged in hierarchical order  to  avoid  users  getting  lost  problem.  Navigational  icons  are  provided  at  the  top  most  right  of  each  page to give a clear and consistent flow. Icons such  as  ‘Home’,  ‘back’,  ‘Previous’,  ‘Next’  and  ‘Search’  are provided together at the top right-hand side as  navigational  panel.     
3.2.4  Implementation 
After  completing  the  design  and  development  phase,  it  was  hosted  on  Pondicherry  University  website  at  http://www.pondiuni.edu.in/workshop/lis/ exhibition/Index.html.  Some  preliminary  tests  were  done  during  the  development  stage  to  minimise  errors. However, due to time constrain many features  were  not  incorporated  at  the  time  of  evaluation. 
4.  EVALUATION  OF  ONLINE  EXHIBITION 
Evaluation  helped  to  identify  the  inadequacies  in  the  design  and  development  of  the  system  and  understand  the  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  the  
127 

========4========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  2,  MARCH   2015 
online  exhibition.  Evaluation  was  carried  out  using  survey  method  and  questionnaire  tool  to  evaluate  this  exhibition.  A  questionnaire  was  prepared  and  distributed  to  50  participants  that  is  one-fourth  of  total  North  East  students  studying  in  Pondicherry  University  comprising  of  Humanities,  Science,  Engineering  and  Social  Science. 
4.1  Personal  Profile 
Of  the  total  respondents,  about  half  (46  %)  of  the respondents were from science background, over  a  fifth  are  (22  %)  from  Social  science,  18  %  from  other  subject  backgrounds,  8  %  from  Humanities,  and the reaming 6 % from Engineering. The majority  of  the  respondents  (56  %)  had  basic  computer  experience, 28 % had moderate computer experience,  and  16  %  had  advance  computer  experience.  The  prior  domain  knowledge  helps  to  users  to  do  the  tasks  quickly,  use  the  system  optimally  and  also  helps  in  giving  constructive  recommendations.  
4.2  Interface  Design 
The  questions  covered  in  the  interface  design  include text readability (font size & style), appropriate  use of colours, appropriate use of icons and buttons,  site attractiveness and user friendliness. The various  ratings on the Interface design issues are tabulated  below  in  Table  1.  Of  the  total  respondents,  84  %  had  rated  Good  and  above  for  the  text  read.  Of  the total 14 % of the respondents’ rated acceptable  where  as  a  small  percentage  (2  %)  rated  as  poor  readability. Overall, the majority of the respondents  opinioned  that  the  text  was  very  clear  so  there  is  no  need  to  change. 
Most of the respondents were very comfortable  with appropriate use of background colour as white  background  occupying  almost  total  web  page  however,  different  colour  backgrounds  were  given  for  different  festivals  for  easy  identification.  Of  
Table 1.  Users rating to interface design 
 Design Very  Poor Acceptable Good Very   Issue/Rating                                   poor good 
Text  readability  (font size &  style) Appropriate  use of colours Appropriate  use of icons  and buttons Site  attractiveness User  friendliness 
- 
2 % 
14 % 
62 % 
22 % 
- 
2 % 
20 % 
48 % 
30 % 
- 
2 % 
20 % 
44 % 
34 % 
- 
4 % 
24 % 
34 % 
38 % 
- 
- 
22 % 
50 % 
28 % 
128 
the  total  respondents,  78  %  had  given  ‘Good’  and  above  rating,  a  fifth  (20  %)  had  given  acceptable,  and a small percentage (2 %) had rated the colour  combination  as  poor. 
The feedback on appropriate use of navigation  icons and buttons was satisfactory; over three fourth  (78  %)  of  the  respondents  rated  as  ‘good’,  a  fifth  (20  %)  of  the  respondents  rated  asacceptable,  and  a  small  percentage  (2  %)  of  the  respondents  rated  aspoor. 
Out  of  the  total  respondents,  72  %  had  given  ‘Good’  and  above  rating  about  the  attractiveness  of  website.  Respondents  felt  that  the  structure  is  very  clear,  simple  and  instinctive.  
The  Tangkhul  tribe  festivals  online  exhibition  was  built  with  simple  and  plain  design,  so  more  than  half  of  the  respondents  found  the  website  was  user-friendly.  The  majority  of  the  respondents  were  of  the  opinion  that  the  website  is  very  much  user-friendly.  Over  three  fourth  (78  %)  had  given  ‘Good’  and  above  rating,  over  a  fifth  (22  %)  of  the  respondents had given as acceptable. They felt that  menu provided on the left side was very helpful for  browsing  of  the  website.  Hence,  there  is  no  need  to  change  the  user  interface  of  the  exhibition.  
4.3  Ease  of  Use 
Of  the  total  respondents,  almost  three  fourth  (74  %)  had  rated  the  exhibition  as  very  much  user  friendly  (Table  2).  They  felt  that  the  overall  design  of  the  website  was  simple,  clear  and  good.  Since,  the  exhibition  was  built  using  HTML  that  enable  user  to  access  the  website  without  any  difficulties.  The  remaining  26  %  felt  that  the  website  has  to  be improved to enhance the user- friendliness. The  data given in the Table 3 shows the users response  to ease of use of the online exhibition. Of the total  respondents, 58 % had given ‘easy’ rating, 34 % had  given average and 8 % of the respondents website  was  simple,  clean  and  good.  Since,  the  exhibition  was  built  using  HTML  that  enable  user  to  access  the  website  without  any  difficulties.  The  remaining  26  %  felt  that  the  website  has  to  be  improved  to  
Table 2.  User friendliness of online exhibition 
Rating/ Not  Issue                                 User- 
friendly User  
friend 
liness  
1 2 
3 
4 
5 
Highly user  friendly 
- 
8 % 
18 % 46 % 
28 % 
Table 3. Ease of use of online exhibition 
Rating/  Issue 
Very Hard 
Hard 
Average Easy 
Very  Easy 
Ease of use     0 
8 % 
34 % 
42 % 
16 % 

========5========

SHIMRAy AND  R AMAIAH: DESIGN AND  D EVELOPMENT OF AN  O NLINE  Ex HIbITION ON THE  T ANGKHUL  T RIbE  F ESTIVALS 
enhance  the  user  freiendliness.  Table  3  shows  the  users  response  to  ease  of  use  of  the  online  exhibition. Of the total respondents, 58 % had given  easy rating, 34 % has given average and 8 % of the  respondents  had  given  hard.  The  overall  rating  of  use is acceptable, owing to systematic organisation  and  good  navigation  support. 
4.4  Content  Coverage  and  Organisation 
The  festivals  are  given  in  chronological  order  with  respect  to  month  of  celebration  starting  form  Luira (January) to Thisham (December). Drop down  menus  are  provided  in  festivals  page,  which  is  chronological  and  yet  sequential  in  the  order  to  period  of  celebration.  They  are  also  provided  with  hyperlinks to other web pages, following associative  structure. 
With  regard  to  the  organisation  of  information,  the  majority  (78  %)  of  the  respondents  had  given  ‘Good’  and  above  rating  however,  20  %  of  them  felt  that  acceptable  and  2  %  felt  poor  (Table  4).  This  shows  that  content  is  in  general  acceptable  to  the  respondents. 
The level content coverage is very important to  the readers of exhibition. Out of the total respondents,  76 % gave a good feedback on the content coverage.   They felt that the content coverage is comprehensive,  however,  some  respondents  pointed  out  that  there  were  too  little  details  on  few  pages.  Respondents  also perceived the website is intuitive as the content  is  clear,  precise,  accessible,  and  consistent.  They  also informed that the related content were chunked  and  labeled  properly,  thus  they  can  find  and  use  information  easily. 
Table 4 shows the organisation of information and  search facility provided in the online exhibition. Most  of the respondents opinioned that finding information  is easy because the various types of information are  
Table  4.  Organisation  of  information  and  search  to  
related sites 
Rating/  Strongly  Some Issue                                              Dis- what  
agree Dis- 
agree Ease of - 8 % fnding  
Infor- 
mation 
Appro - 2 % priate  
links to  
related  
sites 
Link to  - - related  
sites are  
valuable 
Neutral Some 
what  
agree 
 Strongly  agree 
18 % 
34 % 
40 % 
8 % 
22 % 
68 % 
12 % 
36 % 
52 % 
arranged in systematic order, continuity, consistency  and connectivity was maintained in every web page  to  the  relevant  page.  About  three  fourth  (74  %)  of  the  respondents  had  opinioned  that  ‘somewhat  agree’  and  above  rating.  Less  than  a  fifth  (18  %)  and 8 % had given neutral and ‘somewhat disagree’  rating  respectively.  Some  of  the  respondents  were  neutral  with  regard  to  easy  in  finding  information,  due  to  the  absence  of  advance  search  engine.  Due to time constrain, advance search engine was  not  able  to  incorporate  at  the  time  of  evaluation.  However,  it  is  decided  to  incorporate  a  proper  search  engine  later,  which  is  capable  of  indexing  not  only  text,  but  also  multimedia  elements  such  as  images,  audio,  and  video. 
The  majority  (90  %)  of  the  respondents  rated  the  appropriate  links  to  related  site  are  available,  8  %  and  2  %  had  given  ‘neutral’  and  ‘somewhat  disagree’  ratings  respectively.  
The  contents  are  organised  in  a  simple,  clear  and easy manner. Outmost consideration was taken  to  provide  all  the  valuable  information  on  all  the  festivals.  Out  of  the  total  respondents,  majority  of  the respondents (78 %) had given ‘somewhat agree’  and above rating about value of link to related site.  Only 12 % of the respondents are of the opinion that  the  link  to  related  sites  are  ‘somewhat  disagree’. 
4.5  Navigation 
Navigational  design  was  given  top  importance  while developing the exhibition. Where am I? Where  can I go? How can I get there? How can I get back?  This  kind  of  questions  was  given  outmost  concern  while designing navigation buttons. These questions  covers  in  this  section  include  information  retrieval,  navigation,  ease  of  use,  ease  to  understand  and  attractiveness  of  user  interfaces  (Table  5). 
The majority of the respondents (74 %) had given  ‘Fast’  and  above  rating  about  information  retrieval.  The users were able to retrieve the information quickly  because the website was built only with HTML pages  
Table 5. User feedback on navigation 
Rating/ Issue 
Very  slow 
Slow 
Acceptable Fast 
Very  fast 
Information  retrieval Navigation Ease of use Ease to  understand Attracti- veness  of user  interfaces 
- 
4 % 
22 % 
56 % 
18 % 
- - - 
4 % 2 % 6 % 
34 % 20 % 16 % 
44 % 50 % 50 % 
18 % 28 % 28 % 
2 % 
4 % 
28 % 
42 % 
24 % 
129 

========6========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  2,  MARCH   2015 
without  any  animation  and  flash  video  clips  which  are  normally  difficult  to  retrieve.  Over    22  %  had  given acceptable rating and 4 % of the respondents  had  given  slow  retrieval  of  information.  
The respondents found that navigating throughout  the  site  is  reasonably  easy.  The  entire  navigation  clues were given with image (icon) embedded with  text label. Thus, majority of the respondents (62 %)  had  rated  ‘Fast’  and  above  however,  over  a  third  (34  %)  rated  acceptable,  and  4  %  rated  slow.  
Of  the  total  respondents,  78  %  respondents  found that the navigation buttons were easy to use.  The respondents also stated that navigation buttons  can  be  easily  noticed  and  they  did  not  face  any  major  problems  while  navigating  through  different  web  pages  using  navigation  buttons. 
The  majority  of  the  respondents  (78  %)  found  the navigation buttons were easily understandable.  They can easily find out the navigation button without  any  difficulties.  With  regard  to  the  attractiveness  of  user  interfaces,  66  %  had  given  ‘good’  rating  and  accepted  the  simplicity  and  uniqueness  of  user  interface. 
The  Tangkhul  tribe  festivals  online  exhibition  was  designed  and  developed  is  simple  and  plain  site.  Thus  66  %  respondents,  had  rated  ‘fast’  and  above about the attractiveness of exhibition interface.  Over  a  quarter  of  the  respondents  (28  %)  rated  the  attractiveness  of  interface  as  acceptable  and  below.  They  suggested  that  the  attractiveness  of  the interfaces can be improved by adding animation  and  Flash  movie  clips  to  the  interface. 
4.6  Multimedia 
The  collection  of  multimedia  elements  such  as  images, audios and video, were important components  of  the  website,  was  considered  in  this  section.  The  questions  included  in  this  section  are  type  of  computers  used  for  accessing  this  exhibition,  type  of browsers used to accessed this exhibition, quality  of  pictures  and  audio  clips.  
Majority of respondents (92 %) used the Windows  operating system, a small portion (6 %) were not sure  about  their  operating  system,  and  2  %  used  tablet  to  access  this  exhibition.  Of  the  total  respondents,  62 % used ‘Google Chrome’ browser to access this  online  exhibition,  while  36  %  and  2  %  user  used  Firefox  and  Internet  Explorer  respectively.  The  majority of the respondents used Google Chrome as  it is fast, simple, stable, has built-in Flash and PDF  support  for  displaying  sites  and  videos.  However,  irrespective  of  differences  in  browser  usage,  there  was no problem in delivering the text and multimedia  elements  of  the  entire  exhibition. 
Most  of  the  respondents  found  the  images  were  reasonably  viewable,  82  %  of  them  rated  as  
130 
Table 6.  Feedback on pictures and audio clips 
Rating/ Very  Poor Acceptable Good Very Issue poor good Pictures - 4 % 14 % 44 % 38 % Audio clips - 4 % 14 % 56 % 26 % 
Table 7. General evaluation 
Rating/ Strongly  Some issue disa what dis 
gree agree Unique- - 6 % ness of  
design 
Site  - 2 % met my  
expect- 
ation 
Neutral 
16 % 
Some what  agree 46 % 
Stron gly  agree 32 % 
6 % 
60 % 
32 % 
‘Good’ and above (Table 6). However, some of them  suggested adding high resolution images, which will  enhance  the  quality  of  the  exhibition. 
The majority of them found that the audio clips  were acceptable and audible. Of the total, majority  (82  %)  of  the  respondents  had  given  ‘Good’  and  above  rating.  
4.7  Overall  Design 
This section of survey covers the general questions  include  uniqueness  of  design,  the  site  meeting  user  expectation  and  any  other  information  that  is  not  covered  in  the  questionnaire  (Table  7).  The    majority  of  the  respondents  (78  %  and  92  %)  had  rated  the  uniqueness  of  design  ‘somewhat  agree’  and  above. 
5.    CONCLUSIONS 
This  paper  presents  an  overview  of  design  and  development  of  an  online  exhibitions.  Online  exhibition’s success largely depends on user’s expertise   in  computers  usage.  User’s  computer  experience  will  have  advantage  to  get  better  experience  of  the  exhibition.  The  HTML-based  online  exhibition  on  ‘Tangkhul  tribe  festivals’  fulfilled  relatively  most  of  the  requirements  of  the  users.  Findings  showed  that  users  are  interested  in  interactive  exhibition,  advance  search  tools  to  retrieve  text,  images,  and  audio-video.  Another  finding  is  lack  of  touch  and  feels  capability.  This  could  be  achieved  by  using  latest  technologies  like  virtual  reality,  3-D  model  augmented  reality,  etc.  Nowadays,  the  majority  of  the online exhibitions are shifting slowly from static  exhibition  to  virtual  and  interactive  environments. 
REFERENCES 
1. Ramaiah,  C.K.  Guest  Editor  to  a  special  issue  
on Applications of Online Exhibitions. DESIDOC  
J.  of  Lib.  &  Infor.  Tech.,  2013, 33(3) 

========7========

SHIMRAy AND  R AMAIAH: DESIGN AND  D EVELOPMENT OF AN  O NLINE  Ex HIbITION ON THE  T ANGKHUL  T RIbE  F ESTIVALS 
2. Horam,  M.  Nagas  old  ways  and  new  trends. 
Social  and  Cultural  life  of  Nagas.  Cosmos  
publication,  Ukhrul,  1988.pp  60-66. 
3. Joy, R.  Tradition to proselytisation: An ethnographic  
account  of  Tangkhul  Naga  in  North-East  India.  
Inter.  J.  of  Sci.  and  Res.  Pub.,  2014,  4(2),  
1-6. 
4. Lungleng, P.  Tangkhul festivals rituals and sacrifices.  
Ukhrul:  Tangkhul  Theological Association. 5. Antoniou,  A.;  Lepouras,  G.  &  Vassilakis,  C.  
Methodology  for  design  of  online  exhibition.  
DESIDOC  J.  of  Lib.  and  Inf.  Technol.,  2013,  
33(3),  158-65. 
6. Khoon,  L.C.;  Ramaiah,  C.K.  &  Foo,  S.  The  
design and development of an online exhibition  
for heritage information awareness in Singapore.  
Program:  Elec.  Lib.  Infor.  Sys.,  2013,  37(2),  
85-93. 
7. Dix,  A.Human-Computer  Interaction.  Harlow,  
England:  Pearson  Education  Limited.1997. 8.   Peng, L.K.; Ramaiah, C.K. & Foo,S. Heuristic- 
based  user  interface  evaluation:  A  case  study  
of  NTU  Library’s  GEMS  and  OPAC  systems.  
Program:  Elec.  Lib.  Infor.  Sys.,  2013,  38(1),  
42-59. 
9.   b aker,  K.  Heuristic  Evaluation.  http://grouplab. 
cpsc.ucalgary.ca/saul/681/1997/kevin/home.html.  
(accesed  1  February  2015) 
10. Faulker,  C.The  essence  of  Human-Computer  
Interaction.  Hertfordshire,  Englad,  Prentice  
Hall,1998. 
11. Jenny,  P.  Human-Computer Interaction. Edinburgh  
Gate,  England, Addison-Wesley,  1998. 12. Khoon,  L.C.,  &  Ramaiah,  C.  K.  An  overview  
of onlibe exhibition. DESIDOC J. of Lib. & Inf.  
Technol.,  2003, 28(4),  7-20. 
13. Foo, S. Online virtual exhibition: Concepts and  
design consideration. DESIDOC J. of Lib. & Inf.  
Technol.,  2008, 28(4),  22-33. 
14. Ramaiah, C.K.  Applications of online exhibitions.  
DESIDOC  J.  of  Lib.  and  Inf.  Technol.,  2013,  
33(3),  153-157. 
15. Ramaiah,  C.K.  Trends  in  online  exhibitions.  
DESIDOC J. of Lib. & Inf. Technol., 2014,  34(2),  
83-6. 
About  the Authors 
Mr  Somipam  R.  Shimray  has  obtained  his  bLISc  from  Department  of  Library  &  Information  Science  (DLIS)  at  Pondicherry  University,  Puducherry  and  completed his MLIS degree in 2014. He has qualified  UGC-JRF. His research interests include: Design and  development  of  user  interfaces  and  user  studies. 
Dr  Chennupati  K.  Ramaiah   is  working  as  the  Dean,  School  of  Media  and  Communication  and  Professor  at    DLIS  at  Pondicherry  University.  Prior  to that he worked as Professor & Head in the same  Department  from  2010-13  and  before  that  he  also  worked  as  Professor  &  Head,  DLIS  and  University  Librarian  at  Dravidian  University,  Kuppam  from  2008-2010.  He  worked  as  an  Assistant  Professor  for  6  years  with  Nanyang Technological  University,  Singapore  from  1999-2005.  Prior  to  that  he  was  Deputy Director at DESIDOC, Delhi and worked for  14 years with the DRDO. He was a Commonwealth  Scholar  for  doing  PhD  in  the  field  of  Information  Science  in  England  during  1989-1993.  His  formal  education includes Masters in Chemistry and Library  and  Information  Science.  He  is  a  Fellow  of  the  Society  of  Information  Science,  and  member  of  many  international  professional  bodies/  societies.  He has published over 100 papers and four books.  His ares of research interests include: Multimedia &  hypertext technologies, human-computer interaction,  user  interfaces,  designing  e-books,  e-publishing,  e-learning,  archival  informatics,  and  bibliometrics. 
131 

========8========

