DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 35, No. 4, July 2015, pp. 310-315 
  2015, DESIDOC 
      BibIiometrics to Altmetrics: Changing Trends in Assessing   
Research Impact 
Anil Kumar Dhiman 
Central LIbrary, Gurukul Kangri University, Haridwar-249 404 
E-mail: akvishvakarma@rediffmail.com 
ABsTRACT 
Quantitative  measurement  in  library  arena  for  the  impact  of  researches  has  travelled  a  lot  from  bibliometrics to citation metrics and for article level and author level assessment upto h-index, g-index  and  tol-index,  etc. Altmetrics  incorporates  multiple  data  sources-both  traditional  and  emerging.  The  data collected in altmetrics are not limited to calculating article level metrics, but have the potential to  be  used  to  generate  journal  and  author  metrics  as  well  with  new  form  of  scholarly  publication. Thus,  altmetrics provides researchers and scholars both the new ways to track infuence across a wide range  of media and platforms. An attempt is made in this paper to discuss the term ‘altmetrics’ and its possible  
implications in library world. 
Keywords: Bibliometrics, citation metrics, altmetrics 
1.    InTRoduCTIon  
Bibliometric studies are said to be started with  the  publication  of  Cole  &  Eales’s  study1   on  ‘The  History of Comparative Anatomy, Part-1: A Statistical  Analysis  of  the  Literature’,  where  they  studied  the  contributions  in  the  field  of  anatomy  by  counting  the  number  of  publications  produced  by  different  countries covering a period of more than 300 years  (1543-1860) for books and the journal articles. Later  Hulme2   in 1923 used the term statistical bibliography  to mean ‘the illumination of the process of science  and  technology  by  means  of  counting  documents’.  But it was Prichard3  who used the term bibliometrics  in  1965  to  shed  light  on  the  process  of  written  communication  and  of  the  nature  and  course  of  a  discipline  (in  so  far  as  this  is  displayed  through  written  communication)  by  means  of  counting  and  analysing the various facets of written communication.  Since then, bibliometrics is developed into a scientific  tool  for  literature  assessment  purely  based  on  the  principles  of  mathematical  statistics. 
Traditionally, the bibliometrics include the citation  counts,  journal  citation  reports  and  impact  factors  and  immediacy  impact  factors  for  assessing  the  research  impact.  Later,  they  were  followed  by  g-index,  h -index, Tol index, etc. But now the research  articles are available on Web as blogging, tweeting,  posting, responding, linking, bookmarking, sharing,  linking  etc.  So,  traditional  measures  of  scholarly  output present a challenge that is ‘long established  citation-based  metrics  are  unable  to  capture  the  
increasing variety of online references to a scholar's  work’4.  However,  Barbaro, et  al. 
5 
supports  the  fact  that traditional citation metrics are still important but  are increasingly incapable of showing the full picture  as  they  do  not  measure  new  forms  of  scholarly  output,  such  as  datasets  and  software,  and  new  ways of disseminating content through social media.  Hence,  new  means  are  being  developed  for  them  and  altmetrics  is  one  of  them.  
2.    WhAT Is AlTmeTRICs 
Almetrics  that  is  also  known  as  ‘Alternative  Metrics’  (ALM)  or  ‘Alt-metrics’  is  relatively  a  new  term  that  was  coined  in  2010  by  Jason  Priem6   as  an alternative way of measuring impact in the social  web aims at enhancing and complementing the more  traditional ways of impact assessment by expanding  the idea of impact. Das & Mishra7  mention that ‘the  altmetrics  manifesto  was  published  in  2010  by  a  group  of  enthusiasts  and  subsequently  it  becomes  a  baseline  for  a  burgeoning  altmetrics  movement  that achieves a global appreciation. Later, a dynamic  organisation  was  born  to  technologically  support  multi-dimensional measurements of published works,  beyond  citation  counts  in  2011.  The  name  of  this  start-up  company  is  altmetric  LLP,  a  new  avatar  in  providing  online  services  for  generating ALM  as  a  new  performance  indicator.  Simultaneously,  the  concept of altmetrics is increasingly getting popular  since the San Francisco DORA was made public in  2012’. King & Thuna8  mention that the term ‘almetrics’  
Received 25 February 2015, revised 6 April 2015, online published 28 July 2015 

========1========

DHIMAN: BIBLIOMETRICS TO ALTMETRICS: CHANGING TRENDS IN ASSESSING RESEARCH IMPACT 
itself  is  used  to  describe  the  emerging  or  newer  data  sources  for  item  level  metrics,  for  example,  the  Twitter,  Facebook,  or  blogs.  Where  article  level  metrics  refers  to  data  collected  to  determine  the  impact  of  individual  articles,  and  altmetrics  refers  to  the  source  of  the  data,  for  example,  a  tweet,  rather  than  the  data  itself,  or  for  example,  the  number  of  times  an  item  has  been  tweeted  about.  But  ‘altmetrics,  beside  usage  statistics  and  citation  counts  is  used  as  a  value-added  service  to  showcase  their  content  impact  and  give  some  hints  on  how  this  tool  can  be  used  to  supplement  the  traditional  research  performance  assessment  exercise  in  an  institution. Altmetrics  can  provide  a  measure of impact for all non-journal scholarly works  available  in  open  access,  like  usage  statistics,  but  it  can  go  further  by  contextualising  the  readership  of  an  author’s  research  output’9. 
Rehemtula, et  al. 
9 
  further  adds  that  altmetrics  can  be  very  useful  in  providing  data  about  the  impact  of  non-journal  publications.  In  some  cases,  it  could  be  a  good  predictor  of  later  citations  such  as  usage  statistics. Also  its  immediacy  in  showing  impact  helps  to  fill  the  gap  until  the  first  citations  appear. But unlike citations, altmetrics is capable of  giving  context  and  meaning  to  impact  and,  unlike  journal  impact  factor,  it  provides  impact  at  article  level.  ‘Altmetrics  measure  the  impact  not  only  of  journal  articles  but  a  diverse  array  of  scholarly  products.  It  can  free  scholars  to  experiment  with  and  receive  credit  for  alternative  outputs  such  as  digital humanities projects, open data sets, computer  code, and blogs’10. Therefore, citations are the major  source  for  altmetrics;  but  discussion  by  the  media,  mentions  in  the  news,  discussion  by  the  public  as  well  as  importance  to  colleagues  are  also  other  sources  of  altmetrics.  
3.   AdvAnTAges  of AlTmeTRICs 
Altmetrics help to analyse impact and sharing of  raw  science  like  datasets,  codes  and  experimental  designs, ‘nanopublication’ where the citatble unit is  an argument or passage rather than entire article and  ‘widespread self-publishing’ via blogging, microblogging,  comments  or  annotation  with  scoring  mechanism  (altmetrics.org/manifesto/).  
In  Sutton’s11   opinion  most  of  the  advantages  of  altmetrics  over  traditional  measures  of  scholarly  output  stem  from  the  diversity  of  sources  used  in  altmetrics  calculations,  in  no  little  part  because  multiple  sources  of  data  allow  triangulation.  He  further elaborates that altmetrics use mostly publically  available data, making the process and calculations  completely transparent where as traditional metrics  like the journal impact factor are often made available  only  by  subscription  and  calculated  using  a  less  transparent  algorithm,  even  though  the  equation  has  been  published  many  times. 
Altmetrics also have nearly real-time metrics of  scholarly impact. According to Mounce,12   the altmetrics  may  also  be  of  particular  use  for  demonstrating  the  impact  of  articles  published  in  open  access  mega  journals.  These  mega  journals,  for  example,  the PLOS ONE, PeerJ, SAGE Open, and Scientific  Reports, etc., do not reject articles on the basis of  the perceived impact that they may have and accept  article submissions as long as they are well-reported  and technically sound contributions to the academic  literature. He further adds, thus article-level altmetrics  may  be  particularly  key  to  these  mega  journals  as  a  means  of  post-publication  filtering  and  peer  review  to  differentiate  among  many  thousands  of  articles that pass through them. While citations take  many years to accrue, but tweets, facebook shares,  blog  posts  and  reference  management  bookmarks  tend  to  occur  much  more  quickly  after  publication,  thus,  the  immediacy  of  altmetrics  relative  to  more  traditional  measures,  such  as  citations,  also  helps  this  filtering  process. 
Altmetrics  also  can  provide  the  necessary  measures for garnering attention from an audience  that might otherwise consider the work irrelevant or  of low quality. It can also facilitate discovery through  social  media  channels  that  are  more  inclusive  and  democratic than publishers and citation databases,  where  scholars  are  allowed  from  the  developing  world  to  assert  their  worldview  on  a  global  stage  for  scholarly  communication  development13. 
4.   dIsAdvAnTAges  of AlTmeTRICs 
Munnolli  &  Pujar 
14 
  mention  that  altmetric  tools  help  into  filling  up  the  time  gap  but  most  of  the  existing altmetric tools are not structured and provide  hazy  picture  of  computation. The  criteria  of  quality  measure  to  capture  science  communication  are  also  not  clear  and  also  the  quality  of  the  data  used  is  a  challenging  component  as  social  media  services  differ  from  one  to  another  and  counts  for  indicators  are  relatively  easy  to  game  and  fabricate.  Sutton11   adds  that  almetrics  lacks  the  standardisation  of  definition  that  is  provided  by  initiatives  like  Project  Counter.  So,  it  is  easy  to  misinterpret  altmetric’s  meaning  or  take  them  out  of  context.  Further,  there  is  no  one-stop  shop  for  everything because altmetrics are only beginning to  be  developed  on  larger  scales  and  to  be  accepted  on  a  larger  scale.  Moreover,  some  altmetrics  are  more easily gamed or maneuvered than others, for  example the Google Scholar citations. Besides, the  consistency, provenance and contexts are also the  problems  because  article  level  metrics  providers  have the right to collect metrics as needed for their  purposes,  but  as  article-level  metrics  consumers,  there is a problem to compare data from the same  source across providers.15  Further, some altmetrics  are more easily gamed or maneuvered than others  
311 

========2========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  4,  JuLy  2015 
but  Kelley16   suggests  that  the  sheer  volume  of  data  on  which  altmetrics  are  based  may  alleviate  this.  Further,  Thelwall,17 et  al.,  also  mention  that  there  is  a  lack  of  systematic  scientific  evidence  that altmetrics are valid proxies of either impact or  utility,  however,  a  few  case  studies  have  reported  medium correlations between specific altmetrics and  citation  rates  for  individual  journals  or  fields. 
5.    AlTmeTRICs  ResouRCes/Tools  
can  improve  existing  scholarly  filters.  It  can  be  accessed  through  http://altmetrics.org. 
5.3  Impactstory 
ImpactStory is a free open source web application  that  collects  the  data  from  a  variety  of  sources  related  to  a  broader  set  of  resources  including  preprints,  datasets,  presentation  slides  and  other  research output formats. users can create collections  of  materials  through  online  identifiers,  such  as  
Altmetrics tools capture the article level scholarly  
Google  Scholar  Profiles,  DOIs,  and  PubMed  IDs.  data which are shared in social media and measures  
ImpactStory uses more than a dozen APIs to search  the impact of content in real time basis and the data  
the  sources  ranging  from  popular  social  media  to  
scholarly  tools  like  Mendeley  and  PLoS.  Items  are  
are presented with visual effects14. However, almetrics  is  not  about  the  citations  and  not  the  webometrics  but  relatively  is  unstructured  and  closed.  Though,  there exist many resources or the tools, the help of  which  can  be  sought  to  calculate  the  altmetrics  of  different publications, Alperin18   mentions  that  there  is  no  fixed  list  of  sources  for  these  metrics,  but  they  typically  include  mentions  from  social  media  outlets  like  Twitter  and  Facebook;  links  from  blogs  from  sites  such  as  Research  Blogging,  Science  Seeker, and Wordpress.com; citations in Wikipedia;  social  bookmarking  like  delicious.com  or  academic  bookmarking like Mendeley, CiteuLike, Bibsonomy,  and  many  others.  Altmetrics  can  also  refer  to  metrics  on  alternative  research  products,  such  as  presentations, videos, data sets, and the software.  Altmetric.com  (www.altmetric.com);  ImpactStory  (http://impactstory.org/) and PlumX (https://plu.mx/)  are  the  most  used  altmetrics  tools.  
Altmetric  sources  can  be  grouped  into  various  categories,  like  usage,  captures,  mentions,  social  media  and  citations,  etc. 
Based  on  Roemer  &  Borchardt19   &  Barbaro,  et  al.5 following  are  most  popular  resources/tools  of  altmetrics:    
5.1 Altmetric.com 
Altmetric.com  analyses  the  online  impact  of  research  articles  based  on  a  variety  of  sources,  generates  a  score,  and  conveys  this  information  through  small  donut  shaped  visualisations  for  fast  comprehension.  Altmetric.com  collects  data  about  an  individual  article  and  supplies  this  data  to  publishers.  The  publisher,  who  can  subscribe  to  various  altmetric  products,  can  store  and  present  article-level metrics to their readers and the authors.  But  it  is  a  paid  service  which  can  be  accessed  through  www.altmetrics.com. 
5.2  Altmetrics.org  
subsequently  assigned  impact  categories,  such  as  generally/highly  ‘saved’,  ‘cited’,  ‘recommended’  or  ‘discussed’.  
ImpactStory  is  most  useful  for  the  researchers  publishing in non-traditional venues or with scholarship  too  new  to  have  accumulated  traditional  citations  but  it  is  not  a  comprehensive  source  for  tracing  web  impact.  It  can  be  accessed  through  http:// impactstory.it/ 
5.4  Pl os  Article  level  metrics 
Public  Library  of  Science  (PLoS)  which  has  emerged as the leading open access journal repository,  offers  an  alternative  to  traditional  impact  in  the  form  of  article  level  metrics.  It  tracks  the  influence  of individual PLoS articles, from times downloaded  to  mentions  in  social  media  and  blogs.  Besides,  internal article metrics, including comments, notes,  and  ratings  can  also  be  tracked.  While  a  valuable  resource for impact, only PLoS articles benefit from  its  metrics.  Nevertheless,  this  resource  represents  an  important  new  avenue  for  metrics,  which  future  publishers  will  likely  replicate.  It  is  available  free  and  can  be  accessed  through  http://article-level- metrics.PLoS.org/. 
5.5  PlumX 
PlumX is an impact dashboard created by Plum  Analytics for collecting data from a particularly wide  variety of sources. It summarises and compares the  impact  of  not  only  individual  researchers  but  also  of  research  centres,  departments  and  institutions. 5.6  Publish  or  Perish 
Publish or Perish (PoP) was created by Anne-Wil  Harzing  to  assist  faculty  looking  for  more  diverse  bibliometrics. It is a free and downloadable program  that  harvests  data  from  Google  Scholar  based  on  author names. users can manually remove records  
This free web site is a central hub for information  to refine the data, just similar to what is now offered  
about the growing altmetrics movement. Altmetrics. org maintains links to new online tools for calculating  impact.  Its  other  prominent  features  include  an  altmetrics ‘manifesto’ that argue to show that altmetrics  
312 
by  Google  Scholar  citations.  It  can  also  calculate  numerous  metrics,  including  alternatives  to  the  h-index  but  a  few  people  are  familiar  with  non  h-index calculations, so it is up to users to explain  

========3========

DHIMAN: BIBLIOMETRICS TO ALTMETRICS: CHANGING TRENDS IN ASSESSING RESEARCH IMPACT 
such metrics to larger audiences. It can be accessed  through  http://www.harzing.com/pop.htm. 
5.7  Readermeter 
ReaderMeter  is  also  a  free  tool  that  has  been  created  by  Dario  Taraborelli  of  the  Wikimedia  Foundation.  It  crowdsources  impact  by  processing  readership data from Mendeley. However, it contrasts  with  traditional  bibliometric  tools  and  keeps  focus  on  the  readership,  but  not  on  citation.  The  site  functions  by  compiling  reports  based  on  authors’  names, which are subsequently processed through  the Mendeley API. Each report highlights information  such  as  an  author’s  ‘HR-Index’,  ‘GR-Index’,  ‘Total  
Table 1. Comparison of popular altmetric tools7 
Products  Products tracked 
Altmetric.com Papers, datasets, books 
Impact story 
Papers, blog posts, datasets,  
software, slides 
Bookmarks’  and  ‘Top  Publications  by  Readership’.  Currently,  it  draws  the  data  from  Mendely  but  it  is  planning  to  integrate  data  from  multiple  reference  management  sites,  such  as  CiteuLike.  It  can  be  accessed  through  http://readermeter.org/. 
Besides, many other tools also exist for altmetrics  but  a  comparison  of  most  popular  tools  with  their  main  characteristics  is  presented  in  Table  1.‘ 
6.  use  of  AlTmeTRICs  In  lIBRARIes  
Altmetrics  can  provide  an  objective  way  of  understanding the reach of research. Elaborating on the  use of altmetrics, Ayre20  adds that altmetrics is useful  both for researchers and the librarians perspective.  
PlumX 
Papers, blog posts, book chapters, books,  case studies, clinical trials, conference  presentations, datasets, fgures, grants,  interviews, letters, media patents, posters,  presentations, source  code, theses/ dissertations, videos, web pages 
Output of user  interface 
Organisation type Sources 
usage stats  Dryad 
Figshare 
GitHub 
PLoS ALMs SlideShare social Web shares Facebook Google+ 
LinkedIn 
Reddit 
Twitter 
Bookmarks CiteuLike Delicious 
Mendeley scholarly Citations  PubMed 
Scopus 
non scholarly  Citations 
ScienceSeeker Wikipedia 
Free  bookmarklet, Explorer,  Profle pages, metrics widgets,  Profle page, Widget Builder, API 
metrics badges, API For proft 
API 
Nonproft sources 
X X X X X 
X 
X 
For proft 
X X X X X 
X X X X X 
X X 
X X 
X 
X X 
X X X 
X X X 
X X 
X X 
X 
X X 
Note:  X’ shows the presence of the features in altmetric tools in the products tracked. Either of them has both-positive and negative features. But the 
   users can use them accordingly for their altmetric studies.  
313 

========4========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  4,  JuLy  2015 
She  explains  that  from  a  researcher’s  perspective,  altmetrics  provide  an  alternative  measurement  of  impact alongside download and citation counts. From  the  academic  library  perspective,  this  tool  helps  to  develop  the  value  of  functionalities  offered  by  institutional  repositories  by  having  its  most  talked  about  institutional  research  available  for  legal  and  free  download.  Further,  its  assurance  that  these  conversations  surrounding  the  research  can  be  authoritatively  traced  back  to  the  author  and  their  original  piece  of  work  make  almetrics  useful  for  both  researcher  and  the  librarians. 
Based,  on  Sutton11,  major  opportunities  exist  for  following  purposes: 
6.1  Academic  libraries  
done  away  the  notion  of  a  journal  brand,  but  has  also  increased  the  importance  to  authors  for  all  articles  in  all  journals.  
Besides, Sutton11  adds that a few altmetrics exist  for e-books, mainly because “they are generally much  more  substantial  works  containing  many  individual  ideas"  and  thus  perhaps  not  the  appropriate  unit  of  analysis  to  apply  current  altmetrics.  
7.  ConClusIons  
It  is  rightly  seen  that  ‘scholarly  publishing  has  entered  into  an  era  where  the  print  journals  are  slowly  becoming  obsolete,  and  new  publication  types  emerge  from  open  science  communities  on  the  internet.  Along  with  this  development,  also  
But  altmetrics  is  getting  better  reflection  of  
comes  an  increased  need  for  research  evaluation  
Altmetrics provides opportunities to spot trends  
that  is  tailored  to  these  new  publication  types  and  and  make  informed  decisions  based  on  deep  
channels, as a supplement to the traditional academic  quantitative  evidence  for  the  academic  libraries.  
evaluation  based  on  article  and  citation  counts’22.  Further,  using  big  data  to  ‘present  an  integrated  
Now, open access is relatively established field, but  view  of  how  one  unit  of  content  or  on  researcher  
altmetrics  is  still  fairly  new,  relatively  unexplored  has moved across the digital landscape in a series  
and  under-developed  field.  
of  actions  or  digital  conversations’  which  can  ‘then  
be  scaled  up  to  clusters  of  articles,  groups  of  
social impact and outreach of scientific publications.  researchers,  or  potentially  even  a  combination  of  
Altmetrics  include  a  much  broader  spectrum  of  the  two’.  Thus,  trends  and  informed  decisions  can  
measurements (citation counts, web based references,  be  used  in  academic  libraries  for  scholarly  access  
article views/downloads, social media mentions, news  
of  information.  
6.2  Collection development 
Almetrics can help in collection development by  providing an altmetric overlay for journal usage that  will  complement  the  standard  COuNTER  statistics  provided  by  the  publishers.  It  may: 
• Capture  bookmarks,  favourites  on  slideshare,  
followers  on  GitHub,  groups  in  Mendeley,  etc. • Usage  downloads.  
• Rreviews  on Amazon,  SourceForge,  links  from  
Wikipedia,  comments  on youTube,  etc. • Social Media-Tweets, shares, recommendations  
on  Figshare,  ratings  on  SourceForge,  etc. 
• 
Citations  through  SCOPUS,  Web  of  Science  etc.  
6.3  Institution support  
media mentions, etc.) of a much broader collection  of  scholarly  authors  and  outputs  (articles,  people,  journals,  books,  data  sets,  presentations,  videos,  source  code  repositories,  etc.)11.  So  ‘altmetrics  is  here  to  stay,  and  librarians,  mainly  those  involved  in learning and research support activities, must be  familiarised  with  the  tools  available  to  implement  and  disseminate  it  and  the  librarians  may  play  a  crucial role in supporting the adoption of this metrics  by researchers in a responsible way’9. However, as  Das and Mishra7   narrate,  scientific  communities  in  the  developing  countries  are  still  naive  in  handling  highly-interactive academic communication channels  available to them with web 2.0 readiness. They need  to have the necessary information and digital literacy  competencies  to  be  conversant  with  born-digital  documents  and  sharing  them  with  academic  social  networking platforms. Equally, it is equally important  to  keep  in  mind  that  one  can  only  use  altmetrics  
Altmetrics can make the libraries and librarians  
in  certain  social  spheres  on  the  web  that  support  central  in  new  educational  role.  Thus,  it  is  helping  
them through their openness and standardised APIs  the  researchers  and  institutions  to  understand  
as  indicated  by  Mounce12.  
and  manipulate  their  own  impact  of  research  and  scholarly  communication. 
6.4 open Access 
Open  access  journal  initiatives  were  the  first  to  provide  article-level  metrics,  where  according  to  Michalek,  et  al .21   altmetrics  may  provide  new  insights for the authors and as the direct measures  of  article  rather  than  the  journal.  It  has  not  only  
314 
Thus,  altmetrics  is  still  in  its  infancy  stage  in  comparison to the decades old bibliometrics field and  it  will  take  much  time  to  become  a  mature  branch  of  study.  However,  the  importance  of  altmetrics  cannot  be  overlooked  in  changing  world  of  digital  technology.  
RefeRenCes 
1.  Cole, F.J. & Eales, N.B. The history of comparative  

========5========

DHIMAN: BIBLIOMETRICS TO ALTMETRICS: CHANGING TRENDS IN ASSESSING RESEARCH IMPACT 
anatomy.  Science  Progress ,  1917,  11,  578- 
96. 
2.  Hulme,  E.W.  Statistical  Bibliography  in  relation  
to  the  Growth  of  Modern  Civilisation.  Grafton,  
London.  1923. 
3.  Prichard,  A. Statistical Bibliography or Bibliometrics.  
Journal  of  Documentation,  1969,  25(4),  348- 
49. 
4.  Piwowar, H.A. Introduction to altmetrics: What,  
why and where? Bull. of the Ass. for Infor. Sci.  
&  Tech.,  2013, 39(4),  8-9. 
5.  Barbaro, A;  Gentili,  D.  &  Rebuffi,  C. Altmetrics  
as  new  indicators  of  scientific  impact.  J.  of   
Euro.  Asso.  for  Heal.  Infor.  and  Lib.,  2014,  
10(1),  3-6. 
6. J . P r i e m @ j a s o n p r i e m .   I   l i k e   t h e   Te r m  
#articlelevelmetrics, but it fails to imply *Diversity*  
of Measures. Lately, I'm Liking #altmetrics. 7:28  
AM  -  28  Sep  2010,  Tweet. 
7.  Das, A.K & Mishra, S. Genesis of altmetrics or  
article-level  metrics  for  measuring  efficacy  of  
scholarly communications: Current perspectives.  
J.  of  Scien.  Resea.,  2014,  3(2),  82-92. 8.    King,  P.  &  Thuna,  M.  Altmetrics  in  context  
Canada:  CARL  2013.  http://www.carl-abrc.ca/ 
uploads/SCC/CARL2013-altmetrics-EN-FA.pdf  
(accessed  on  10  February  2015). 
9.  Rehemtula, S ; Rosa, M.L.; Leitao, P. & Aviles,  
P.A.  Altmetrics  in  institutional  repositories:  
New  perspectives  for  assessing  research  
impact.  Libraries  in  the  Digital  Age  (LIDA)  
Proceedings,  13,  2014.  http://ozk.unizd.hr/ 
proceedings/index.php/lida/article/view/141/210  
(accessed  on  10  February  2015). 
10.  Rathemacher,  Andrée  J.  Article-level  metrics  
and  altmetrics:  New  ways  to  measure  the  
impact  of  your  research.  URI  AAUP  News ,  
2014,  37(4),  2-4.  https://docs.google.com/ 
file/d/0B-LbmAB0uzHGTDJKbnluOWhzauk  
(accessed  on  10  February  2015). 
11.   Sutton, Sarah W. Altmetrics: What good are they  
to academic libraries? Kansas Library Association  
college and university libraries section proceedings,  
2014, 4(2). http://dx.doi.org/10.4148/2160-942X.1041  
(accessed  on  10  February  2015). 
12.  Mounce, R. Open access and altmetrics: Distinct  
but  complementary.  Bull.  of  the  Ass.  for  Infor.  
Sci.  and  Tech.,  2013, 39(4),  14-17. 
13.    Alperin,  Juan  Pablo.  Ask  not  what  altmetrics  
can  do  for  you,  but  what  altmetrics  can  do  for  
developing countries. Bull. of the Ass. for Infor.  
Sci.  and  Tech,  2013, 39(4),18-21. 
14. Munnolli,  S.S. & Pujar, S.M. Eugene to almetrics:  
A  chase  for  virtual  foot  prints.  Annals  of  Lib.  
and  Infor.  Stu.,  2013, 60,  134-39. 
15.Chamberlain,S.  Consuming  article-level  
metrics:  Observations  and  lessons.Information  
Standards Quarterly, 2013, 25(2),4.doi:10.3789/ 
isqv25no2.2013.02  (accessed  on  10  February  
2015). 
16.  Kelley,  M.  Two  Architects  of  Library  Discovery  
Tools  launch  an  Altmetrics  Venture.  The  
Digital  Shift.  2012.  http://www.thedigitalshift. 
com/2012/05/social-media/two-architects-of-library- 
discovery-tools-launch-an-altmetrics-venture/  
(accessed  on  10  February  2015). 
17.  Thelwall,  M  ;  Haustein,  S;  Lariviere,  V.  &  
Sugimoto, C.R. Do altmetrics work? Twitter and  
ten other social web services. PLoS ONE, 2013,  
8(5),  e64841.  doi:10.137/journal.pone.0064841  
(accessed  on  10  February  2015). 
18.  Alperin,  Juan  Pablo.  Open  access  indicators:  
Assessing  Growth  and  use  of  Open  Access  
Resources  from  Developing  Regions. In   Open  
Access Indicators and Scholarly Communications  
in Latin America edited by J.P. Alperin, D. Babini  
& G. Fischman. CLACSO; Buenos Aires, 2014,  
pp.15-78.  
19. Roemer, Robin Chin & Borchardt, Rachel. From  
Bibliometrics to altmetrics:  A  changing scholarly  
landscape, C&RL  News ,  2012,  596-700.  20.  Ayre,  Lucy.  Libraries  can  embrace  the  use  
of  Altmetrics  as  a  means  to  strengthen  the  
Functionality of Institutional Repositories. 2013.  
http://blo gs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/20 
13/08/22/altmetrics-why-the-library-can-embrace- 
them/  (accessed  on  10  February  2015). 21. Michalek, A; Buschman, M. & Parkhill, M. Altmetrics:  
A modern way to assess research and journals.  
Editorial  Offi¬ce  News,   2014,  6-8.  www.ismte. 
org/resource/resmgr/eon/altmetricsmay2014.pdf  
(accessed  on  10  February  2015). 
22. Rasmussen, Pernille G & Andersen, Jens Peter.  
Altmetrics: An alternate perspective on research  
evaluation. Sciecominfo, 2013, 9,2. http://journals. 
lub.lu.se/index.php/sciecominfo/article/view/7292.  
(accessed  on  10  February  2015). 
About  the Author 
dr  Anil  Kumar  dhiman   holds  MA,  MSc,  MLIS,  BEd,  PGDCA,  MBA  (IT)  and  PhD  (Botany)  &  PhD  (LIS).  He  is  working  as  Information  Scientist  in  Gurukul  Kangri  university,  Haridwar.  He  has  170  papers  (131  in  Library  Science  and  39  in  Botany)  and  29  books  (20  in  LIS  and  09  in  Botany)  to  his  credit.  He  has  presented  48  papers in national and international seminars/conferences  including one in Nepal during February–March 2011. He  has also acted as chairperson/resource person in various  seminars/conferences of national and international repute  and  had  been  the  member  of  organising  committees.  He  is  also  associated  with  CSTT,  MHRD,  New  Delhi  as  Library  Science  Expert.  
315 

========6========

