DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 35, No. 3, May 2015, pp. 169-176 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.35.3.8673 
  2015, DESIDOC 
Academic Library in Transition from Library as a Place to Library as a  Learning Centre: A Case Study of Indian Institutes of Management 
Bharat Kumar 
Management Development Institute, Gurgaon-122 007, Haryana 
E-mail: Bharat.Kumar@hotmail.com 
AbSTrACT 
This paper is based on a study conducted in seven Indian Institute of Management (IIM) libraries,  viz., IIM-Ahmadabad, IIM-Bombay, IIM-Calcutta, IIM-Indore, IIM-Kozhikode, IIM-Lucknow, and IIM-Shilong.  It discusses in detail the comparative status of the resources, implementation of IT, viz., software being  used  to  automate  library  functions  and  provide  remote  access  to  library.  Decreasing  reliance  on  local  collections is transforming the library as a physical destination. It also discusses about different information  products and services provided by the libraries to their users to convert them as a learning centres. 
Keywords: Indian Institute of Management, academic libraries, management libraries, learning centres 
1. 
INTrODUCTION 
Library  is  an  integral  part  of  an  academic  institution and is affected by changes in the academics.  Changes  in  higher  education  and  teaching  and  learning  approaches  have  created  a  need  for  a  reconceptualisation of librarian’s role and responsibilities.  With  the  development  of  newer  technologies  and  their decreasing implementation cost, the academic  library  has  been  compelled  to  think  of  the  design,  development and delivery of its products and services  afresh.  While  the  primary  objective  of  the  library  is  to  support  teaching  and  learning,  the  concept  has  been  enhanced  considerably  given  the  needs  and  expectations  of  users  today.  The  changes  in  and  around  libraries  have  been  summed  by  Nyamboga & Kemparaju1  as “..the famous line from  Thomas  Carlyle,”  the  real  university  is  a  collection  of  books’  may  have  been  right  in  his  days,  but  it  is  not  true  today.  This  is  an  electronic  age  where  universities  and  their  libraries  are  expected  to  be  much  more  than  collections  of  books.  In  addition,  the creation of knowledge is unstoppable, and it is  being communicated at expanding rates. Indeed, this  is causing profound changes in both the economics  and the technology of libraries. As we have entered  the  21st  century,  information  technology  is  now  a  buzzword  with  incredible  fitness  and  strength  that  has  changed  the  very  nature  of  how  we  share,  store  and  disseminate  information.  The  application  and accessibility of information technology facilitate  the  free  flow  of  information,  creative  expression,  and  effective  management.  The  use  of  information  technology in libraries has tremendously increased due  
to its enhanced user satisfaction, cost effectiveness,  faster  and  simpler  programs,  rapid  communicative  interaction (resource sharing) and easier operational  procedures.” 
1.1 Changing role  of  the Academic  Libraries 
An  academic  library  has  been  the  ‘heart  of  the  educational  institution’  serving  the  academic  community of its parent body. It offers the students  curriculum  support  by  providing  a  wide  range  of  services.  Efforts  need  to  be  made  by  libraries  to  improve  and  gain  importance  in  the  teaching- learning process. In this context, King2  states. ‘The  critical  issue  for  academic  libraries  then,  as  now,  included  the  need  to  reposition  from  custodian  of  locally held collections to the gateway to information  from  beyond  the  library  walls;  accommodating  the  rapid  growth  of  information  resources  in  electronic  form;  the  investment  and  increasing  dependence  on  information  technology  as  the  enabler  in  the  delivery  of  library  and  information  services;  the  changing  teaching  and  learning  environment  and  the  converging  roles  of  libraries  and  information  technology providers’. There has been a continuous  discussion and concern regarding the role and status  of  the  academic  library.  Many  authors  have  stated  a  need  for  change  and  reconceptualisation  the  roles  and  responsibilities  academic  librarians  and  libraries.  Library  buildings  mainly  play  three  major  functions for its users: First, they house books and  other  documents.  Second,  they  provided  space  to  its  users  for  the  purpose  of  reading  and  studying.  Third, they provide a place to the users to consult/ discuss with library staff members for their information  needs.  But  with  the  passage  of  time,  development  
Received 25 March 2015, revised 6 April 2015, online published 22 April 2015 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  3,  MAY  2015 
of  technologies  and  their  reducing  implementation  cost  forced  libraries  to  migrate  its  resources  and  services  from  physical  format  to  digital  format3.  Over  the  time  of  the  last  two  decades  information  technology  (IT)  has  revolutionised  the  way  that  libraries  meet  the  needs  of  its  users.  Reading  and  research are becoming continuously less dependent  on  users’  location.  To  access  library  resources  to  a  certain  extent,  it  is  not  necessary  to  visit  library  building. These trends wonder whether there is much  future  for  library  buildings  on  academic  institution  campuses. 
Crowley4   considers  this  situation  as  a  serious  threat. According  to  him  the  subscription  of  online  resources,  in  many  cases,  has  reduced  personal  visits to the library by its users. Reducing budgetary  provisions in higher education, a situation is arising in  which some academic institutes may find it reasonable  to  reduce  or  eliminate  physical  libraries. 
Current trends suggest that the role of academic  library as information centre will continuously loose  its importance. The University of Texas at Austin5,6 shifted  the  90,000  volumes  from  its  undergraduate  library  to  a  different  location  of  the  campus.  The  new  campus  of  the  University  of  California7   at  Merced,  have  a  capacity  to  shelve  a  collection  of  only  250,000  volumes,  a  tiny  number  for  a  research library. Decreasing dependency on physical  collections  will  likely  result  in  compact  shelving  of  print  documents,  zero-growth  collections,  shifting  of  less  used  materials  to  remote  locations,  and  increased demand for facilities like interlibrary loan  (ILL)  and  document  delivery  services.  Freeman8 summarises  his  view  of  the  academic  library  as  place:  The  primary  role  of  a  library  is  to  support  and  enrich  the  students’  in  education.  However,  a  library  plays  an  important  role  in  the  development  of  society.  Here  people  come  together  on  levels  and  in  ways  that  they  might  not  in  a  residence  hall,  classroom  or  off-campus  location. 
Lewis9  provides a strategy for academic libraries  in what is left of the first quarter of the 21st  century.  There are five components of the model: (a) complete  the migration from print format to digital format; (b)  retire  legacy  print  collections;  (c)  redesign  library  space;  (d)  reposition  library  and  information  tools,  resources, and expertise; and (e) shift the focus of  collections from purchasing to curating content. Each  component of this strategy and their interactions will  be  considered  and  is  expected  that  the  result  will  provide an effective roadmap for academic libraries  and  their  parent  organisation. 
Twenty  years  ago,  parameters  of  an  excellent  academic library were: Impressive physical facilities,  vast  collection  of  documents  and  subscription  of  large number of journals, huge space for seating a  large number of student, a big budget, and services 
170 
provided  by  specialists  in  the  disciplines  taught  at  the parent organisation. Presently, these measures  are  of  lesser  importance,  and  others  have  arisen  with significant prominence10. Accordingly, measures  of accreditation for libraries are less accepted than  they  used  to  be. 
1.2 Indian  Institute  of  Management: A  
Historical  Overview 
After independence of India in 1947, the Planning  Commission was responsible to supervise and direct  country’s  development.  India  developed  rapidly  in  the  1950s.  Under  its  industrial  policy  in  the  late  1950s,  the  Commission  started  facing  problem  in  appointing  competent  managers  for  these  public  sector  enterprises.  To  solve  this  problem,  in  1959  the Planning Commission11  invited Professor George  Robbins,  University  of  California,  to  assist  in  the  establishment of an All India Institute of Management  Studies.  The  Government  of  India  on  the  basis  of  his recommendations, decided to establish two elite  management  institutes  named  as  'Indian  Institutes  of Management' (IIM) at Calcutta (now Kolkata) and  Ahmedabad these mainly offer courses at postgraduate,  doctoral  level  and  executive  education  programs.  These  IIMs  are  public,  autonomous  institutes  of  management  education  and  research  in  India.  The  establishment  of  IIMs  was  initiated  by  our  first  Prime  Minister  Jawaharlal  Nehru12.  The  IIMs  are  registered  as  societies  under  the  Indian  Societies  Registration Act14. Each IIM is autonomous in nature  and exercises independent control over its day-to-day  functions.  However,  the  administration  of  all  IIMs  and  the  overall  strategy  of  IIMs  are  supervised  by  the  IIM  Council  headed  by  Minister  of  Human  Resource Development (MHRD), India and consists  of  the  chairpersons  and  directors  of  all  IIMs  and  senior  officials  from  the  MHRD  of  the  Government  of  India15,16.  There  are  13  IIMs  (Table  1),  but  this  study  is  confined  to  the  IIMs  established  earlier  than  2010,i.e.,  IIMS.  IIMs  established  in  and  after  2010 are at the stage of their infancy  so  have  not  been  included  in  the  study. 
2. ObjeCTI veS 
Primary  objectives  of  this  study  is  to  understand: (a) Comparative  status  of  collection  in  IIM  
libraries; 
(b) Comparative  status  of  IT  application  in  IIM  
libraries;  
(c) User  services  provided  by  IIM  libraries;  and (d) How IIM libraries are transforming from traditional  
libraries  to  learning  centres. 
3. MeTHODOLO gy 
A questionnaire was prepared for data collection.  The questionnaire was divided into different headings  

========2========

KUMAR: ACADEMIC LIBRARY IN TRANSITION FROM LIBRARY  AS A  PLACE TO  LIBRARY AS A L EARNING CENTRE 
Table 1. Indian Institutes of Management (in order of establishment year)13 
S.  Name of institute  Abbre. No. 
1. Indian Institute of Management Calcutta IIM-C 2. Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad IIM-A 3. Indian Institute of Management Bangalore IIMB 4. Indian Institute of Management Lucknow IIM-L 5. Indian Institute of Management Kozhikode IIM-K 6. Indian Institute of Management Indore IIM-I 7. Indian Institute of Management Shillong IIM-S 8. Indian Institute of Management Rohtak IIM-R 9. Indian Institute of Management Ranchi IIM- 
Ranchi 10. Indian Institute of Management Raipur IIM- 
Raipur 11. Indian Institute of Management Tiruchirapalli IIM-T 12. Indian Institute of Management Udaipur IIM-U 13. Indian Institute of Management Kashipur IIM-Ka- 
shipur as  major  components  viz.,  library  details,  library  staff, budget, collection, IT infrastructure, and users  services,  etc.  It  was  sent  to  respective  libraries  by  e-mail to library staff members. For further clarification,  where required, things were discussed by e-mail as  well  as  telephonically.  The  following  description  of  IIM  libraries  is  based  on  the  data  received  in  the  questionnaires  sent  to  the  libraries. 
4. 
ANALySIS AND  FINDINg S 
All the seven IIM libraries provided the essential  details  requested  in  the  questionnaire  and  the  collected  data  is  analysed. 
4.1  IIM  Library  Overview 
All  the  libraries  have  their  own  webpage  with  links  on  the  homepage  of  the  Institute  website.  
4.2 Library budget 
On the budget, information was sought only for the  current year. In terms of budget allocation, it is very  much clear that all IIM libraries are spending more  than double on electronic resources (e-resources) in  comparison to print material. The IIM-A, IIM-B, IIM-I  libraries  had  made  provisions  for  IT  infrastructure  and in remaining IIMs’ IT infrastructure budget is part  of  the  institute’s  IT  budget.  The  budget  in  Table  2  doesn’t include subscription charges of e-resources  subscribed through INDEST-AICTE consortium and  
Table 2. Library budget (in lakhs) 
budget Head / IIMs Books 
Journals/E-resources/Databases IT Infrastructure 
IIM-A 73.55 560 2.75 
IIM-b 30 436 24 
year of esta- blishment 13 Nov 1961 11 Dec 1961 1973 1984 1996 1996 2007 2010 2010 
Location 
Website address 
Kolkata, West Bengal Ahmedabad, Gujarat Bangalore, Karnataka Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh Kozhikode, Kerala Indore, Madhya Pradesh Shillong, Meghalaya Rohtak, Haryana Ranchi, Jharkhand 
www.iimcal.ac.in www.iimahd.ernet.in www.iimb.ernet.in www.iiml.ac.in www.iimk.ac.in www.iimidr.ac.in www.iimshillong.in www.iimrohtak.ac.in www.iimranchi.ac.in 
2010 
Raipur, Chhattisgarh 
www.iimraipur.ac.in 
2011 2011 2011 
Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu www.iimtrichy.ac.in 
Udaipur, Rajasthan www.iimu.ac.in 
Kashipur, Uttarakhand www.iimkashipur. 
ac.in 
UGC  INFONET  Digital  Library  Consortium.  This  budget allocation is for e-resources and databases  subscribed  by  IIMs  through  IIMs  consortium  and  direct  from  publisher/aggregator.  
4.3 Library  Collection 
Library collection is a sum of total library materials  that  make  up  the  holdings  of  a  library.  The  data  are  presented  in  the  Table  3.  
The largest collection of books, i.e., 188024 is in  IIM-A library, and IIM-S library that is the youngest  library  in  IIMs  has  least  collection  of  11622  books.  IIM-A  is  subscribing  largest  number  of  e-resources  and  least  by  IIM-S  as  it  was  established  in  2007  and  still  in  its  child  growth. 
4.4   e lectronic resources  through  Consortium 
The  IIMs  are  subscribing  e-resources  through  IIM  Consortium;  INDEST-AICTE  Consortium,  UGC  INFONET  Digital  Library  Consortium,  and  as  well  as  directly  from  publisher/aggregator. 
4.4.1 
IIM  Consortium 
IIM  Consortia17   was  set  up  in  2000.  IIM-K  took  an  initiative  in  the  establishment  of  the  IIM  Consortia,  and  its  first  meeting  held  at  Calicut.  The  formal  approval  of  the  consortia  came  from  the IIM Directors meeting held at IIM, Kozhikode in  August 2001. The objective was: To ensure among  
IIM-C 90 500 -- 
IIM-I 10 400 10 
IIM-K 100 250 -- 
IIM-L 20 4.10 -- 
IIM-S 
}  400 
-- 
171 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  3,  MAY  2015 
Table 3. Library collection (as on 31.12.2014) 
Documents IIM-A IIM-b Books 188024 191462 Current Periodicals 222 168 Theses 
— Print Format 300 160 — Digital Format 300 160 Electronic Resources 
— E-journals 14453 2090 — E-books 11000 1400 — Company/Country Databases 71 20 the  IIMs,  optimum  utilisation  and  enhancement  of  the  resources,  and  to  minimise  the  expenditure  by  consortia-based  subscriptions  to  the  commonly  subscribed  databases  and  journals.The  meetings  with  publishers/aggregators  proved  constructive  and  fruitful.  During  its  first  meeting,  a  number  of  electronic  resources  were  jointly  purchased  by  IIMs  at  very  competitive  prices,  and  remaining  publishers/aggregators  promised  to  provide  their  resources  at  discounted  price.  In  13th meeting  of  IIM Consortium18,  held  at  IIM  Raipur,  the  members  felt  that  the  IIM  Consortium’s  presence  should  be  strengthened  in  the  INDEST  Consortium.  It  was  also decided that from next year, in IIM Consortium  Annual Meet, a representative of INDEST Consortium  to  be  invited.The  Consortium  negotiates  for  the  better  price  for  the  e-resources  to  be  subscribed  by  all  IIM  libraries  that  are  not  available  in  other  consortia  or  don’t  contain  journals  as  per  their  requirements.  Payment  of  subscription  charges  of  these  resources  is  made  by  each  IIM  directly  to  the  publisher/aggregator. 
4.4.2 
INDEST-AICTE  Consortium 
The ‘Indian National Digital Library in Engineering  Sciences and Technology (INDEST) Consortium19  was  set up by the MHRD in 2003 on the recommendation  of the Expert Group appointed by the Ministry under  the chairmanship of Prof. N. Balakrishnan. The IIT  Delhi was designated as the Consortium Headquarters  to  coordinate  all  its  activities.  In  December  2005,  the  Consortium  was  re-named  as  INDEST-AICTE  Consortium. It subscribes e-resources for the member  institutions  at  discounted  rates  and  on  favorable  terms  and  conditions.  The  Ministry  provides  funds  for  subscription  of  these  e-resources.  
4.4.3 UGC  INFONET  Digital  Library  Consortium 
The UGC-INFONET Digital Library Consortium 
20 was  formally  launched  by  Dr  A.P.J.  Abdul  Kalam,  the  President  of  India,  in  December,  2003.  The  Consortium  proved  to  be  a  recipe  to  university  libraries  that  have  been  discontinuing  subscription  of  journals  because  of  ‘serials  crisis’.  The  crisis  
172 
IIM-C 142924 208 
IIM-I 28000 80 
IIM-K 35000 270 
IIM-L 43887 440 
IIM-S 11622 50 
154 -- 
22 -- 
8 8 
28 -- 
-- -- 
1771 1700 20000 1500 1200 1024 20000 200000 60000 -- 
42 13 50 42 10 was  a  result  of  an  increase  in  the  subscription  price  of  journals  much  faster  than  the  inflation  rate,  the  increase  in  number  of  journals  and  the  insufficiency of funds available to the libraries. The  Consortium  is  executed  by  the  INFormation  and  LIBrary NETwork (INFLIBNET) Centre, Gandhinagar  and  funded  by  the  UGC. 
4.5 Library  Staff 
Library staff should be qualified/competent and  adequate  in  number  to  manage  the  library  and  its  services  effectively  and  efficiently.  Number  of  staff  members  and  their  level  depends  on  the  factors  like  size  of  library  collection,  annual  additions,  library  budget,  library  hours,  number  of  users,  services  offered,  information  products  compiled,  level  of  automation,  etc.  In  all  IIM  libraries,  almost  all  positions  are  filled.  The  position  of  Librarian  is  vacant in IIM-L since a long time which affects the  functioning  and  efficiency  of  library. 
4.6 Library  Membership 
All  IIM  libraries  are  providing  access  to  the  library,  its  resources  and  services  to  its  all  their  faculty  members,  staff,  and  students.  Alumni  can  also  use  the  library  in  their  respective  institutes  except IIM-K and IIM-S. The IIM-K is at the planning  stage  to  provide  this  facility  to  its  alumni. All  IIMs  except  IIM-K  and  IIM-S  are  providing  access  to  their  library  to  corporate,  institutes  and  individuals  on  charges  basis. 
4.7 Application  of  IT 
Rapid  developments  in  IT  and  their  extensive  applications in all aspects of everyday life, academic  libraries are no exception. Lynch21  believes that: "IT  has affected librarians in three stages of ‘rebuilding’,  ‘innovation’  and  ‘transformation’.  The  first  effect  of  IT  was  automation  and  rebuilding.  The  important  characteristic  of  this  stage  is  the  reduction  of  costs  and  speeding  up  of  activities.  In  the  second  stage,  libraries  realised  the  new  capabilities  of  IT.  In  addition  to  above  advantages,  they  used  it  for  new services. The third stage began at late 1980s,  

========4========

KUMAR: ACADEMIC LIBRARY IN TRANSITION FROM LIBRARY  AS A  PLACE TO  LIBRARY AS A L EARNING CENTRE 
and  library  environments  were  changed  due  to  the  application  of  IT." 
4.7.1 
Library  Management  Software 
The  IIM  libraries  are  fully-automated  using  the  different  library  management  software.  IIM-K  and  IIM-L  are  using  LibSys  while  IIM-B,  IIIM-C,  IIM-I,  and IIM-S are using VTLS Virtua. IIM-A is the only  library that is using Koha, an open source software  (OSS).  IIM-I  and  IIM-C  libraries  switched  over  to  VTLS Virtua from LibSys in 2005, 2015, respectively,  and  IIM-A  library  turned  to  Koha  from  LibSys  in  2014. Libraries stated reason for migrating to another  software  is  to  provide  more  and  better  services  to  their  users.  They  feel  that  the  new  software  is  more  efficient  in  the  fully-automated  environment. Expectation  and  requirements  of  libraries  and  its  users are always keep on changing so library should  change  the  software  as  per  chaining  requirements  or  should  get  developed  the  required  features  into  existing  software  as  software  development  is  also  an  ongoing  process.  Libraries  should  carry  out  SWOT  analysis  and  ROI  before  switching  to  other  software.  In  the  times  of  OSS,  only  one  library  is  using  KOHA.  It  needs  to  be  further  researched  why  other  premier  institutions  like  IIMs  have  not  switched  over  to  OSS. 
4.7.2 
Remote Access 
Publishers/aggregators are providing e-resources  on  IP-based  access,  allowing  the  use  of  these  e-resources  only  within  the  institution  premises.  It  is  to  avoid  misuse  and  unauthorised  use  of  the  resources through remote access by username and  password method. But it is also a limitation for the  users.  Users  always  wish  to  access  e-resources  from  anywhere,  anytime.  Therefore,  libraries  are  providing remote access to its users using different  software. IIM-A, IIM-C, and IIM-K are using RemoteXS;  IIM-B  ,and  IIM-I  are  using  EZproxy,  and  IIM-L  is  using Athens  software. 
4.7.3 
Institutional  Repository 
An institutional repository (IR) is an online locus  for  collecting,  preserving,  and  disseminating  of  the  intellectual  output  of  an  academic  institution.  To  enhance the accessibility and visibility of the research  output of the faculty members and research scholar  of  the  institute.  Most  of  the  IIMs  have  created  IR  to  collect,  preserve,  and  distribute  the  scholarly  output of their faculty members and students. These  include  articles,  theses,  working  papers,  annual  reports,  research  projects,  etc.  The  IIM-A,  IIM-B,  IIM-I, IIM-K are using DSpace whereas IIM-L is using  Greenstone.  The  IIM-C  and  IIM-S  don’t  have  IR. 
4.7.4 
Low  Vision  Solution 
The IIM-C and IIM-I libraries had thought about low  vision solution. The IIM-C has purchased OpenBook,  PEARL, and JAWS (Job Access With Speech) from  Freedom  Scientific.  OpenBook22   converts  printed  documents  or  graphic-based  text  into  an  e-text  format  on  PC,  using  high-quality  speech  and  the  latest optical character recognition (OCR) technology.  This software is designed for people who have low  vision  or  are  visually  impaired  who  need  access  to  print  and  electronic  materials.  OpenBook  and  the  PEARL  document  camera  create  a  complete  scanning  and  reading  system  for  work,  home,  and  school.  
JAWS23   is  one  of  the  world's  most  popular  screen  reader,  developed  for  people  whose  vision  loss deprive them from seeing content on the screen  or  navigating  with  a  mouse.  It  provides  output  in  speech  and  Braille  format.  IIM-I  has  Zoom-EX24,  which  allows  one  to  convert  any  printed  material  into  multiple  formats  such  as  speech,  large  print,  MP3  or  text  files,  promptly. 
5. 
ServICeS AND  FACILITI eS 
5.1  Circulation 
Circulation  is  an  essential  service  in  a  library  and would continue till the print material is available.  Presently, in IIM libraries barcode-based circulation  system is in practice. However, IIM-I and IIM-S are  the only libraries that have implemented an RFID- based  system  in  their  libraries  and  circulation  of  books  is  also  based  on  this  technology. 
5.2 OPAC 
An Online Public Access Catalog (OPAC) is an  online  database  of  a  library  or  group  of  libraries  holdings.  Users  can  search  to  locate  documents  and other material available at a library by different  approaches,  like  title,  author,  etc.  All  IIM  libraries  are  providing  OPAC  to  their  users. 
Except  IIM-L,  all  other  IIMs  under  this  study  have  developed  union  catalogue  by  implementing  EBSCO Discovery Services. A user of any  IIM  can  search  a  book  in  any  other  IIM  OPAC  and  also  request  to  his/her  library  to  get  it  on  the  loan. 
5.3 Inter-library  Loan 
Inter-library  loan  (ILL)  is  a  service,  one  of  the  oldest service in libraries, where a user of one library  can borrow books or get photocopies of documents  that  are  available  with  another  library. All  IIMs  are  providing  loan  facility  of  books  as  well  as  articles  among  them  without  any  charges.  It  saves  a  lot  of  time  faculty  members  and  research  students  in  getting  a  required  document.  
173 

========5========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  3,  MAY  2015 
6. 
INFOrMATION  PrODUCTS 
All  IIMs  are  compiling  different  information  products  for  their  users  to  keep  them  up-to-date  and build proximity between the library and its users  to  maximise  the  use  of  library  resources.  
6.1 New Arrival  of books 
‘New  Arrival  of  Books’  is  an  alert  service  that  updates users about new books added to the library  collection  during  specified  period.  IIM-A  provides  this  service  named  as  ‘New Arrival  (Books)’  in  the  form of a pdf file on the weekly basis. It comprises  a  list  of  books  arranged  under  different  subject  headings  and  contains  bibliographic  information  of  the  book  along  with  its  picture  and  hyperlink  to  publisher’s  website.  IIM-B  provides  the  services  as ‘New Accessions’ providing bibliographic details  of  the  book  and  as  a  user  clicks  on  the  title  of  a  book  it  directs  the  user  to  the  catalog  of  that  title.  IIM-C has named this service as ‘New Arrivals’ and  provides  it  on  a  weekly  basis.  In  it  the  titles  are  arranged  by  broad  class  numbers  and  contain  a  brief abstract of a book along with its bibliographic  details. 
Only  IIM-I  library  is  using  Shelfari25,  a  social  cataloging website for books, for newly added books  in  the  library.  It  is  updated  on  the  daily  basis,  and  a  link  of  it  has  been  provided  on  library  web  page  ‘New  Arrival’  (Fig.1).  Shelfari25   was  founded  by  RealNetworks alumni and launched on 11 October,  2006. IIM-L provides the service as ‘Current Additions’  on the monthly basis providing bibliographic details  of  books. 
Figure 1. Shelfari of IIM-I26 6.2 New Arrivals  of journals 
The  IIM-A  provides  this  service  named  ‘New  Arrivals (Print Journals)’ on weekly basis containing  the  title  of  the  journal,  volume,  and  issue  details.  IIM-L has calls it service as ‘Current Content Service’  and notifies contents of the periodicals as received  by  the  library  on  the  weekly  basis.  
174 
The  title  of  the  journal  does  not  serve  much  purpose.  It  should  include  the  title  of  the  article,  the  name  of  the  author(s)  and  also  abstract,  and  journals should be arranged subject-wise. Thus, by  reading  abstract  a  user  can  determine  whether  an  article  is  relevant  to  him/her  or  not. 
6.3 Other  Information  Products 
IIM-A  compiles  a  wide  range  of  products  to  its  users.  ‘IIMA  Weekly  News  Digest’  is  arranged  under  two  sections-news  on  IIMA  and  ‘Faculty  Column’  and  as  a  user  clicks  on  Full  Texts/he  can  read  the  complete  news.  In  ‘Quick  Guide  to  Databases’ databases are categorised under seven  headings based on the type of information contained.  As  one  clicks  on  a  database,  it  will  redirect  to  the  website  of  the  database.  ‘Offline  Database  Installation Guide’ is a manual regarding installation  of  five  offline  databases  on  users’  computer      Equity, ACE  MF,  Capitaline  PLUS,  CMIE  Prowess, — and  Thomson  Reuters  Eikon.  As  a  user  clicks  on ACE  the  Installation  Guide,  a  pdf  file  opens,  describing  steps  in  details  to  install  the  database  on  his/her  computer system. Another service ‘Student Information  Reference Service’ is a dedicated service to assist  students  for  information  requirements  to  complete  their  assignments,  projects,  class  preparation,  etc.  A  dedicated  library  professional  staff  member  is  available in the library from Monday-Friday between  5.00  PM-08:00  PM,  who  assists  the  students  in  addressing  their  information  requirements.  The  requirements  may  include  help  in  identifying  the  appropriate databases for assignments or class work,  customised  orientation  to  specific  databases,  etc.  Under heading of ‘Industry Information’, the resources  have been classified into different categories according  to  their  content  type.  It  includes  company/industry  information, country information, academic literature,  e-books,  legal  information  resources,  newspaper  and  magazines,  etc.,  and  a  brief  description  of  the  resource,  a  user  guide  and  a  link  to  download  mobile  apps  for  Android  and  Apple  phones.  
6.4 Other  Services 
IIM-I  and  IIM-L  have  also  developed  ‘Children  Section’  for  campus  community  children.  IIM-I  has  approximately 800 books and its opening hours are  as  library  hours.  In  this  section  IIM-L  has  around  600  books  and  remains  open  from  5-7  pm  on  all  working  days.  It  is  an  excellent  initiative  of  these  two  libraries  to  contribute  to  overall  development  and  to  create  reading  habit  among  the  children.  IIM-L  library  has  a  similar  product  for  its  students,  named, ‘Reading Beyond Curriculum’. This product  is  development  by  the  library  in  consultation  with  faculty  members  of  the  institute.  It  contributes  to  the overall development of the students along with  

========6========

KUMAR: ACADEMIC LIBRARY IN TRANSITION FROM LIBRARY  AS A  PLACE TO  LIBRARY AS A L EARNING CENTRE 
developing  a  reading  habit,  and  it  is  also  an  effort  to  optimise  the  usage  to  library  resources. 
7. 
SOCIAL  MeDIA 
Social  media  is  an  application  that  enables  users  to  create  and  share  content  to  facilitate  much  closer  relationships  between  libraries  and  their  patrons.  The  IIM-K  library  is  the  only  library  that is on Facebook and provides information about  institute news and activities. According to a survey  conducted  by  Library  Journal’s  on  Public  Library  Marketing  Methods  and  Best  Practices,  86  %  of  libraries  were  found  using  social  media.  Mainly,  two  social  media  platforms,  Facebook  (99  %)  and  Twitter (56 %) were used by libraries. Our libraries  are  yet  to  take  off  in  this  regard. 
8. 
CONCLUSIONS AND SUggeSTIONS 
All  IIMs  libraries  are  playing  a  vital  role  to  achieve  objectives  of  their  parent  institutions.  The  IIMs are subscribing to a large number of e-resources  and  providing  remote  access  to  their  users  so  that  they can access them anytime and from anywhere.  Libraries  are  compiling  different  services/products  and  providing  personalised  reference  service  to  support them in their studies and to build proximity  between  the  library  and  its  users  to  increase  the  use  of  its  resources.  Libraries  are  giving  users  needs  and  preferences  primary  consideration 
The following measures are suggested to make  libraries as learning centres and maximise the use  of  library  resources. 
(a) The  IIMs  are  acquiring  e-resources  from  three  
consortia. Subscribing resources from different  
consortia is not advisable. It results in duplication  
of  efforts  and  wastage  of  time  and  energy.  
There should be only one consortium at national  
level  for  all  type  of  academic  institutions  with  
different sections like of science and technology,  
business  and  management,  social  sciences,  
medicine,  law,  etc.  and  e-resources  should  be  
available  in  it  as  per  their  requirements  of  all  
institutions.  It  will  strengthen  the  consortium  
and its power to bargain for better subscription  
price,  terms  and  conditions,  embargo,  access  
to the back volumes, perpetual access, archival  
rights,  training  programmes,  etc.,  because  of  
large  number  of  subscription  base. 
(b) All IIMs are using different software to automate  
library  functions  and  services  and  to  provide  
access to its resources. All libraries may purchase  
same  software  so  that  they  can  bargain  on  
price  and  terms  and  conditions. They  can  also  
pressurise  vendor  to  customise  the  software  
as  per  their  requirements.  One  library  is  using  
OSS  that  can  be  practiced  by  others  also  in  
view  of  its  advantages  and  trends. 
(c) The  IIMs  are  compiling  different  information  
products  and  services  for  their  users.  Best  
practices should be circulated. The libraries should  
expand  the  activities  of  IIM  Consortium  where  
the  exchange  of  staff  will  enhance  expertise  
across libraries. They should increase interaction  
among library staff members to share and learn  
from  services  compiled/provided  and  practices  
followed  in  different  libraries.  It  will  develop  
competencies  and  broaden  understanding  of  
library  staff  members.  Even  it  can  be  planned  
that  a  library  staff  of  one  IIM  should  visit  and  
stay  for  some  time  to  another  IIM  to  observe  
and  learn  functioning  of  a  section/service(s)  
provided  by  the  library.  After  returning  to  his  
own  institute,  s/he  can  improve  functioning  of  
the  library. 
(d) ‘Children Section’ at IIM-I and IIM-L and ‘Reading  
Beyond  Curriculum’  developed  by  IIM-L  is  a  
superb  initiative  of  the  library  to  develop  and  
create reading habit among the children and its  
students.  All  other  libraries  may  think  in  this  
direction  to  inculcate  reading  habits. 
(e) Libraries should provide personalised reference  
service  to  assist  its  users  in  selecting  an  
appropriate  resource,  do  complex  search,  to  
use  a  database  to  fetch  relevant  information  
without  wastage  of  time.  Library  should  invite  
publishers/aggregators  to  conduct  training  
programmes for e-resource/databases and how  
to  creation  of    alert  services. 
(f) All  libraries  should  be  on  social  media.  It  is  
appropriate  to  keep  the  users  up-to-date  and  
marketing  of  library  services  and  information  
products.  
reFereNCeS 
1. Nyamboga, C.M. & Kemparaju, T.D. Information  
technology  in  university  libraries  in  Karnataka.  
Information  Development,   2002,  18(4),  257- 
65. 
2. King,  Helen.  The  academic  library  in  the  21st 
century:  What  need  for  physical  space?  In  
Proceedings  of  the  IATUL  Conferences.  Paper  
14.  http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/cgi/viewcontent. 
cgi?article=1506&context=iatul  (accessed  on  8  
February  2015). 
3. Smith, Gregory A. Academic libraries in transition:  
Current trends, future prospects. 2006. Faculty  
Publications and Presentations. Paper 5. http:// 
digitalcommons.liberty.edu/lib_fac_pubs/5 (accessed  
on  2  February  2015). 
4. Crowley,  B.  Tacit  knowledge,  tacit  ignorance,  
and the future of academic. librarianship. Coll.  
& Res. Lib., 2001, 62(6), 565-584. doi: 10.5860/ 
175 

========7========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  3,  MAY  2015 
crl.62.6.565. http://crl.acrl.org/content/62/6/565. 
full.pdf  (accessed  on  4  February  2015) 5. Blumenthal,  R.  College  libraries  set  aside  
books  in  a  digital  age.  The  New  York  Times, 
May 2005. http://www.nytimes.com/2005/05/14/ 
education/14library.html?_r=0  (accessed  on  30  
January  2015) 
6. Flawn  Academic  Center:  Frequently  asked  
questions. http://www.utexas.edu/computer/fac/ 
faq.html  (accessed  on  8  February  2015). 7. Carlson, S. Shelve under ‘e’ for electronic. The  
Chronicle of High. Edu., 2005. http://chronicle. 
com/article/Shelve-Under-E-for/65383/ (accessed  
on  11  January  2015) 
8. Freeman,  G.T.  The  library  as  place:  Changes  
in  learning  patterns,  collections,  technology,  
and use. In  Library as Place: Rethinking Roles,  
Rethinking  Spaces,  Council  on  Library  and  
Information Resources, Washington, D.C., 2005.  
pp. 1-9. http://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/pub129/ 
pub129.pdf  (accessed  on  22  January,  2015). 9. Lewis, David W. A strategy for academic libraries  
in  the  first  quarter  of  the  21st   century.  Coll.  &  
Res.  Lib.,   2007,  68(5),  418-34.  DOI:  10.5860/ 
crl.68.5.418 
10. Kyrillidou,  M.  Introducing  ‘NewMeasures’.  In  
16. Elite B-school students back in radar of finance  
co. Business Standard,  12 November 2009. http:// 
www.business-standard.com/article/management/ 
elite-b-school-students-back-in-radar-of-finance- 
cos-109111200197_1.html  (accessed  on  21  
January  2015). 
17. IIM  Consortium.  http://www.iimk.ac.in/libportal/ 
iimconsortium.php  (accessed  on  2  February  
2015) 
18. 13th  Meeting of the IIM Library Consortium, 28- 
29 September 2012. http://www.iimraipur.ac.in/ 
news64.htm  (accessed  on  23  February  2015). 19. INDEST-AICTE  Consortium.  http://paniit.iitd. 
ac.in/indest/index.php/about-us  (accessed  on  
2  February  2015). 
20. UGC INFONET Digital Library Consortium. http:// 
www.inflibnet.ac.in/econ/about.php (accessed on  
2  February  2015) 
21. Lynch,  C.  From  automation  to  transformation:  
40 years of librarian and information technology  
in  higher  education.   Education  Review, 35(1),  
60-8. 
22. OpenBook.  Low  Vision  Solutions:  OpenBook®  
and PEARL®.http://www.freedomscientific.com/ 
Products/LowVision/OpenBook. (accessed on 28  
February  2015). 
2004, Orlando. http://www.libqual.org/documents/ 
admin/kyrillidou_ALCTS_2004.pdf (accessed on  
22  February,  2015) 
11. Bhargava,  R.C.,  et  al .  Report  of  IIM  Review  
Committee.  Government  of  India:  Ministry  of  
Human  Resource  Development.  25  September  
2008. http://mhrd.gov.in/sites/upload_files/mhrd/ 
files/document-reports/bhargava_IIMreview_0.pdf  
(accessed  on  21  January  2015). 
12. 'Thanks but No Thanks'-IIM Ahmedabad's Pioneering  
Decision’.  http://www.liberalsindia.com/update/ 
PressRelease9.php/  (accessed  on  21  January  
2015). 
13. Indian  Institute  of  Management.  Wikipedia.  
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indian_Institutes_of_ 
Management  (accessed  on  20  January  2015) 14. Nanda, Prashant K. Diploma to degree hope for  
IIMs-HRD ministry works with B-schools to change  
course  name.   Telegraph,   Calcutta,  13  January  
2012.  http://www.telegraphindia.com/1111204/ 
jsp/nation/story_14836608.jsp (accessed on 21  
January  2015). 
15. External  review  of  IIMs  to  be  undertaken:  Shri  
Kapil  Sibal  Chairs  Meeting  of  IIM  Directors’.  
National  Informatics  Centre.  http://pib.nic.in/ 
newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=76962 2 November  
2011  (accessed  on  21  January  2015). 
American Library Association Annual Conference- 23. 
JAWS. Blindness Solutions: JAWS®.http://www. 
176 
freedomscientific.com/Products/Blindness/JAWS.  
(accessed  on  28  February  2015). 
24. Zoom-EX. 
25. Cook,  John.  Shelfari  an  online  meeting  place  
for  bibliophiles  (10/10/2006).  Seattle  PI  http:// 
www.seattlepi.com/business/article/Shelfari-an- 
online-meeting-place-for-bibliophiles-1216875. 
php  (accessed  on  15  February  2015). 26. IIM-I  Shelfari.  http://www.shelfari.com/jadongs/ 
shelf  (accessed  on  4  March  2015). 
About  the Author 
Mr bharat Kumar  is Assistant Librarian at Management  Development Institute, an AMBA accredited B-school  of India. He holds a MPhil (Library and Information  Science)  and  Post  Graduate  Diploma  in  Computer  Application. He has served in a number of institutes/ universities in different capacities. He has developed  online  course  on  information  retrieval  for  SAARC  Documentation Centre. He has authored number of  articles in journals, books and presented papers in  national and international conferences and published  a  book  titled  ‘Progressive  Trends  in  Electronic  Resource Management in Libraries’ with IGI Global,  USA. 

========8========

