DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 35, No. 3, May 2015, pp. 149-159 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.35.3.8674 
  2015, DESIDOC 
Library and Information System in Andhra Pradesh: An Overview 
R.S.R. Varalakshmi 
Department of Library and Information Science, Andhra University, Visakhapatnam 
E-mail: rvsn1234@hotmail.com 
AbStrAct 
The State of Andhra Pradesh had a long history of library system prior to Indian independence when  it was part of Madras Presidency. Over the time signifcant changes occurred in the library and information  system. The present study is an attempt to overview the growth and functioning of academic, public and  special library and information systems in the State of Andhra Pradesh. The study has been taken up  with  six  parameters–budget,  professional  staff,  collection,  automation,  ICT  infrastructure  and  services.  The analysis is based on data gathered through questionnaire, phone calls and information available on  institutions’ Website. The fndings indicate lopsided functioning of all types of libraries. 
Keywords: Academic libraries, public libraries, special libraries, Andhra Pradesh libraries 
1.      IntrOductIOn 
 Andhra Pradesh is one of the 29 states of India.  The state has a total of 13 districts, the Anantapur  district  is  the  largest  and  Srikakulam  district  is  the  smallest  district.  The  districts  are  divided  into  two  regions  of  the  state,  i.e.,  Coastal  Andhra  and  Rayalaseema.  Coastal  Andhra  comprises  the  9  districts: Srikakulam, Vizianagaram, Visakhapatnam,  East  Godavari,  West  Godavari,  Krishna,  Guntur,  Prakasam, Sri Potti Sri Ramulu Nellore. Rayalaseema  comprises  the  4  districts:  Kurnool,  Chittoor,  YSR  Kadapa,  and Anantapur. 
Libraries  as  community  centres  and  part  of  educational  institutions  have  a  long  history,  in  the  State  and  considered  as  ‘SaraswathiNilayams’.  Librarianship, as a special skilled work was recognised  in  the  State  95  years  ago  in  1920,  when  the  first  training  course  in  librarianship  was  started  under  the  auspices  of  Andhra  Desa  Library  Association.   The  Andhra  University,  Visakhapatnam  was  the  pioneer  to  introduce  (LIS)  course  in  1935  with  the  initiation  of  the  then  University  Librarian,  M.O.  Thomas, who was the first President of Indian Library  Association.  It  was  offered  as  a  summer  course  at  certificate  level  at  irregular  periods.  Later,  it  was  switched  over  to  one  year  Diploma  in  1937.  Thus  the  libraries  have  been  managed  by  professionally  qualified  persons  and  the  libraries  got  their  own  identity  as  service  organisations.  Over  the  years,  libraries  have  marched  a  long  way  and  reached  a  state of relative maturity as knowledge management  centres and reaching out to the users with a blend  of  traditional  and  modern  services.  
2. ObJEctIVE 
The  study  presents  an  overview  of  academic,  public, and special library and information systems in  the State of Andhra Pradesh (A.P.). An attempt has  been  made  for  a  demographic  display  of  libraries  under  the  traditional  three  categories,  though  the  list  is  not  exhaustive.  
3. MEthOdOLOgy 
Survey method was adopted with questionnaire  as a tool to gather data but very few responses were  received  in  the  expected  time  span.  Hence,  most  of  the  data  is  gathered  from  the  websites  of  the  organisations /institutions. The support of concerned  library  staff  was  taken  through  phone  calls  to  fill  in  the  gaps  especially  budget  and  staff  strength.  However,  there  are  gaps  owing  to  non-availability  or  no  response  from  the  library  professionals.  
The  study  has  taken  into  consideration  six  parameters  and  studied  with  basic  data.  Owing  to  the  quantum  of  libraries  to  be  studied  and  the  time  constraint,  in-depth  data  were  not  gathered  hence,  analysis  presents  only  an  overview  of  the  conditions  and  not  a  critical  analysis.  The  study  was  conducted  on  the  following  parameters. (a)  Budget —The functioning of a library depends on  
the availability of adequate financial resources.  
The  budgetary  position  of  libraries  in  A.P.  is  
presented. 
(b)  Professional staff —The strength of professional  
staff is an essential factor in delivering information  
services to the respective users in an institution. 
Received 25 March 2015, revised 15 April 2015, online published 22 April 2015 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  3,  MAY   2015 
The  study  displays  the  staff  position  in  the  
libraries  of  A.P.  
(c)  Collection —Now the print and electronic Collection  
play an equal role in storing and disseminating  
knowledge. Hence an attempt has been made to  
ascertain  the  strength  of  the  collection  among  
the  libraries  of  the  State. 
(d)  Automation—The UGC, RRRLF, State Governments  
are supporting the libraries with financial grants  
for  computerisation  of  library  activities.  Hence  
the  status  of  automation  activities  have  been  
studied.  
(e)   ICT Infrastructure—The computer and communication  
technologies  have  metamorphosed  the  library  
environment as digital/virtual information system.  
However,  it  is  a  fact  that  all  libraries  are  not  
fortunate to possess the required ICT infrastructure.  
Therefore an attempt was made to find out the  
realities  of  infrastructure  facilities.  
(f)  Services —There are well established practices  
like  reference,  bibliographic,  alerting,  analysis  
and  consolidation  and  review  type  of  services  
besides support services like document delivery,  
translation,  etc.  With  advent  of  web-based  
services,  the  users  are  being  reached  through  
online  services.  How  the  libraries  are  able  to  
blend  traditional  and  web-based  services  and  
achieve the expected target services has been  
studied. 
4.   AcAdEMI c  LIbrArIES In AndhrA 
PrAdESh 
Academic libraries include school, college, university  libraries. However, school libraries are not included  in the study and the scope of academic libraries is  confined to university, college and junior college or  plus  two  level.  Though  the  goal  of  all  these  types  of  academic  libraries  is  to  cater  to  the  needs  of  academic  community  for  supplementing  the  study  and  research  they  differ  enormously  in  the  value  and  content  from  one  another. 
The  higher  education  in  the  State  of  Andhra  Pradesh  is  offered  through:  
(i)  University  colleges  
(ii)  Government  colleges  
(iii) Government-aided  private  colleges  and  (iv)  Private-unaided  colleges.  
The  Andhra  Pradesh  State  Council  of  Higher  Education  (APSCHE)  (came  into  existence  w.e.f.  20.05.1988  through  Act  16  of  1988)  oversees  the  matters  relating  to  higher  education  in  the  State  and advices the Government in matters ‘connected  therewith  and  incidental  thereto’1. 
4.1 university  Libraries 
The university libraries form a distinct lot among  the academic libraries as they have been regarded  
150 
as  central  to  the  activities  of  higher  learning,  i.e.,  teaching, learning and research. A well-established  library  with  an  all-round  and  up  to  date  collection  suitable  for  learning  and  research  is  a  necessity  for  higher  education  system  since  they  proved  to  be  significant  partners  in  the  development  of  scholarship. There  are  10  conventional,  13  special  and  5  deemed  universities  in  the  State.  The  data  of these universities regarding budget, professional  staff strength, and collection are presented in Table 1  and status of automation, ICT infrastructure, services  are  presented  in  Table  2.  
4.1.1  Budget 
The  conspicuous  observation  with  regard  to  budget is that conventional state university libraries  and  the  well  established  old  universities  have  good  funding  crossing  one  crore  per  annum  while  university  libraries  established  recently  from  2006  onwards  are  in  a  poor  condition  as  there  are  no  regular  budgetary  sanctions  except  adhoc  grants.  As  far  as  financial  resources  are  concerned  the  deemed  universities  are  competing  with  UGC  and  State  supported  conventional  university  libraries.  Some of the specialised universities/institutions are  also spending good amount like 36 lakhs (Dravidian),  45  lakhs  (S.V.  Veterinary),  1.3  crore  (SVIMS)  that  function  with  the  support  of  Government.  Other  institutions  have  grants  sanctioned  for  planned  period  that  are  releasedadhoc  by  the  institution  management. This creates hurdle for the autonomy  of  library  to  build  collection  regularly  as  per  the  needs  of  the  users. 
4.1.2  Professional  Staff 
The  condition  of  professional  staff  strength  is  pathetic as only one (Acharya Nagarjuna University)  among  the  10  conventional  universities  have  a  full-time University Librarian and others are managed  by  In-Charge  librarians  either  professional  or  non- professional. The  recently  established  (2006-2009)  state universities’ library staff is miserably inadequate  as  they  are  managed  by  contract  personnel  who  don’t  have  either  decision  making  or  execution  powers  except  manning  the  routines.  The  position  of  specialised  universities  is  also  not  encouraging  as  many  of  the  personnel  positions  are  filled  with  professionals on contract basis. The scenario of staff  strength  in  deemed  universities  seems  to  be  good  though  the  study  did  not  include  data  regarding  their  pay  structure  as  per  the  designation.  
4.1.3  Collections 
 The  collections  of  the  libraries  grow  with  age,  hence,  well-established  conventional,  special  and  deemed  universities  have  adequate  information  sources at least in terms of quantity as they range  from 1 lakh to 5 lakh. However, the newly established  

========2========

VARALAKSHMI: LIbRARY AND  I NFORMATION  S YSTEM IN  A NDHRA  P RADESH 
table 1. Status of budget professionals collection and organisation of university library in A.P. 
S. name of the library 
no. 
conventional university libraries –10 1. Dr V.S.K. Library, Andhra University 
2. 
Central Library, Sri Venkateswara  University 
3. 
4. 
Dr. b.R. Ambedkar Memorial Library,  Acharya Nagarjuna University, Guntur Central Library, Sri Krishna Devaraya  University, Anantapur 
5. 
6. 
7. 8. 9. 10. 
Univ. Library, Adikavi Nannaya Univ,  Rakahmundry 
University Library, Yogi Vemana Univ,  Kadapa 
Dr b.R. Ambedkar Univ., Srikakulam Krishna Univ., Machilipatnam Vikram Simhapuri Univ., Nellore Rayalaseema Univ., Kurnool 
yr. of  Estt. 
budget  (I nr) 
Professionals 
1927 
1.08 crore 
38 LA and TA 
1955 
1976 
books:Adhoc Periodicals-6  lacs 76 Lacs 
10 Profession- als 
1983 
2006 
8 Lac (R)  books (UGC  Adhoc) Adhoc 
1L1DL1D.O, 1  I.O., 8 PA. 1 AL; 1 I.O; 1  TA; 7 LA., 10  (contract) 1(contract) 
2006 
Adhoc 
2 LA 
2008 2008 2008 2008 
Adhoc Adhoc Adhoc - 
2 LA No 1 AL, 1 TA No  
collection 
Organiza- tion 
b. 5 Lacs> ; J.P 211 J.E. Infonet 8000+         INDEST 
b.3, 68, 315 J.P 465 J.E. Infonet INDEST DELNET 
b.1,38,870 J.P 265 J.E. Infonet 
b.1,59,000 J.P. 98 J.E. Infonet 
DDC; ALA  OPAC 
DDC; AACR  OPAC 
DDC; AACR;   OPAC DDC; AACR;   OPAC 
b. 4,300 J.P. 50 b. 38,000 J.P. 45 N.A. N.A. b. 7,500 J.P. 80 NA 
DDC; AACR 
DDC 
DDC; AACR NA DDC; AACR NA 
Specialised university/institution libraries –13 
1. 
baba Saheb Dr b.R. Ambedkar li- brary, Jawaharlal Nehru Technological  Uni., Kakinada 
2008  
Adhoc 
1 AL, 2 LA  (Contract) 
b.75,326 E.b.1181 J.P 520 J.E. NList INDEST - ASME, ASCE,  Xplore IEEEScience  Direct NPTEL 
DDC; OPAC 
2. 
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological Uni.,  Anantapur 
3. 
Library, Rajiv Gandhi Univ. of Knowl- edge Technologies, Nuziwidu (1), R.K.  Puram, Idupalapaya (2).  
4. 
Sri Padmavathi Mahila Viswavidya- layam, Tirupati 
5. 
Central Library,Dravidian Univ., Kup- pam 
6. 
Dr N.T.R.Univ. of Health Sciences,  Vijayawada  
2008 
Adhoc E.J.: 7lacs 
3 Professionals  b. 65,500 J.E.INDEST 
(Contract) 
2008 
Adhoc 
1 (RKP) No (NUZ) 
1983 
Adhoc 
1 Librarian 3 LA  b. 85,000  2 Professionals  J.P 150 
(Contract) 
1997 
36 Lacs 
1 DL,2 AL,1 DO  b. 76,000 
6 LA 
1986 
NA 
2 A.L. 
DDC; OPAC 
Springer, Elsevier,  McGrawHill ASDL,  ASME  ASCE, Xplore  IEEE and J-Gate NTEL INDEST-Science Direct, ASME, ASCE   Xplore  IEEE J-Gate’ Springer,  Sage etc. 
- 
DDC; OPAC 
J.E. INFONET 
DDC; OPAC 
Online 
7. 
Univ. Library, Damodaram Sanjeeviah  2009 
National Law Univ., Visakhapatnam 
8. 
Central Library, Sri Venkateswara  Veterinary Univ., Tirupati 
9. 10. 
Sri Venkateswara Vedic Univ., Tirupati Dr Y.S.R. Horticultural Univ. Tadepal- ligudem 
Adhoc 
2007  (1982) 
40 Lakhs 
Librarian  (Contract)1 DL, 1AL (Regular) 1 A.L 6 (Contract) 
2006 2007 
NA 49,61,313 (Include staff  salaries) 
NA 1 L; 4 JLA 
J.P 155, 
J.E. OA 
Eb-EJ. 356 NTR MED- NET & ERMED b.9000 
J.P 40 
J.E. 3 databases b.10,000 J. P. 68 (F) E.b. 72  
D/b-CERA, OVID NA 
b. 9408 
J.P. 52 
DDC; AACR 
Web OPAC 
NA NA 
151 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  3,  MAY   2015 
11. 
Indian Maritime University, Visakhap- atnam Campus (Formerly NSDRC)  
2009 (1991) 
12. 
Central Library of School of Planning  and Architecture Vijayawada (MHRD) Sri Venkateswara Institute of Medical  Sciences, Tirupati 
2008 
Adhoc 
13. 
1984 
b. 18.60 
J.1.12 crore 
deemed universities–5 
1. Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapeeth, Tiru- 
pati 
2. Sri Satyasai Institute of Higher Learn- 
ing 
1992 (1961) 1981 
Adhoc 
2 crore (plan  
3. 
GITAM University, Visakhapatnam 
2007 (1980) 
period) + Adhoc 55 lakhs 
4. 
NTR Vignan Library, Vignan Univer- sity, Guntur 
2009 
60 Lacs 
5. 
Central Library, KoneruLakshmaiah  Univ., Vijayawada 
2009 
1.69 crore 
b.-books; J.P.-Journal publications; E.b.-E-books; E.J.-E-journals 
1 Manager 2 TA (Contract) 
Depth Class. OPAC 
1 D.L., 1 A.L. 
1 L, 1A.L. 6 LA  
b. 35000> 
P. 40 
E. 3397 
E.J:J-Gate, IMG Vega;  WSE 
b. 3190 
J. 80; D/b. 2 b. 8617 
J.P. 149 
J.E. ‘Clinical Key’ of  Elsevier 
DDC 23 OPAC DDC OPAC 
1 A.L, 1 I.O,  3 Pres. Assts. 1L, 1 AL 
1L, 4 AL, 5 TA 
1L, 2AL 
1 L, 5 AL, 8 LA 
b. 1,04, 865 DDC J. 160 AACR b. 1,60,000 DDC J.P. 250 OPAC J.E. Infonet 
b.198053 DDC J.P. 325 OPAC E.b. 3090300 Ebrary,  Digital Engineering Lib. E.J.8295 
D/b  ASTEM, ACM So - net and NPTEL  
b. 60,000 DDC E.J. 2831 3 D/b.EbSCO OPAC J-Gate 
b. 1.3 lacs DDC J.P. 475 OPAC INFLIbNET  
OUP J-Gate 
E.b. 5000 
E.J.19445 
NPTEL 
DELENET 
L-Librarian; AL-Assistant Librarian; LA- Library Assistant; TA-Technical Assistant; DL: Deputy Librarian 
universities that have emerged in digital environment  ought  to  have  more  collections  in    electronic  form  than  print.  It  is  astonishing  to  find  that  the  six  universities  established  by  the  state  government  after  2006  do  not  have  e-media  in  their  collection.  The  finding  indicates  lopsided  growth  of  university  libraries  in  the  State  with  reference  to  collection  of  information  resources.  The  reason  may  be  lack  of  qualified  professionals  to  build  and  disseminate  information  resources.    
The collection of specialised university libraries  is  confined  to  specific  subjects,  hence,  may  be  in  thousands compared to lakhs of books in conventional  universities. Deemed universities data indicates sound  collection  of  information  resources  both  books  and  journals,  in  print  and  e-formats.  An  encouraging  observation is that well-established universities are  subscribing to consortia like UGC Infonet, INDEST,  DELENET,  CeRA,  etc.,  and  proving  access  to  thousands of e-documents. Another significant feature  
152 
is that professionals in all university libraries in the  State are organising the knowledge resources using  classification scheme (DDC) in spite of inadequate  professionals and majority of them provide access to  resources through OPAC and few through traditional  catalogue  format.  
4.1.4 Automation 
Except the six state university libraries established  from 2006–2009, out of 28 university libraries in the  State all other 22 libraries, i.e., 71.4 % have made  attempts for automation of library activities. However  a  point  of  concern  is  only  5  Deemed  Universities,  4 specialised universities have completed automation  activities  that  include  circulation  also.  Others  have  partial  implementation  of  automation  activity.  
4.1.5  Infrastructure  
Twenty three (72 %) libraries have ICT infrastructure  and  provide  internet  access.  The  quantum  and  

========4========

VARALAKSHMI: LIbRARY AND  I NFORMATION  S YSTEM IN  A NDHRA  P RADESH 
table 2. Status of automation, Ict  infrastructure and services of university libraries in A.P.  
S.  name of the library 
no. 
conventional university libraries –10 
Automation 
Ict  Infrastructure 
Services 
1. 
Dr V.S.K. Library, Andhra University 
SOUL, Partial  
Camus, network 1Gbps    connectivity with fbre optic Campus network 10 Mbps Campus network 
Traditional 
2. Central Library, Sri Venkateswara University SOUL, Partial 3. Dr.b.R.Ambedkar Memorial Library, Acharya  NewGenLib, Partial 
Nagarjuna University, Guntur 
4. Central Library, Sri Krishna Devaraya University,  SOUL, Partial 
Anantapur 
5. Univ. Library, AdikaviNannayaUniv, Rakahmundry - 
6. University Library, Yogi VemanaUniv, Kadapa - 
7. Dr b.R. Ambedkar Univ., Srikakulam - 
8. Krishna Univ., Machilipatnam - 
9. VikramSimhapuri Univ., Nellore - 
10. Rayalaseema Univ., Kurnool - 
Specialised universities/institution libraries–13 
1. baba Saheb Dr b.R. Ambedkar library, Jawaharlal  DEES Campus softs 
Nehru Technological Univ., Kakinada Complete 
2. Jawaharlal Nehru Technological Uni., Anantapur Koha  Partial 3. Library, Rajiv Gandhi Univ. of Knowledge Technolo- - 
gies, Nuziwidu (1), R.K.Puram, Idupalapaya (2).  
4. Sri PadmavathiMahilaViswavidyalayam, Tirupati SOUL  Partial 5. Central Library,Dravidian Univ., Kuppam SOUL  Partial 6. Dr N.T.R. Univ. of Health Sciences, Vijayawada  Online 
7. University Library, DamodaramSanjeeviah National  No 
Law Univ., Visakhapatnam 
8. Central Library, Sri Venkateswara Veterinary Univ.,  Total Library Software  
Tirupati Complete 
9. Sri Venkateswara Vedic Univ., Tirupati NA 
10. Dr Y.S.R. Horticultural Univ., Tadepalligudem - 
11. Indian Maritime University, Visakhapatnam Cam- Libsys, LS Digital 
pus (Formerly NSDRC, 1991) Complete 
Traditional Traditional 
Campus network  
Traditional 
- 
Internet  access Internet  access N.A. 
- 
- 
Traditional - - N.A. Traditional N.A. 
Internet access 
Traditional 
Internet access Internet access 
Traditional - 
WiFi 
Internet access Wi-Fi Network access Internet access 
Traditional Traditional Traditional Traditional 
Internet Access;                     E-Surveillance 
NA 
Internet access 
Well equipped; RFID, LAN,  WiFi 
Traditional 
NA Traditional Traditional D.  L.-Online 
12. Central Library of School of Planning and Architec- 
ture Vijayawada (SPAV) 
13. Sri Venkateswara Institute of Medical Sciences,  
Tirupati 
deemed universities–5 
1. Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapeeth, Tirupati 
Libsys Complete Environ LibSoft Complete 
WiFi 
Internet access-broadband 
Traditional blog-based Traditional 
SOUL Complete Koha, Complete Libsys Complete 
No 
Traditional 
2. 3. 
Sri Satyasai Institute of Higher Learning GITAM University, Visakhapatnam 
Internet access WiFi, I Gbps 
4. 
NTR Vignan Library, Vignan University, Guntur 
Indigenous LMS Complete 
Academic, EOS Inter- national 
Complete 
WiFi 1Gbps 
Traditional Traditional SMS/Mail  alerts Traditional 
5. 
Central Library, KoneruLakshmaiah Univ., Vi- jayawada 
WiFi 
Traditional 
153 

========5========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  3,  MAY   2015 
quality  of  infrastructure  varies  as  some  libraries  have more than two servers, Wi-Fi with high speed  broad-band,  RFID  and  other  latest  technologies  while  others  have  just  internet  connectivity. 
4.1.6  Services 
Traditional  services  are  predominant  in  all  libraries  under  study  though  GITAM  University  extends  SMS/e-mail  alerts  and  JNTU-K  librarian  developed  blog-based  interaction  with  users.  It  is  evident  that  LIS  professionals  in  these  libraries  are  not  practicing  Web  2.0  or  Web  3.0  services  like  Web-based  services,  RSS  feeds,  interacting  through  social  networking. 
4.2  college  Libraries 
The undergraduate Colleges in A.P. are categorised  into  three  types-Government  Degree  Colleges  (GDC)  controlled  by  Commissionarate  of  College  Education,  Private-aided  Colleges  (PAC),  partly  funded  by  Government  though  in  private  sector  and  private  degree  colleges  that  are  solely  under  private  management.  All  colleges  are  affiliated  to  respective universities of that region. The number of  private colleges are more than GDCs and PACs put  together. Some of these colleges offer PG courses  and  some  are  accorded  with  ‘autonomous  college’  status by the UGC. The autonomous colleges have  PG  and  research  programmes.  The  number  of  colleges  in  Government  and  private  management  are  shown  in  Table  3.  
4.2.1  Budget 
 The Government college libraries primary source  of income for collection development is UGC grants.  The UGC provides assistance to the college libraries  only when college is enlisted under the Section 2(f)  
table 3. colleges in Andhra Pradesh 
category governement  Aided  Private  
colleges colleges colleges 
no. no. no. Engineering 18 350 M.C.A. 15 179 M.b.A. 13 383 b.Ed 9 369 Law 4 28 Medical  10 13 Dental  2 13 Nursing  9 116 Degree Colleges 145 126 1062 D. Pharmacy 48 b.Pharmacy 128 M.Pharmacy 117 b.P. Ed 27 
154 
and 12 (b) of UGC Act. Other sources of income are  State  grants  for  salaries  of  staff  who  are  drawing  UGC  recommended  pay  scales.  The  other  source  is  student  fee  which  is  meagre  and  insufficient  to  meet the recurring expenses of the library. Therefore,  only those college libraries managed by Government  and  private-aided  receiving  financial  support  from  UGC  are  in  a  better  position  financially.  However,  the  UGC  grants  are  for  plan  period  and  released  at  irregular  intervals. 
A study by Moly7  revealed that though there are  recommendations by Committees and Commissions  for  per  capita  budgetary  allocation  for  libraries  out  of  total  budget  of  total  institutional  budget,  in  reality,  ‘the  situation  seems  to  be  different.  In  majority  of  colleges  management  is  allocating  one  or  two  per  cent  of  the  total  college  budget.  Same  is the case with both Government and autonomous  colleges.  It  was  also  observed  that  the  allocation  of  amount  to  the  private-aided  and  autonomous  colleges (range between Rs 35000-50000) seems to  be  better  that  Government  degree  college  libraries  (range  between  Rs  5000-25000).    
4.2.2  Professional  Staff 
better  management  and  reaching  out  the  users  with  customised  services  is  possible  when  professionally-trained  personnel  are  at  the  helm  of  the  library.  The  observation  reveals  that  almost  all  Government,  aided  and  autonomous  colleges  have  a  qualified  librarian.  Assistant  librarians  are  appointed  in  autonomous  colleges  and  very  few  Government  colleges.  It  is  also  observed  that  the  plight  of  private  colleges  that  are  in  hundreds  is  deplorable  as  there  is  library  for  name  sake  to  get  affiliation  from  University  or  approval  of  AICTE  or  NbA.  They  are  employing  librarians  on  contract  basis  with  consolidated  pay  and  there  is  no  focus  to develop a knowledge environment. Many a times  the nature of work is semiprofessional and there is  no  opportunity  to  display  professional  expertise. 
4.2.3  Collection  
The  collections  of  colleges  range  depending  on  the  age  of  the  library.  The  older  colleges  have  collection of 50,000 and above while new colleges have  below 5000 documents.  For example, the collection  of  Andhra  Loyola  College  Library  (autonomous)  (1953),  Vijayawada  is  1,08,000,  Dr  V.S.  Krishna  Govt. Degree College Library, Visakhapatnam (1968)  is  12800;  Govt.  Women’s  Degree  College  Library,  Sri  Kalahasthi  (1988)  is  7150.  Some  colleges  are  offering P.G. programmes. Government, private-aided  and autonomous colleges are maintaining periodical  collections. The study by Moly7   reveals  that  out  of  40  Government  and  autonomous  colleges  under  study, 65 % are subscribing to 1-50 print periodicals.  

========6========

VARALAKSHMI: LIbRARY AND  I NFORMATION  S YSTEM IN  A NDHRA  P RADESH 
Majority have membership in N-LIST programme of  UGC  INFLIbNET  and  subscribing  to  e-journals.  In  total  nearly  100  (exact  93)  colleges  from  the  13  districts of A.P. have membership in N-LIST (Source:  http://nlist.inflibnet.ac.in/members.php)  and  thus  accessing  the  electronic  resources.  The  situation  of  private  colleges  is  not  encouraging  in  terms  of  quality and quantity of their periodical subscriptions,  though they offer Post Graduate courses. The vital  issues  are  non-availability  of  regular  budgetary  grants and qualified library professional to manage  the  collection  building  and  technical  processing.  
4.2.4  Services 
The  face  of  college  libraries  is  changing  with  the  impact  of  technologies.  How  best  the  college  libraries  can  support  the  users  with  a  blend  of  traditional and technology based services? In majority  of  college  libraries,  general  and  professional,  the  traditional  services  of  lending,  reference,  career  guidance,  orientation  and  information  literacy  are  given  priority  in  all  types  of  colleges.  Web  based  services  is  a  rare  feature. 
4.2.5 Automation 
 Well established college libraries have initiated  automation  activities  long  back  with  CDS/ISIS  and  presently  the  Government  and  aided  colleges  implementing  computerisation  of  library  activities  use  SOUL,  Koha,  NewGenLib  (Open  source)  etc.  The State Government approved the SOUL Software  hence Government colleges opt for automation using  SOUL  software  of  INFLIbNET.  However,  the  data  reveals that automation activity is partial in majority  of  college  libraries-both  general  and  professional.   4.2.6  ICT  Infrastructure  
Internet  access  is  available  in  all  Government,  aided  and  autonomous  colleges.  
Note:  Majority  of  private  colleges  do  not  have  either a good library accommodation or professional  librarian;  hence  the  observations  given  here  are  in  general  with  reference  to  Government,  aided  and  autonomous  colleges.  
4.3  Junior college  Libraries 
The board of Intermediate Education regulates  and supervises the system of intermediate education.  There  are  1,687  junior  colleges  functioning  in  the  State  of  A.P  Among  them,  junior  colleges  under  the  Government  management-375,  Social  Welfare  Dept.- 70, Tribal Welfare Department-19, A.P. Residential  Education Institutions Society (Government of AP)-09  and aided-private colleges-264 and others function  under  private  management.  There  are  libraries  functioning  in  almost  all  junior  colleges  except  private  colleges.  The  professional  librarians  are  drawing salaries at par with junior lecturers and are  
gazetted  officers  in  rank.  Though  there  is  library  the  collection  is  limited  to  text  books.  Owing  to  their  location  in  rural,  remote  and  tribal  areas  they  do  not  possess  internet  connectivity  or  automation  activities,  hence,  serving  the  users  with  traditional  services.  However,  some  Government  and  aided  junior colleges in urban environment have computers  and  internet  facility.  
An  interaction  with  working  librarians  revealed  that there is not much demand for library books and  less percent of students are motivated to make use  of  library  facility.  The  reason  is  that  Government  supplies  text  books  to  students  under  different  categories.  The  students  are  tuned  to  prepare  for  common entrance test (EAMCET) to get admission  to  professional  courses  and  don’t  have  interest  or  time  to  spend  in  the  library.  Less  to  talk  about  private  junior  colleges  as  their  aim  is  to  achieve  ranks than cultivating learning skills and knowledge  acquiring habits. Thus junior college libraries (JCLs)  are  a  distinct  lot  among  academic  libraries  serving  huge population of students in their budding stages  of  knowledge  acquisition.  Unfortunately,  they  are  under-developed  compared  to  their  counterparts  in  higher  education.  The  management  and  the  profession  have  not  paid  the  required  attention  on  this  category  of  academic  libraries. 
5.  PubLIc  LIbrArIES In  AndhrA   Pr AdESh  
Public  library  movement  in  A.P.  started  along  with the freedom movement and dates back to late  19th   century.  They  formed  the  dais  for  discussions  on freedom struggle and social issues. The political  status of the State was changing from time to time  along with changes in the Library Act and libraries.  At  present, A.P.  Library Act  1960  is  in  vogue. 
5.1  Structure  of  Public  Libraries  
The  organisational  structure  of  public  library  system  is  as  follows:  
• The  Department  of  public  libraries  is  the  
administrative  head  of  public  library  system  in  
the  State  that  was  administered  under  Public  
Library  Act  1960.  
• A.P.  Grandhalaya  Parishad  is  the  policy  
formulation  body.  The  Parishad  shall  function  
under  the  general  supervision  and  control  of  
the Government. It promotes library services in  
the State. A separate Directorate is created for  
administering the libraries in the State. The goal  
is to establish, equip, maintain, and develop an  
integrated  comprehensive  and  efficient  library  
service  to  the  readers  in  the  State. 
• Different  categories  of  libraries: 
•   State  Central  Library  (Yet  to  be  established) 
155 

========7========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  3,  MAY   2015 
•   Regional  Libraries-5 
•   District  Central  Libraries  (Zilla  Grandhalaya 
Samstha)-13 
•   Branch  libraries–940  (approx.) 
•   Village  libraries 
•   Mobile  libraries  (Defunct  except  few) 
•  Book  Deposit  Centres  (110x13)-1430 
In  addition,  there  are  private  libraries  in  each  district ranging between 10-30, working with dedication  and  commitment  to  serve  the  community. 
5.1.1  Budget  
due to inadequate professional staff, hence, few of  them  are  getting  the  work  done  through-sourcing.   
5.1.5  ICT  Infrastructure 
All district central libraries have internet connectivity  with  adequate  systems.  They  provide  access  to  readers.  
5.1.6  Services 
The district central libraries and branch libraries  offer  lending,  reference,  and  career  guidance  as  priority services. Web-based services are not available  in  any  of  the  public  libraries.  In  addition,  there  
rate  of  8  paisa  per  rupee.  Cess  varies  from  one  
Cess  is  the  major  source  of  income  that  is  
is  provision  to  establish  ‘book  deposit  centre’  in  collected  from  house  tax  and  property  tax  at  the  
schools  with  more  than  200  student  strength  to  
provide  them  reading  beyond  curriculum.  
The observations of Velaga Venkatappaiah, while  
Visakhapatnam- 1,20,00000, while Krishna-6,00,00000.  However,  the  major  issue  is  with  deposition  by  Municipal  Corporation.  For  example,  the  ZGS  are  next to Municipal Corporations every year to deposit  library  cess,  and  with  great  difficulty  realise  part  of  it.  Same  is  the  case  in  majority  of  districts.  The  cess  amount  is  utilised  for  book  collection.  Staff salaries and pensions are borne by the State  government.  
district  to  another  depending  on  the  area  and  
size  of  tax  payers.  For  example  Vizianagaram  
proposing Andhra Pradesh Publlic Library bill 2014,  Zilla  Grandhalaya  Samstha  (ZGS)  has  1,15,000;   
for the new State of Andhra Pradesh with 13 districts  
reveals  the  real  situation  of  public  library  system  
5.1.2  Professional  Staff 
The  staff  pattern  is  Secretary  ZGS/Librarian  District Central Library; Deputy Librarian; Assistant  Librarian.  Then  there  is  semi  professional  and  non–professional  staff.  There  are  vacancies  in  Deputy  Librarian  and Assistant  Librarian  grades  in  majority districts, hence, the libraries have inadequate  manpower.  The  branch  libraries  are  manned  by  semiprofessionals  and  part-time  staff.  Therefore,  the  major  issue  is  inadequacy  of  staff.  
5.1.3  Collection 
The book selection and purchase is centralised  and  is  taken  care  of  by book  Selection  Committee  at the behest of Department of Public Libraries. To  get  ‘on  demand’  books  within  15-20  days  of  user’s  request approximately 10 % of budget is sanctioned  to  ZGS.  However,  the  grants  from  RRRLF  for  purchase of books is totally spent by the Department  of Public Libraries. Therefore, there is no autonomy  for  ZGS/branch  libraries  in  collection  building.  In  general books are classified according to DDC and  catalogues  are  maintained.  
5.1.4  Automation  
E-Grandhalaya software is available in all district  central libraries. Automation activities are at snail pace  
156 
in  A.P.  He  observed  the  following  inadequacies  that  have  a  direct  impact  on  functioning  of  public  libraries  in  the  State:  
(i) Library  cess  is  being  collected  from  all  house  
and  property  tax  payers  but  library  service  is  
offered to less than 20 % of tax payers. Library  
cess  is  quite  inadequate  to  maintain  public  
libraries.  Library  cess  collection  system  is  a  
total  failure.  Linking  of  the  growth  of  libraries  
with  the  library  cess  is  a  great  curse. (ii) There is demand from all quarters of tax payers  
in  the  districts  for  establishing  public  libraries  
as  they  are  paying  library  cess. 
(iii)  Collection  of  library  cess  at  one  place  and  
spending it in another place is not at all desirable.  
Library cess collected for a specific purpose in  
the  cities  like  Visakhapatnam  and  Vijayawada,  
etc.  should  not  be  spent  in  villages  in  the  
district.  
(iv)  Due to centralisation of book selection, books needed  
to the readers are not being purchased on time  
and  users  are  put  to  great  inconvenience. (v) The  existing  staff  never  received  salaries  in  
time  during  the  past  six  decades.  (Now  things  
are  better  than  a  couple  of  years  ago) (vi) Corporate status of the Act was not implemented  
so  far.  In  practice,  it  is  centralised. 
(vii) Annual Administrative Reports of the Department of  
Public Libraries are not being published regularly  
and  they  are  not  accessible  to  public. 
The  conditions  of  public  libraries  in  A.P.  are  not  compatible  to  the  premise  of  NKC  (2007),  i.e., promotion of ICT applications in public libraries.  There  are  wide  range  of  expectations  on  public  libraries  as  centres  of  scholastic  excellence  but  in  

========8========

VARALAKSHMI: LIbRARY AND  I NFORMATION  S YSTEM IN  A NDHRA  P RADESH 
reality they are in the backward state and significant  infrastructural and attitudinal changes are required to  bring out development of public library system. There  is  a  need  to  revamp  the  libraries  in  terms  budget,  collections,  staff,  services,  and  infrastructure.  
6.    SPEcIAL   L IbrArIES In AndhrA PrAdESh 
Special  libraries  in A.P.  can  be  categorised  as  those  functioning  in  scientific/research  institutions  and  industrial  organisations  (Table  5).  
6.1 technical  Information centre  at cSIr 
Institution 
National Institute of Oceanography, Visakhapatnam  is  credited  with  many  research  projects  on  ocean  science  research  on  bay  of  bengal  and  Indian  Ocean. The institution has a small collection books  and access to CSIR-Consortium for e-journals. There  is  no  separate  library,  hence,  other  parameters  of  the  study  have  no  validity. 
6.2  technical  Information  centres  at  IcAr 
Institutions 
It  is  evident  from  Table  5  that  the  research  institutes  under  ICAR  for  Tobacco  and  Oil  Palm  research are maintaining libraries with one qualified  Senior Technical Assistant. They have regular grants  (sanctioned  for  plan  period)  that  support  to  have  collections in the specialised area of research. The  libraries  offer  all  types  of  traditional  information  services like current awareness alerts; reprography,  document  delivery,  reference,  etc.  Internet  access  is  available  in  the  CTRI  library.  
The Technical Information Centre, ICAR-CMFRI  does not have a library separately, hence, data was  not  available.  The  reason  may  be  it  is  a  regional  centre hence, services may be obtained from HQrs  library. 
6.3  technical  Information  resource  centre  at  
drdO  Laboratory  and  ISrO 
Technical  Information  Resource  Centre,  Naval  Scientific  and  Technological  Laboratory  (NSTL),  DRDO  has  regular  budgetary  grants  that  supports  collection  building.  Further  staff  strength  of  four  professionals  have  made  it  possible  to  implement  effective services in LAN environment and library is  linked  to  NKN.  Library  is    operational  in  complete  automated  environment  including  circulation.  It  is  evident  from  the  analysis  of  TIRC,  NSTL  that  regular budget and qualified professional librarians  are the essential factors to serve scientific/research  organisation  and  support  its  R&D  activities.  
The Technical Information Centre, Satish Dhawan  Space Centre, Sriharikota is having a well-established  
library that is functioning under completely automated  environment  using  LibSys  software.  However,  it  is  difficult  to  get  data  from  TIC–SDSC  owing  to  data  security  reasons  of  the  organisation.  
6.4  Libraries/Information centres  at  Public  
Sector undertakings  
There are eight Public Sector Undertakings in the  State1  for different industrial products. Visakhapatnam  is  the  nerve  centre  for  most  of  them  as  it  is  an  industrial  city.  besides  there  are  44  Public  Sector  Undertakings in A.P. managed by the Dept. of Public  Enterprises, General Administration, A.P. They may  be  having  a  specialised  collection  of  books  and  journals  and  access  to  the  internet  (Table  6). 
6.5  Libraries/Information  centres  at  
Private-public  Sector  undertakings  
The public sector undertakings do have libraries  with collections in their specified field of work, but they  are not managed by professional librarians (Table 7).  In fact bharat Heavy Plates and Vessels (bHPV, now  acquired by bHEL), Hindustan Petroleum Corporation  Ltd., Oil  and Natural Gas Corporation, Rajahmundry  had  very  good  libraries  with  quality  collection  of  current  periodicals,  standards,  specifications,  etc.  and qualified professional librarians used to deliver  high  quality  services  that  supported  research  and  development  of  the  organisation/industry.  After  retirement of the professional staff new recruitments  are not initiated leading to closure of these libraries.  Central  Library,  Training  and  Development  Centre,  RINL once had full-fledged qualified professionals with  Manager  rank  head  for  the  library,  now  functioning  with single lower-cadre professional. The Hindustan  Shipyard, Visakhapatnam Port Trust, National Mineral  Development  Corporation,  Visakhapatnam  did  not  have any librarian and the websites have not made  a  mention  of  library  in  the  organisation.  
There are a number of private-public undertakings  such as IP AP Paper Mills, Rajahmundry, Coromandel  Fertilizers, Visakhapatnam and there are innumerable  industries in the state in the areas of steel, cement,  mining,  Zinc,  Pharmacetical  but  do  not  library  facility to the employees. The probable reason may  be  majority  of  them  are  production  units  with  less  focus  on  R&D.  In  the  absence  of  library  and  or  professional librarian, the analysis of these libraries  cannot  be  undertaken. 
Therefore, it can be construed that among special  libraries,  the  information  centres  functioning  under  scientific  organisations  have  libraries  managed  by  professional librarians while the industrial libraries,  with  few  exceptions  like  RINL  did  not  establish  libraries.  Those  that  used  to  have  good  libraries  are  also  defunct  at  present.  
157 

========9========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  3,  MAY   2015 
table 5. technical Information centres of special libraries 
S. name of the institution no. 
cSIr-nIO 
1. CSIR - National Institute of  
Oceanogrphy, Visakhapanam IcAr 
1. TIC, ICAR-Cetral Tobacco  
Research Centre (CTRI) 
year of  budget Estt.  
1966 
- 
1950 
5 Lacs 
2. 
TIC, ICAR-Indian Institute of Oil  Palm Research, Pedavegi 
1995 
4 Lacs 
3.  TIC, ICAR-Central Marine and  
Fisheries Research Institute,  
Regional Centre, Visakhapatnam drdO-nStL 
1. TIRC, Naval Scientifc  
Technological Laboratory 
1967 
- 
1969 
50  00000 
ISrO 2. 
TIC, Satish Dhawan Space Cen- tre, SHAR, Sriharikota, Nellore 
1971 
N.A. 
Profession- 
als 
collection 
Automation Services 
- 
b. 2,500 (approx.) E.J. CSIR Consortium 
- 
1 Sr Tech.  Asst. 
b.13,645 b.V. 12,132 R. 3131 J.P. 35 J.E. CeRA b. 1611 J. 27 J.E. CeRA D/b  AGRIS N.A. 
WINISIS 
Partial 
Traditional internet  access 
1 Sr Tech  Asst 
NewGenLib 
Traditional 
Partial 
No 
- 
- 
1 S; 2 T.O; 1  T.A. 
b.22,000,  J.P & E. 100> E.J. DRDO Consortia IEEE, ASME, ACM,  Elsevier 
LibSys -7 
Complete 
Traditional LAN based I.R. NKN 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
b.-books; J.P.-Journal publications; b.V.-bound volumes; E.b.-E-books; E.J.-E-journals;  S-Scientist; Sr Tech Asst-Senior Technical Assistant; ; TA-Technical Assistant; TO-Technical Offcer 
table 6. Public sector undertakings 
S.  no. 1. 2. 3. 4. 
name of the organisation/institution 
Hindustan  Shipyard Ltd, VSP 
Library, bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd (bHPV), VSP Library, Hindustan Petroleum Corp. Ltd, VSP Central Library, Training and Development Centre,  
RashtriyaIspat Nigam Ltd (RINL), Visakhapatnam Steel Plant 
5. 6. 7. 8. 
Visakhapatnam Port Trust, VSP Dredging Corporation of India, VSP Naval Armament Depot, VSP ONGC, Rajahmundry 
year of  Existence  Professional  Services Estt. of library librarian 
1941 - No - 
1971 Yes No Traditional 1957 Yes No - 
1971 Yes 1 (Lower  High speed  
cadre) LAN based  1933 - - - 
1976 - - - 
Yes 1 Traditional - Yes N.A. Traditional 
9.  
National Mineral Development Corporation (NMDC), Regional  
Offce, Visakhapatnam 
table 7. Private-public sector undertakings 
S. no. name of the organisation/institution 1. Hindustan Zinc Smelter, Visakhapatnam 2. Coromandel Fertilisers, Visakhapatnam 
year of Establishment 
1974 1961 
3. 
IP AP Paper Mills, Rajahmundry 
1964 
158 
Existence of library Yes 
- 
Professional librarian No 
- 
- 
- 

========10========

VARALAKSHMI: LIbRARY AND  I NFORMATION  S YSTEM IN  A NDHRA  P RADESH 
7. cOncLuSIOnS 
The State of Andhra Pradesh has a network of  academic, public and special libraries. There are a  number  of  factors,  both  external  and  internal  that  affect  the  operation  of  libraries  in  the  State.  In  contemporary times their operations are encountered  with external factors like rapid changes in information  environment,  impact  of  emerging  technologies,  changing policies and internals factors like diminishing  budgetary provisions, inadequate professional staff  and lack of support from the management. The study  reveals that academic libraries having professional  librarians  have  changed  the  work  culture  keeping  pace with emerging digital environment; made their  activities automated; procure electronic documents;  provide  online  access  to  information  resources.  The  public  libraries  are  also  moving  with  set  goal  of  catching  up  with  the  developments  inspite  of  limited  finances  and  professionally  qualified  staff.  However,  they  have  to  walk  a  long  way  to  reach  expectations  of  the  community.  Unfortunately,  the  special library scenario is not encouraging except in  those libraries where professional staff are employed.  The  organisations  are  expected  to  start  or  revive  libraries  in  industries  as  R&D  activities  paralyses  without  technical  information  centres.  
rEFErEncES 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Andhra Pradesh State Higher Education Council:  Profile. http://www.apsche.org/profiles.html (accessed  on  10  February  2015). 
Andhra  Pradesh. A.P.  state  portal.  http://www. ap.gov.in/(accessed  on  10  February  2015). CSIR – National Institute of Oceanography (NIO),  Visakhapatnam. http://www.nio.org/index/option/ com_vacvizag/task/show/title/Visakhapatnam/tid/6/ sid/28/thid/67(accessed  on  3  February  2015). Department of Public Libraries, Andhra Pradesh. 2014.  http://publiclibraries.ap.nic.in/zgs.aspx(accessed  on  3  February  2015). 
5. Govt.  of  Andhra  Pradesh.  Public  Enterprises  
Department.  List  of  public  sector  undertakings  
in Andhra Pradesh. 2015. http://www.ped.ap.gov. 
in/  (accessed  on  12  February  2015). 6. ICAR Central Marine Research Institute, Regional  
Centre,  Visakhapatnam.  http://www.cmfri.org. 
in/about-library.html  (accessed  on  3  February  
2015). 
7. Moly,  T.M.  Role  of  college  libraries  in  career  
guidance: A study of Government and autonomous  
colleges affiliated to Andhra University. Andhra  
University,  April  2007.    PhD  Thesis.  
8. Preedip  balaji  &  Vinit  Kumar.  Use  of  web  
technology  in  providing  information  services  
by  south  Indian  technological  universities  as  
displayed  on  library  web  sites.  Library  High  
Tech,  2011,  29(3). www.emeraldinsight.com/doi/ 
abs/10.1108/07378831111174431 (accessed on  
27  January  2015) 
9. Technical Information Centre, ICAR Indian Institute  
of  Oil  Palm  Research,  PedaVegi.  http://www. 
dopr.gov.in/(accessed  on  3  February  2015) 10. Technical Information Centre, ICAR Central Tobacco  
Research  Institute,  Rajahmundry.  http://www. 
ctri.org.in/(accessed  on  3  February  2015) 11. Wikipedia. List of public sector undertakings in  
India. 2014. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_ 
public_sector_undertakings_in_India (accessed  
on  5  February  2015) 
About  the Author 
dr  r.S.r.  Varalakshmi   had  worked  as  Librarian  for  11  years  and  as  teacher  for  27  years.  She  has  published  more  than  100  papers  in  national  and  international  journals  and  conference  proceedings.  Her research activities include: UGC-Major Research  Project  and  guidance  to  9  PhDs  and  5  MPhils.  Presently,  she  is  involved  in  creating  courseware  for  digital  libraries  using  Moodle  software. 
159 

========11========

