DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 35, No. 5, September 2015, pp. 343-354 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.35.5.8901 
  2015, DESIDOC 
An Overview of Mobile Reading Habits 
Somipam R. Shimray*, Chennupati Keerti** and Chennupati K. Ramaiah***  
Department of Library and Information Science,  
Pondicherry University, Puducherry-605 014 
E-mail: *srshimray@yahoo.com, ***ckramaiah.lis@pondiuni.edu.in 
**Department of Electronics and Communications Engineering,  Muffakham Jah College of Engineering and Technology, Hyderabad-500 034  
E-mail: keertiramaiah@yahoo.co.in 
AbstRAct 
Reading is a multidimensional cognitive method of decrypting symbols to build and develop meaning  from the recommended text. Mobiles and smartphones are transforming human lives at fast pace. One  of the new refned inclinations of the 21st  century has been the gradual change in reading habits. The  extensive  usage  of  the  internet  at  a  global  level  and  the  use  of  various  forms  of  reading  materials  particularly  hypertext  and  hypermedia  resources  have  made  radical  shift  in  reading  different  forms  in  addition to printed text materials. Reading style is not the same as a decade back. Now, people are reading  electronic documents and the latest form of electronic books (e-books), electronic journals (e-journals),  electronic mails (e-mails) and online databases. Digital content has broken the physical boundaries of  homes, libraries, and offces. This paper reviews all the developments related to mobile reading from print  to online reading, online reading habits, students’ attitude and behaviour to e-books, the move to mobile  reading  and  it  advantages  and  disadvantages. Also  looked  into  are  the  roles  of  several  independent  variables such as gender, age, culture, and socioeconomic background of mobile users and their impact  on mobile reading habits. Though mobiles are convenient to use, using them on a daily basis for longer  hours, will cause a lot of health related problems such as cancer, stress, and neck pain.  The microwave  radiations (MWR) from mobile phones is harmful to all people particularly on children and unborn babies.  Higher  level  mobile  phone  use  is  associated  with  sleep  disturbances  and  symptoms  of  depression  in  men. Overall this paper provides a detailed review of mobile reading habits and how people shifted from  printed form to online then to mobile form along advantages and disadvantages.  
Keywords: Mobile reading, online learning, reading habits, problems of long time mobile reading, impact   
 of mobile reading 
1.  INtRODUctION 
The  history  of  reading  can  be  dated  back  to  the beginning of the script during the 4th  millennium  BC. Reading is the only way to access information.  Reading is a multidimensional cognitive process of  decrypting  symbols  to  build  and  develop  meaning  from the recommended text and the context. There  are  no  concrete  rules  for  reading,  rather  reading  permits  readers  to  produce  or  reproduce  their  own  ideas  introspectively.  It  is  a  way  of  semantic  acquirement, communication, distribution of information  and thoughts. Till the end of 2000 many individuals  could  not  afford  to  buy  cell  phones;  computers  and  the  internet  are  new  technologies  but  these  are  now  widely  available  and  easily  connectable.  Information  technology  and  its  convenience  has  changed human lives and led to deviate in reading  quality  and  reading  habits.  This  change  played  
a  dramatic  role  in  the  revolution  in  learning  and  thinking, quality, quantity of reading and developed  inclination  toward  reading.  Eventually,  this  led  to  lifelong  learning,  thereby  making  an  open-minded  revolution  in  the  society1. 
2.  LItERAtURE  REVIEW 
Reading  habits  have  made  an  adverse  impact  on people due to various types of advancements in  digital communication. Increasing digital information  has  led  readers  to  spend  more  time  on  reading  devices  and  that  has  big  affect  on  the  reading  behaviour  of  many  readers.  As  the  technology  of  mobile  phones  has  developed  to  a  much  more  advanced level and gained popularity, the number of  users has increased as well2. Digital information and  content  has  contributed  to  shift  of  reading  printed  books  to  digital  reading.  Electronic  books  can  be  
Received 12 June 2015, revised 3 August 2015, online published 10 September 2015 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  5, SEpTEMBER   2015 
grouped  into  two  classes:  hardware  devices  used  to  read  the  content  and  the  content  itself3. 
Akanda, Hoq & Hasan4  stated that for the overall  development  of  a  human  being,  reading  is  vital.  They  stated  that  with  the  arrival  of  contemporary  digital  technologies,  particularly  mobile  phones,  tablets,  e-readers,  television,  and  other  means  of  entertainment,  the  reading  habits,  particularly  in  the  younger  generation,  is  undergoing  changes  at  a  faster  pace.  Davis5,  et  al.,   conducted  a  survey  on  mobile  reading  habits  and  found  that  most  of  the people that read on a web browser prefered to  make  notes  and  highlight  in  document.  Users  are  not satisfied with ‘navigation within the document,’  ‘in-text search,’ ‘document storage and organisation’  in  current  applications.  Users  do  not  stick  to  one  program  for  their  reading. 
UNESCO6  conducted a study on mobile reading  in developing countries and found that mobile phones  are  helping  as  a  gateway  to  long-size  text.  Mobile  phones are permitted to access the same book the  pC  accesses,  even  the  least  expensive  mobiles  allowing  users  to  access  and  read  books.  Mobile  devices are the most favourable reading devices to  millions  of  people  in  the  world.  people  read  more  when  they  read  on  mobile  devices. 
Usage  of  smartphone  for  reading  is  expected  to  go  higher  as  the  latest  mobile  phone  support  Android,  Tizen,  Windows,  etc.,  operating  systems.  In a study7, it was found that 85 % of people claim  that mobile devices are a central part of their daily  life. Mobile phones or smartphones travel along with  their owners from table to workstation to shops and  home again with efficiency, proximity and convenience.  Nowadays  most  of  the  youth  below  30  years  are  using  mobile  applications  for  organising  their  lives  better  as  wireless  technology  has  been  youth’s  entertainment option (Market Analysis & Consumer  Research Organisation (MACRO)8, Devarajan9  reports  that irrespective of the socio-economic background,  the majority of the people are interested in reading  books  using  mobile  phones  (51.96  %)  especially  fiction followed by Science (34.66). The new report  on  ‘The  Mobile  Economy:  2015’,  forecasts  that  the  number  of  unique  mobile  subscribers’  will  increase  from 3.6 billion at the end of 2014 to 4.6 billion. By  the year 2020, almost 60 %  of the global population  will  subscribe  to  mobile  services  (GSMA)10. 
3.  ONLINE  READING 
‘Online’  has  precise  denotation  with  respect  to  information technology (IT). The common perception  for  ‘online’  denotes  to  an  Internet  connection  and  connectivity. This concept has now stretched from (IT)  to the area of human interaction and conversation.  Online  reading  primarily  means  the  content  may  
344 
only  be  read  while  the  reader  is  online.  An  online  book  or  e-book  is  a  resource  in  book-like  form  that  is  only  available  to  read  online.  Thus,  the  reader's  involvement  is  similar  to  that  of  a  printed  book,  except  that  the  book  is  read  in  a  mobile  or  computer  and  is  only  reachable  or  accessible  when  the  reader  is  online.  Online  reading  is  also  a  virtual  learning  environment  in  which  information  is  presented  in  pages,  and  they  are  read  serially  and  inertly  with  little  interaction  and  multimedia11.  Alliance  for Telecommunications  Industry  Solutions  (ATIS)12  considered the following criteria which must  be fulfilled for online reading:  (a) Devices like mobile  or  computer  should  be  under  the  direct  control  of  other device(s); (b) Devices must be functional and  prepared  for  facility  and  services;  and  (c)  Devices  must be available for instantaneous use on demand  by  the  system  without  human  intervention. 
3.1  Reading  in  Print  and  on  E-reader 
During  the  early  2010s,  there  was  a  migration  from  traditional  print  media  reading  to  e-reading  on  mobiles.  Digital  connectivity  has  greater  impact  in  day-to-day  work  communication,  shopping,  and  even  leisure.  With  developments  in  technology  and  production  of  smart  phones,  life  is  becoming  more rewarding and day-to-day activities are either  directly or indirectly connected with mobile devices.  Reading printed books and reading on an e-reader  give  a  different  satisfaction.  Now  the  choice  of  choosing  reading  in  physical  printed  book  form  and  on  e-reader  is  eventually  up  to  the  reader.  Many voracious readers choose technology as their  choice  for  reading  as  it  is  more  suitable,  while  still  many  decided  to  choose  printed  books  as  they  love  to  feel  the  weight  and  read  in  their  own  relaxed  way  wherever  they  are.  Reading  physical  printed  books  is  easy  as  it  will  not  be  hurting  the  reader  eyes  with  backlight.  A  printed  book  does  not  require  e-readers  or  batteries  for  reading  and  has  no  warranty  period.  printed  physical  books  are  more  convenient  to  read  and  for  consumption  of  information.  Readers  use  printed  documents  for  in-depth  reading.  Generally,  involving  marking  and  underlining.  this  indicates  that  paper  is  doubtful  of  disappearing  even  in  the  digital  era. 
E-reader  is  smarter  and  more  interactive  and  playing an increasingly important role in the worldwide  book  market.  E-readers  are  easy  to  carry,  save  space,  convenient,  save  money  and  time,  and  ease-of-use13. The e-reader provides rich navigation  such  as  tables  of  contents,  searching  by  field  or  indexes  or  internal  and  external  hyperlinks,  and  user  notes  and  bookmarking14.  E-readers  permit  readers  to  switch  in  between  titles  with  ease15.  Many  researchers  from  different  fields  including  psychology,  computer  science,  and  library  and  

========2========

SHIMRAY, et  al.: AN  O VERVIEW Of MOBILE  R EADING  H ABITS 
information science have investigated about various  issues related to online reading and published over  100  papers  in  the  literature. All  the  studies  before  1992 found that people read slower, less accurately  and  less  comprehensively  on  screens  than  on  paper16.  Studies  published  since  the  early  1990’s  however, have produced more inconsistent results:  A slight majority has confirmed earlier conclusions,  but  almost  as  many  have  found  few  significant  differences in reading speed or comprehension between  paper  and  screens.  Recent  surveys  suggest  that  although  most  people  still  prefer  paper—especially  when  reading  intensively—attitudes  are  changing  as  tablets  and  e-reading  technology  improve  and  reading  digital  books  for  facts  and  fun  becomes  more  common17.  
According to a UK survey, young people are now  much  more  likely  to  prefer  to  read  on  a  computer  screen  rather  than  a  printed  book  or  magazine.  BBC reported in the news that The National Literary  Trust18  studied almost 35,000 8 to 16 years old. The  number  of  youngsters  purchasing  mobile  phones,  computers  and  tablet  devices  has  gone  up  so  much, accordingly reading on screen also gone up.  Of  the  total  surveyed,  52  %  preferred  to  read  on  screen  compared  with  32  %  who  preferred  print,  with  the  remainder  having  no  opinion  or  preferring  not to read at all. As well as social networking and  browsing websites, the study indicates almost a third  of  youngsters  read  fiction  on  online  devices19.  
3.2  Online  Reading  Habits 
One  of  the  new  refined  inclinations  of  the  21st   century  is  the  change  in  reading  habits.  The  extensive  worldwide  usage  of  the  Internet  and  the  use  of  other  reading  sources  particularly  using  hypertext  and  hypermedia  resources  have  made  radical  deviations  in  reading  forms.  Online  reading  has become popular and penetrated into all types of  people and their learning styles. With a massive and  immediate quantity of accessible digital information to  people, predominantly the young, they are spending  additional  time  in  reading  electronic  resources20.  Additional  time  is  spent  on  scanning  and  surfing  for  facts  on  the  internet.  They  are  also  spending  more  time  on  scanning  and  surfing  for  information  result  into  development  of  discerning  innovatively  and critically. The progress of electronic mass media  destructive  effects  on  reading  with  that  people  are  less  involved  in  a  wide-range  of  reading  skills  and  lack  the  capability  to  read  intensely  and  withstand  a  lengthy  in  reading. 
3.3  Reading behaviour  in  Digital  Environment 
Evolution  and  development  of  digital  mass  media  has  influenced  the  reading  behaviour  of  readers. Reading style is not the same as a decade  
back. Now readers are reading things like eBooks,  e-journals,  e-mails  and  online  databases.  Digital  content  has  broken  physical  boundaries  of  the  home,  libraries  and  office21.  Digital  publishing  has  significantly  increased  the  number  of  documents,  and  information.  Digital  content  has  changed  the  reading behaviour of readers who are more inclined  toward  digitised  contents  as  it  offers  various  new  facilities  such  as  interactivity,  non-linearity,  and  easy  access  to  information.  Contemporary  readers  steadily advance to screen-based reading behaviour,  and  use  many  strategies  such  as  browsing  and  keyword  identifying  to  manage  with  the  increase  of  information  in  the  digital  environment20.  Users  reading from screens devote less time for in depth  and concentrated reading as they spend additional  time  for  scanning,  skimming,  keyword  spotting,  onetime  reading  and  nonlinear  reading. 
3.4  students  Attitudes  and  behaviours  
towards  Digital textbooks 
Now  the  developments  in  digital  technology  have  touched  the  highest  level.  In  the  education  sector,  digital  books  are  introduced  in  the  form  of  electronic textbooks, adoption of e-books has been  growing  dramatically  and  is  expected  to  grow  at  a  much  higher  rate  in  the  near  future22.  Often  these  digital  textbooks  are  web-based,  digital  replicas  of  printed  textbooks.  
Students often favour to read print copies over a  digital version when reading for longer time. Digital  textbooks  are  more  suitable  for  quick  reference  purpose rather than for long and continuous reading  purpose.  Students  consider  digital  textbook  as  a  learning  object  as  it  support  learning  and  they  are  reusable.  As  digital  text  provides  a  variety  of  advantages such as lower costs, easy accessibility,  and up-to-date content, students are inclining towards  digital  textbooks  because  of  their  superior  delivery  techniques,  not  a  better  way  to  read23.  Accepting  and  understanding  the  type  of  reading  device  and  its usability is based on user’s acceptance of digital  textbooks. Usefulness and ease of use considerably  and positively influence these students to buy digital  textbooks.  Computer  experience  of  a  student  also  decides  their  behavioural  acceptance  of  digital  textbooks. 
3.5 shifts  towards  Online  Learning 
The present period is driven by digital technology.  Reading and literacy has been largely restructured  due to technological advancements, particularly the  introduction of digital and information and communication  technologies (ICTs). Digital advancement cannot be  overlooked as a mere change. Shifting from printed  physical  books  to  online  learning  does  not  mean  the end of physical learning habits. Through internet  
345 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  5, SEpTEMBER   2015 
and  World  Wide  Web,  virtual  learning  has  evolved  and is already spreading all over the world. Online  learning  provides  new  ways  of  writing,  searching,  and  reading.  Digital  media  played  a  major  role  in  shifting from printed physical books to online learning  by  providing  facilities  which  are  not  available  with  the  printed  form  such  as  non-linearity,  interactivity,  immediacy  of  accessing  information,  coverage  of  information, audio and video contents20.  Nowadays  through  online  mode  a  user  can  educate  himself  or  herself  in  their  own  time24. 
4.  MObILE  READING 
The  literature  offers  different  definitions  of  ebooks extending from an electronic monograph in  the  form  of  electronic  text,  regardless  of  size  or  composition (a digital object), but excluding journal  publication made available electronically (or optically)  for  any  device  (handheld  or  desktop)  that  includes  a screen25. According to China publishers26   mobile  reading is ‘the act of reading and consuming digital  content on mobile devices’ such as phones, tablets,  pCs,  e-readers,  etc.,  and  which  covers  e-books,  e-newspapers,  e-magazines,  and  mobile  cartoons.  The rapid development of mobile reading promoted  the  mobile  publishing  industry  in  a  big  way. 
physical printed books are facing lot of challenges  after  the  introduction  of  online  reading  particularly  mobile reading tools. The literature provides various  definitions of e-books, ranging from simple electronic  monograph  up  to  any  piece  of  electronic  text,  regardless  of  size  or  composition  reads  on  any  e-reading  device  that  includes  online  screen25.  A  mobile reader is a digital device with written content  which is a product by assimilating the familiar idea  of  a  book  along  with  features  that  are  provided  in  an electronic environment. A mobile reader typically  provides reading along with other features such as  search  and  cross  reference  functions,  hypertext  links, bookmarks, annotations, highlights, multimedia  objects  and  interactive  tools27. 
About  91  %  of  adults  and  60  %  of  teens  in  US  own  mobile  devices  and  on  an  average  spend  144  minutes  a  day  using  his  or  her  phone  during  a  16  hour  period28.  According  to  December  2013  statistics,  of  the  total  Indian  population,  1/120  are  tablet  users,  1/10  are  mobile  internet  users,  1/13  are  social  media  users  and  1/6  are  internet  users.  Of  the  total,  during  the  same  period  the  online  population  grew  in  India  to  73.9  million;  out  of  those  who  surf  the  Web  at  home  or  work  on  a  computer  grew  over  previous  year,  i.e.,  March  201229.  The  average  connection  speeds  in  India  is  only  1.7  Mbps  compared  to  Singapore  with  9.1  Mbps and the UK follow 8.1 Mbps, and Broadband  connections  (i.e.,  4  Mbps  or  higher)  still  account  for  less  than  5  %  of  all  internet  connections.  The  
346 
connections  of  10  Mbps  or  more  are  very  much  limited to just 0.7 % of all users. Therefore, mobile  connectivity  in  India  is  going  up  in  a  big  way  thus,  70  %  of  internet  page  views  in  India  come  from  mobile  devices.  Despite  the  slow  speed  networks,  an  average  Indian  internet  user  spend  almost  5  hours  on  the  internet  every  day,  with  40  %  of  that  time  spent  on  social  media.  
According to the 35th  Statistical Report on internet  Development  in  China30     the  number  of  internet  users  in  China  reached  649  million  in  December  2014, of which the number of mobile internet users  had  reached  557  million  (85.8  %).    It  is  found  that  the  percentage  of  Chinese  consumers  aged  16+  with a mobile phone at 89 %. Thus, China’s mobile  reading increased phenomenally with a total of 600  million users having revenues of £656 million. Mobile  reading  devices  are  technological  innovations  that  is  changing  the  concept  of  book  and  publishing  industry.  The  Kindle,  Nook,  and  ipad  are  the  most  commonly  used  mobile  reading  devices  that  are  capable  of  providing  wireless  technology  and  the  internet  facilities. 
5.  GENERAL  MObILE  READING  HAbIts 
Reading habits have been cultivated by human  being since time immemorial. Through reading, the  words of wisdom and knowledge have been passed  on  from  one  generation  to  another  generation.  Reading  enhances  innovative  vision  to  the  eyes  and  novel  knowledge  to  the  mind.  The  vital  factor  for  intellectual  and  emotional  growth  is  reading.  
5.1  Reading  Habits  Variations  with  Gender 
Reading was the empirical and theoretical area  of study for a long time31.  Gender  and  age  are  the  two primary independent variables affecting reading  habits32. Boys and girls show a number of reading- related  differences  that  go  beyond  performance  differences  on  large-scale  assessments.  Moyes33,  Zickuhr34, et.al.,  and  Miller,  Kristen  &  Lee35   stated  that  females  are  more  substantial  readers  than  males.  Boy’s  inclining  to  negative  approaches  towards  reading,  while  girls  enjoy  reading  better  than  boys1.  Hassell  &  Rodg36   reveal  that  girls  have  more  favourable  attitudes  than  boys  for  both  recreational and academic reading. Girls tend to do  more  non-assigned  reading,  reading  for  pleasure,  or  reading  for  general  interest  than  boys.  Girls  perform  more  out-of-class  reading,  sharing  and  conversation of reading resources and spend more  time doing homework than boys. Boys on the other  hand,  prefer  watching  television  or  movies  rather  than reading37.  Boys  spend  less  time  reading  than  girls,  are  not  that  much  motivated  to  pick  up  a  book  and  do  not  value  reading  as  an  activity  are  less  self-confident  readers  and  judge  themselves  

========4========

SHIMRAY, et  al.: AN  O VERVIEW Of MOBILE  R EADING  H ABITS 
as  having  lower  reading  skills  than  girls38.  Boys’  underachievement in reading is a significant concern  for  the  UK  schools.  In  a  National  Literacy  Trust  survey,  76  %  of  UK  schools  indicated  that  boys  in  their school and did not do well in reading compared  to girls. To tackle these problems, 82 % of schools  have  developed  their  own  strategies18.  Worldwide  literacy  marks  also  shows  that  boys  don’t  do  as  well  as  girls39. 
Gender  is  another  factor  that  is  often  reported  to affect reading development. In general, boys are  believed  to  have  more  aptitude  for  using  computer  and  information  technologies,  and  it  is  also  true  when using e-books in an educational context. In a  study, two investigations were conducted to explore  children’s attitudes, reading behaviours and outcomes  to  find  out  if  there  were  any  gender  differences  in  the reading of e-books. The results show that while  the  girls  mostly  had  the  behaviour  of  skimming  during  the  reading  process,  they  outscored  the  boys  in  the  retrieval  tests.  The  gender  differences  are  still  a  substantial  and  considerable  factor  in  children’s reading of e-books40. Another study explored  the  effect  of  age  and  gender  on  second-grade  children’s  reading  performance  and  discuss  them  in  a  neurobiological  point  of  view.  It  was  found  that older children have better reading scores than  younger,  but  gender  does  not  affect  second-grade  children’s  reading  performance.  Results  showed  a  significant effect of age in reading performance, with  the older children having better scores than younger  ones  for  reading  fluency,  reading  comprehension,  and  the  total  reading  performance.  Here,  gender  was  not  found  to  play  an  important  role  in  reading  performance41.  
Smith & Wilhelm42  identified common judgments  about boys, girls, and their reading habits: (a) Girls  understand  fiction  better  than  boys;  (b)  Nonfiction,  magazines,  and  newspapers  are  prefer  by  boys;  (c)  Boys  incline  to  favour  short  texts  or  texts  with  short divisions; (d) Girls relish leisure reading more  than boys; (e) Sports, hobbies, fantasy and science  fiction are common for boys; and (f) Graphic novels  and  comic  books  are  more  popular  with  boys  than  girls. 
5.2  teenage  Readers'  Attitudes  and  
  Preferences 
The  growth  and  reconstruction  of  technology  has made teenagers lives easier. Mobile technology  is  ubiquitous  and  now  well-known  to  teenagers.  Almost  all  teenagers  are  aware  and  have  access  to  mobile  phones.  Mobile  phones  not  only  enable  spoken  communication  but  are  also  used  by  many  teenagers heavily using them for reading purposes.  Teenagers have an inclination toward mobile reading  as  it  replaces  feelings  of  aloneness,  separation  or  
dullness.  Teenager  readers  spend  more  time  on  mobiles  on  weekend  than  on  casual  week  days40.  Teenagers  prefer  mobile  phones  with  built-in  rich  multimedia  features  as  they  want  interactive  user  interfaces  for  reading. 
5.3 cultural  Reading 
In  an  anthropological  word,  culture  can  be  defined  as  how  a  group  of  people  do  things,  how  they greet one another and communicate, how they  dress, eat, work, and play. A cultural reading means  that  reading  is  done  in  a  specific  culture  and  is  a  habit  that  is  common  and  valued  highly  by  that  particular  society43.  Heyes  &  frith44   indicated  that  most probably all humans neurocognitive skills are  formed by culture and many are culturally inherited.  Cultural reading is a inherent skill that enables the  cultural  inheritance  of  other,  more  precisely  skills.  The  differences  in  cultural  reading  are  associated  with the demographic composition of different kinds  of  culture  and  communities.  Cultural  familiarity  simplifies  understanding,  reading  accomplishments  and stimulates schematic knowledge and promotes  strategic  reading  behaviours,  and  the  influence  of  cultural  familiarity  remains  intact.  Cultural  reading  is  more  established  in  urban  areas  than  rural  counterparts31.  Cultural  representation  is  required  by  a  reader  to  fully  understand  and  comprehend  a  text. 
5.4  socio-economic  Groups–Rural  vs.  Urban  
Readers 
Socio-economic factors play a big role on reading  habits. families with higher socio-economic position living  in urban areas start school with higher achievement  levels  than  their  peers  from  rural  background.  The  dissimilarities  in  reading  habits  between  rural  and  urban are associated with the demographic composition  of different kinds of socio-economic groups—the age  of  the  population,  their  overall  level  of  educational  background,  and  the  general  level  of  household  income. The educational achievement of the adults  and  parents  in  the  community,  earning  capacity,  community  employment  rate,  and  requirement  of  education  are  the  main  factors  for  differentiating  rural  and  urban  readers45.  The  reading  habits  of  rural and urban college students of the 21st  century  show  that  reading  values  are  more  established  in  urban  students  than  their  rural  counterparts31. 
5.5  Impact  of  Mobile  Reading  on  People  
According  to  UNESCO,  mobile  reading  will  certainly play a big effect on two thirds of illiterates  in the world. However, out of these people, women  are  less  likely  to  own  mobile  devices  those  own  mobile  devices  are  more  likely  to  read  than  men.   So, UNESCO is working to use mobile devices and  
347 

========5========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  5, SEpTEMBER   2015 
other  ICTs  to  transform  illiterates  to  literates.  It  was  found  that  one  third  of  mobile  device  women  users are reading stories to their children on them.  Since  most  of  the  mobile  reading  market  demands  English  language  literature,  there  is  also  a  need  to  provide  more  access  to  literature  that  is  written  in  local  languages  by  local  authors.  They  feel  that  most  of  the  governments  are  not  utilising  the  full  potential  of  mobile  devices  to  improve  education  and literacy in developing countries. They suggested  that  publishing  companies  should  consider  digital  first  content  strategies  to  reach  new  readers  in  these  growing  markets.  They  also  estimated  that  the  cost  of  an  open  access  copyright  eBook  can  be  made  available  for  2-3  cents  (US)  against  the  cost  of  a  paperback  book  is  around  US$10.  Since  physical  printed  literature  is  much  more  difficult  to  distribute, especially in rural areas, digital literature  is an easier, cheaper, and quicker alternative. They  felt that mobile devices may play a positive impact  on  the  eradication  of  illiteracy  in  the  world6.  
6.  tYPEs   OF  MO bILE  DEVIcEs 
A  mobile  phone  is  a  hand  held  device  and  also  called  as  a  cellular  phone,  cell  phone,  hand  phone,  or  simply  a  phone  which  can  be  used  as  telephone  over  a  radio  link  while  moving  around  a  wide  geographical  area.  Modern  mobile  phones  called  smartphones  which  have  general  computing  capabilities  besides  making  calls,  provide  wide  range of other  amenities  such as text messaging,   multimedia messaging service (MMS), e-mail, internet  access,  short-range  wireless  communications  via  infrared and bluetooth, business applications, gaming,  photography  and  reading. 
Some  of  the  most  common  forms  of  mobile  reading  devices  are: 
(a)   p ortable computers: They are easy to carry along  
with  us  anywhere.  They  have  a  full  keyboard  
and  mainly  run  with  software  such  as  laptops,  
notebooks,  notepads,  etc.  
(b)   p ersonal digital assistant (pDA): It is also called  
as a handheld pC or palmtop, a mobile device  
that combines computing, telephone/fax, internet  
and  networking  features.  
(c) Ultra-Mobile  pC:  It  is  a  hand-held  computing  
device capable of running a Windows OS, larger  
a pDA  but  smaller  than  a  laptop. 
(d) Smartphone:  It  is  like  a  mobile  phone  that  
performs  many  of  the  functions  of  a  computer,  
typically having a touchscreen interface, Internet  
access,  and  an  operating  system  capable  of  
running  downloaded  apps. 
(e) Tablet  computer:  It  is  a  wireless,  portable  pC  
with  a  touch  screen  interface,  smaller  than  a  
348 
notebook computer but larger than a smartphone  which  is  expressively  used  for  communication  and  online  reading. 
(f) Global  positioning  System  (GpS)  navigation  
device: It is a device that accurately calculates  
geographical  location  by  receiving  information  
from GpS satellites. Initially, it was used in cars,  
boats,  cell  phones,  mobile  devices  and  even  
personal  heads-up  display  (HUD)  glasses. 
7. ADVANt AGEs  OF  MO bILE  READING 
A  decade  back,  a  mobile  phone  or  cell-phone  signified  fashion,  symbol  of  richness,  money  and  success.  Nevertheless,  today,  every  one  finds  it  a  necessity  in  day-to-day  life  and  has  become  a  basic  need  for  every  individual.  Mobile  devices  are  faster,  easier  and  more  effective  way  to  share  information46. 
A  mobile  is  widely  used  for  reading.  Today  people are moving from old-fashioned paper-based  books  to  e-books  and  mobile  reading.  By  using  mobile  phone  you  can  purchase,  download  and  read  any  book. Advantages  of  using  mobile  phone  for  reading  are  as  follows47. 
(a)   p ortability:  Mobile  device  is  light  and  small.  It  
can fit easily in our pocket. Therefore, users can  
take anywhere allowing them to carry hundreds  
of  books  without  worrying  about  weight.  It  can  
be  carried  from  one  place  to  another  as  it  
breaks  physical  boundaries. 
(b) Capacity: Mobile devices allow users to receive  
information immediately by browsing and downloading  
books. Mobile reading is interactive as it contain  
audio, video and animations. Its interface allows  
novice users to perform and function with ease  
for  better  reading.  Users  can  easily  search  for  
any  information  instead  of  turning  page  after  
page. 
(c) Better reading: While reading fonts size can be  
resized,  making  it  easier  to  read  for  different  
readers.  Latest  technology  in  mobile  devices  
provides  additional  software  to  turn  some  of  
the  books  into  audio  books.    
(d) Avoiding annoyances: Mobile reading reduces the  
annoyance of flipping pages to avoid distraction  
and  concentration. 
(e)   f ree  books:  Mobile  reading  saves  money  and  
time; there is no need to go to the book store.  
Thousands  of  free  books  are  available  on  the  
Internet  which  can  be  read  by  using  mobile  
devices. 
(f) Gain  of  space:  Mobile  reading  required  less  
memory  and  space.  Users  do  not  need  any  
extra  space  to  store  downloaded  books.  User  

========6========

SHIMRAY, et  al.: AN  O VERVIEW Of MOBILE  R EADING  H ABITS 
can store hundreds of books on mobile devices  for  reading. 
8.    DIsADVANtAGEs/bARRIERs  OF MObILE 
READING   ( UsER ExPERIENcE) 
Developments in information technology during  the past years have led to maximum exploration of  mobiles  usage.  Using  mobile  devices  for  reading  purpose  has  become  a  lifestyle.  Besides  many  advantages,  every  product  has  a  defect  and  way  to  improve.  Mobile  devices  when  used  for  reading  purpose  have  its  own  problems  such  as:  
8.1  Usability 
Surpassing the classic book over eBooks largely  depends  on  its  usability.  The  usage  of  mobile  has  potential in different areas in the field of education.  Usability  play  a  critical  role  in  mobile  reading. App  developers devote time, effort and money in getting  the  usability  of  their  products  and  services  right  for  users.  providing  a  clean,  clear  and  pleasant  look  is  vital  to  retain  users  from  leaving  mobiles.  Interfaces  and  navigation  are  the  prime  problem  areas  to  any  mobile  user  while  reading.  Many  mobile  users  are  not  satisfied  with  the  navigation  as  it  is  non-intuitive  and  reading  non-linear  texts  for  example  newspapers  reading  on  mobiles  is  not  comfortable.  Usability  is  the  quality  of  a  user's  experience  when  interacting  with  mobile  devices  and  it  is  about  the  effectiveness,  efficiency  and  the  overall  satisfaction  of  the  user. 
8.2 Acceptance 
Acceptance  and  loyalty  in  service  industries  and  its  potential,  i.e.,  mobile  phone  impact  on  the  development  of  sustainable  competitive  edge  from  others48.  prior  domain  knowledge  and  lack  of  technical  skills  of  naive  users  led  to  many  problems  in  selection  of  suitable  mobile  devices  for  their  reading.  Mobility,  support,  connectivity,  immediacy, collaborative, readability, usefulness and  text satisfactory plays an important role in accepting  mobile  devices  for  reading  purpose. 
8.3  Reading speed  Variation Among  People 
Normally  an  average  person  reads  at  about  200-400  words  per  minute  but  speed  readers  can  read  around  1000-1700  words  per  minute.  The  average  reading  speed  increases  as  an  individual  grows in age and develops in intellect and cognition.   Reading  on  a  computer  screen  is  more  visually  demanding than reading printed text. The speed of  online  reading  depends  upon  the  eyes  movement  from  word  to  word  and  from  line  to  line.    Online  reading  requires  longer  time  eye  movements  and  imposes  continuous  focusing  and  position  demand  
which  is  both  visually  and  physically  tiring.  They  felt  that  font  size  played  an  important  role  when  reading  texts  on  the  Internet.  Being  able  to  take  notes  and  leave  marks  or  underline  text  when  reading  documents  on  the  computer  screens  were  also  important.  In  a  study  it  was  found  that  the  factors  that  affected  the  students’  online  reading  behaviours  were  eyestrain  and  headache49.  
8.4  Health-related  Problems  due  to  Mobile  
Reading 
Mobile  devices  should  offer  pagination  that  matches  with  original  text.  Use  of  color  especially  red  and  green  as  differentiators  must  be  avoided.  Reading with mobile devices before sleeping causes  health related problems50. Reading by using mobile  devices  in  dark  place  before  bedtime  took  readers  to  keep  awake  for  longer  hours,  having  a  lower  quality  of  sleep.  Mobile  devices  produce  light,  the  blue light produced from mobile screen suppress the  production  of  sleep  inducing  hormone  melatonin51 thus,  resulting  in  sleep  deficiency,  disrupting  daily  work,  which  eventually  influence  on  performance,  health  and  safety.  
The  potential  harm  from  microwave  radiation  (MWR)  from  wireless  devices  is  more,  particularly  on children and unborn babies. Several studies have  found that children absorb more MWR than adults.  One  found  that  that  the  brain  tissue  of  children  absorbed  about  two  times  more  MWR  than  that  of  adults,  and  other  studies  have  reported  that  the  bone  marrow  of  children  absorbs  10  times  more  MWR than that of adults52, Kuster53. Thus, children  are at greater risk than adults when exposed to any  carcinogen  because  MWR  exposure  can  result  in  degeneration  of  the  protective  myelin  sheath  that  surrounds brain neurons54.  Some of the governments  like  Belgium,  france,  India,  etc  are  proactive  and  already passing laws about children and teens need  to  know  how  to  use  these  devices  safely.  
Mobile devices should not be kept in children's  bedrooms  at  night,  particularly  under  their  pillows.  The  pew  Research  Center55   has  reported  that  75  %  of  preteens  and  early  teens  sleep  all  night  with  their  cell  phone  under  their  pillow  or  keep  a  mobile  phone  in  their  front  pants  pockets.  There  is  danger  to  exposure  to  MWR. At  the  same  time,   for  girls  it  can  lead  to  breast  cancer. 
The  high  frequency  of  mobile  phone  use  can  have  negative  effects  on  our  stress  levels.  The  constant  ringing,  vibrating  alerts,  and  reminders  of  cell  phones  may  feel  stressful.  Researchers  found  high  mobile  phone  use  was  associated  with  stress and sleep disturbances for women, whereas  high  mobile  phone  use  was  associated  with  sleep  disturbances  and  symptoms  of  depression  in  men.  
349 

========7========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  5, SEpTEMBER   2015 
By  sending  frequent  text  messages  and  e-mails  with  hand  and  fingers,  users  may  cause  pain  and  inflammation of the joints and sometimes neck and  shoulders  pains.  Long  hours  of  reading  on  smaller  screens  of  mobiles  lead  to  vision  problems  in  the  later part of life56. Researchers found that the artificial  indoor-light  used  in  the  rooms  suppresses  the  rise  of  melatonin,  making  the  people  feel  less  sleepy,  and  thus  more  inclined  to  delay  their  bedtime.  This  is  because  when  the  people  alter  the  colour  of  light,  by  reducing  blue  light  and  increasing  the  red  and  yellow,  the  disruptive  effects  of  the  light  were  minimised57.  Therefore,  doctors  advised  to  avoid  late  night  use  of  technology  particularly  use  of  electronic  equipment  in  the  bedroom,  however  there  is  increasing  evidence  that  late-night  use  of  mobile  devices  are  more  disruptive  to  sleep  than  watching  television.  This  can  particularly  affect  teenagers.    
The exposure to the radio frequency (Rf) fields  emitted by mobile phones is generally more than a  1000 times higher than from base stations. So, many  studies  have  been  conducted  in  this  area  to  know  the  greater  risks  due  to  mobile  phone  exposure.  Research  found  strong  evidence  of  developing  cancer, electromagnetic interference, traffic accidents  and other health effects among the mobile devices  users  so  precautions  must  be  taken  to  use  the  same  safely.  
9.    ROLE  OF  READING  DEVIcEs   AND  
INtERFAcE  AFFORDANcEs 
The most commended affordances of the reading  devices are their capability to hold a complete library  and  thus  reducing  the  weight  of  reading  material.  Reading devices are used to assist people to carry  books all over the places, for commercial or pleasure,  college  or  holiday,  etc.  Reading  devices  are  good  for  the  environment  as  they  do  not  use  paper  or  ink.  Interfaces  of  reading  devices  discovered  that  reading  skills  were  hindered  by  not  being  able  to  swiftly  and  materially  judge  the  text.  possible  navigation  is  addressed  by  designers  in  reading  devices,  by  addition  of  functions  to  shows  page  numbers,  hyperlinks,  chapter  titles  to  tables  of  contents,  and  adding  of  automatic  bookmarks. 
10.  FUt URE  tRENDs   IN  MO bILE  READING 
The  age  of  mobile  technology  has  reached  a  new  height.  A  decade  back  mobile  applications  or  cloud technology were unknown arenas. The mobile  phone  that  we  presently  use,  know  and  carry  in   pockets  will  shortly  take  advanced  forms. 10.1  technological  trends 
Mobile  technology  is  now  focusing  on  the  development  of  computing  environment  in  these  
350 
devices.  Wearable  technology  has  started  to  and  will  become  the  subsequent  mobile  technology.  Smartphones, glass screens, holograms and augmented  reality will become the future technologies of mobile  phones. Use of hologram and large screen devices  will not be too far. In future, technology will authorise  to  recognise  its  user  and  differentiate  much  more  proficiently than contemporary passports do. Credit  cards will be substituted by mobile phone payment  when biometrics is fully developed and implemented.  In the near future, electro vibration will be featured  in  touch-screen  devices  allowing  smartphone  to  offer  electrostatic  controls  to  fingers  that  will  have  the  result  of  conning  our  brain  into  thinking  as  feeling  a  texture.  
10.2 business 
future  mobile  business  should  emphasis  on  recognising mobile user experiences. Mobile companies  have to develop an effective mobile business policy  that will increase expansion of value to the business,  decreasing  time  to  launch  a  new  product  in  the  market,  growth  in  scale  to  meet  current  and  future  needs,  minimising  product  developments  costs,  generating new revenue streams, improving customer  relationships and increase in productivity. The evolving  mobile technologies like Bluetooth, General packet  Radio System Network (GpRS) and Global System  for  Mobile  Communication  (GSM)  are  expected  to  accelerate  mobile  business58   to  greater  heights. 
10.3  Pricing  of  Hardware  and content 
Knowing  the  details  about  today’s  mobile  device  is  vital  for  all.  Nowadays,  no  business  is  ignoring mobile device users. A few years from now,  mobile web search will definitely overtake desktop.  Nowadays,  the  companies  frequently  update  the  hardware models to achieve their business targets.  Whether their enthusiasm is justified or not, people  get  excited  about  higher  resolution  screens,  front  facing  cameras  and  quad  &  octa-core  processors.  Mobile  phone  producers  are  adventuring  into  3D  bandwagon.  3D  cameras  offer  new  input  sensor  for three-dimensional relationships. The price of an  iphone start from Rs.45,000/-. Android smartphones,  Windows smartphones and others smartphone price  start  with  Rs.  8,000/-  and  above.  However,  the  present price is likely to drop with the advancement in  technology. Comparing to other smartphones, Android  phones  are  considerably  lower  in  price.  Quality  of  the  mobile  phone  should  not  be  compromised  with  its  price.  Displays  and  processors  that  are  used  in  high-end  smartphones  are  feasible  and  used  in  lower-cost  smartphones59.  
Decreasing  price  of  a  smartphone  is  directly  proportional to decreasing price of electronic content  

========8========

SHIMRAY, et  al.: AN  O VERVIEW Of MOBILE  R EADING  H ABITS 
and  hardware.  As  the  price  of  a  smartphone  is  becoming  cheaper,  more  and  more  consumers  are  moving  towards  smartphones  nowadays.  The  content  on  the  web  is  easily  accessible  when  connected  to  the  Internet.  publishing  companies  are  rapidly  moving  towards  electronic  age  as  they  understand  the  requirements  of  today’s  users  and  overtake  physical  publishing,  though  not  rooting  it  out  completely. 
10.4  curriculum  of  Future  
number  of  people  is  carrying  small  mobile  devices  with  them  that  are  capable  of  holding  and  reading  tens or thousands of eBooks that are useful for the  promotion of literacy and reading. New technologies  like smartphones can play important roles in helping  to  enable  efforts  and  activities  to  teach  people  to  learn  how  to  read. 
Reading requires books which are non-accessible  to  millions  of  people  in  the  world  and  thus  do  not  read.  However,  today  mobile  phones  and  cellular  networks  are  filling  up  that  gap  and  helping  these  
Social networking, social media, technology and  people  out  of  reach.  It  is  estimated  that  over  6  virtual classrooms have transformed the way teachers  billion now have access to a working mobile phone  
demonstrate and students acquire knowledge. Abdullah  &  Siraj60   stated  that  advancements  in  technology  have  transformed  how  we  live  our  lives.  Today  the  developed  and  underdeveloped  countries  are  separated by technology. Technology has made a wide  learning gap between privileged and underprivileged  countries.  Students  from  developed  countries  are  learning  through  mobiles  and  computers  while  in  underdeveloped  countries,  they  are  learning  using  torn  printed  textbooks. 
Mobile  learning  is  the  solution  to  fill  up  this  gap.  Mobile  technologies  aids  in  learning  and  will  further enhance the development of new educational  method  which  simplify  students-centered  or  self- access learning involvement, thus escalating chances  to flourish the education anytime and anywhere. In  the  future,  mobile  learning  will  produce  additional  carriers and professions worldwide. This is because  mobile devices are light, not costly and easily access  when  compared  to  desktops  or  other  devices. 
11.  cONcLUsIONs 
In  this  fast  changing  digital  world,  readers  are  estimated  to  progressively  change  the  screen- based reading act to stay alive with knowledge-rich  environments.  Mobile  reading  is  extensively  used  for  information  seeking  purposes.  Usage  of  mobile  reading is higher in urban areas.  Reading devices  support reading of a particular text and the extensive  scanning  of  manifold  texts.  However,  it  has  not  overcome  the  serious  obstacles  of  supporting  the  tangled  reading,  note  making,  and  arrangement  practices that are the basis of producing novel and  significant texts. further improvements and research is  required in mobile technology to introduce adaptable  user  interfaces,  faster  processors,  ergonomically  best  designs  with  time  and  users  needs,  hands  free  operations,  etc.  
UNESCO’s recent study found that illiterate girls  and women are more attracted to the literacy courses  offered through the mobile phones, computers, Internet  and  TV.  Also  noticed  are  the  potential  for  mobile  phones  and  other  mobile  devices  like  e-readers  to  aid in literacy programs6. With the result that larger  
which is still used primarily for basic communication.  It  is  often  possible  to  provide  access  to  printed  books through a mobile device for a fractional cost.  Today’s smartphones are less expensive and allow  users  to  store  large  number  of  books  and  access  and  read  them.  Nowadays  women  and  men,  girls  and boys around world are reading many books on  mobile phones. UNESCO conducted a comprehensive  survey  of  mobile  reading  in  developing  countries  like Ethiopia, Ghana, India, Kenya, Nigeria, pakistan  and  Zimbabwe  and  found  that  people  read  more  when  they  have  access  to  text  on  mobile  devices,  that  they  enjoy  reading  more,  and  that  people  commonly  read  books  and  stories  to  children  from  mobile  devices6.  
By the year 2020, 90 % of the world’s population  over  six  years  old  is  predicted  to  have  a  mobile  phone  of  which  6.1  billion  will  have  a  smartphone  subscription. The fastest growth rate to new mobile  subscriptions  was  found  in  India  with  18  million  and  China  with  12  million  in  the  third  quarter  of  2014.  The  falling  cost  of  handsets,  coupled  with  improved usability and increasing network coverage,  are  factors  that  are  making  mobile  acceptance  to  the  majority  of  the  world’s  population,  regardless  of  age  or  location.  The  Ericsson  Mobility  Report61 estimated  that  by  2020,  the  world  will  like  never  before.    
REFERENcEs 
1. Clark,  C.  &  foster,  A.  Children’s  and  young  
people’s reading habits and preferences: The who,  
what,  why,  where  and  when?  London:  National  
Literacy Trust, 2005. http://www.literacytrust.org. 
uk/Research/Reading_Connects_survey.pdf 2. Lopatovska, I. E-books in academia: Expectations  
and challenges. proceedings of the iConference:  
Scholarship in Action: Data, Innovation, Wisdom, 
2013.  pp.  486-90. 
3. Henke, H. Electronic books and e-publishing: A  
practical  guide  for  authors.  London:  Springer,  
2001. 
4. Akanda, A.K.; Hoq, K.M., & Hasan, N. Reading  
351 

========9========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  5, SEpTEMBER   2015 
habit  of  students  in  social  sciences  and  arts:  
A  case  study  of  Rajshahi  University.  Chinese  
Libra.:  An  Intern.  Elec.  J.,  60-71.  http://www. 
iclc.us/cliej/cl35AHH.pdf2013. 
5. Davies,  Kate.;  Donnellon,  Kyle.;  Ku,  Melody  &  
Obley, J.p. Hathitrust mobile: A survey of mobile  
reading habits. Hathitrust mobile. http://jpobley. 
com/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/ SurveyReport. 
pdf  2011. 
6. UNESCO. Reading in the mobile era: A study of  
mobile  reading  in  developing  countries.  paris:  
UNESCO,  2014. 
7. Salesforce.  Salesforce  marketing  cloud.  Mobile  
Behaviour  Report.  2014.  pp.1-36. 
8. Market analysis & consumer research organisation  
(MACRO). Study of mobile phone usage among  
the  teenagers  and  youth  in  Mumbai.  Market  
Analysis and Consumer Research Organisation,  
2004,  pp.  1-39. 
9. Devarajan,  G.  Users  approach  to  information  
in  libraries. In Reading  interests  of  secondary  
school  students.  Ess  Ess  pub,  New  Delhi,  
1989.  pp.14. 
10. GSM  Association.  The  Mobile  Economy,  2015,  
http://www.gsma.com. 
11. Amy, M.; Tom, R.; Laura, H. S. & Leah, C. pew  
research  journalism  project:  future  of  mobile  
news. Washington: pew research center. http:// 
www.journalism.org/2012/10/01/future-mobile- 
news/2012. 
12. ATIS. Alliance  for  Telecommunications  Industry  
Solutions (ATIS) Telecom Glossary. http://www. 
atis.org/glossary/definition.aspx?id=3306  2015. 13. Ramaiah,  C.K.  E-books:  past,  present  and  
future. DESIDOC  J.  of  Lib.  &  Inf.  Tech., 2012,  
32(2),  79-82. 
14. Deam, J. E-books vs. print: What parents need  
to  know?  http://www.scholastic.com/parents/ 
resources/article/developing-reading-skills/e-books- 
vs-print-what-parents-need-to-know. 
15. Liu,  Z.  &  Stork,  D.  Is  paperless  really  more?  
Rethinking  the  role  of  paper  in  the  digital  age.  
Communications  of  the  ACM,  2000,  43(11),  
94-97. 
16. Dillon, A.  Reading from paper versus screens:  
A  critical  review  of  the  empirical  literature.  
Ergonomics,  1992,  35(10),  1297-326. 
17. Jabr,  ferris.  The  reading  brain  in  the  digital  
age:  The  science  of  paper  versus  screens.  
Scientific American. http://www.scientificamerican. 
com/article/reading-paper-screens/ (accessed on  
April  11,  2013). 
352 
18. National  literacy  trust.  parliamentary  literacy  
group and the boys’ reading commission. London,  
national  literacy  trust.  Http://www.Literacytrust. 
Org.Uk/assets/0001/4056/boys_commission_report. 
pdf  2011. 
19. Clark, C. Children’s and young people’s reading  
in.  findings  from  the  National  Literacy  Trust’s  
annual  survey.  National  Literacy  Trust,  2012- 
2013,  London. 
20. Liu, Z.  Reading behaviour in the digital environment:  
Changes in reading behaviour over the past 10  
years. Journal  of  Documentation,   2005,  61(6),  
700-12. 
21. Brown,  G.J.  Beyond  print:  Reading  digitally.  
Library  Hi  Tech,  2001, 19,   390-99. 
22. Thomas, S.E.  Another side of the e-book puzzle.  
Indiana  Libraries,  2007, 26(1),  39-45. 
23. Cavanaugh,  T.    proceedings  of  society  for  
Information  Technology  &  Teacher  Education  
International Conference 2004, Using electronic  
texts as the course textbook. Association for the  
Advancement of Computing in Education (AACE),  
2004,  Chesapeake,  VA.  pp.  1113-17.  
24. Bailey,  J.;  Schneider,  C.  & Ark,  T.V.  Navigating  
the  digital  shift.  Digital  Learning  Now!  2013.  
http://digitallearningnow.com/site/uploads/2013/10/ 
DLN-ebook-pDf.pdf. 
25. Armstrong, C; Edwards, L. & Lonsdale, R. E-books  
in  UK  academic  libraries.  Program:  Elec.  Lib.  
and  Inf.  Sys., 2002 36(4),  216-27. 
26. China publishers. The digital publishing phalanx in  
china, a report by china publishers for frankfurt  
book  fair,  2013. 
27. Vassiliou,  M.  &  Rowley,  J.  progressing  the  
definition  of  e-book.  Library  Hi  Tech ,  2008,  
26(3),  355-68. 
28. Morningside  recovery  rehabilitation.  5  Reasons  
why  cellphones  are  bad  for  your  health,  2014.  
https://www.morningsiderecovery.com/. 
29. Akamai. The Akamai state of the internet report,  
Akamai  technologies.  Cambridge,  MA:  http:// 
www.akamai.com/stateoftheinternet/2012.  
30. China  internet  network  information  center.  
35th   statistical  report  on  internet  development  
in  China,  Cnnic.  http://www1.Cnnic.Cn/idr/ 
reportdownloads/201404/u020140417607531610855. 
pdf  2015. 
31. Loan,  f.A.  Reading  habits  of  rural  and  urban  
college students in the 21st  century. http://www. 
webpages.uidaho.edu/~mbolin/loan.htm  2011. 32. Norvell,  G.W.  The  reading  interests  of  young  

========10========

SHIMRAY, et  al.: AN  O VERVIEW Of MOBILE  R EADING  H ABITS 
people.  Health,  Washington,  D.C.  1950. 33. Moyes,  J.  Idea  that  net  is  killing  book  reading  
can  be  filed  under  fiction,  2000.  http://www. 
independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/news/ 
idea-that-net-is-killing-book-reading-can-be-filed- 
under-fiction-718166.html. 
34. Zickuhr, Kathryn; Rainie, Lee.; purcell, Kristen;  
Madden,  Mary  &  Brenner,  Joanna.  Younger  
Americans’  reading  and  library  habits.  pew  
Research  Center,  Washington,  2012.  http:// 
libraries.pewinternet.org/2012/10/23/younger- 
americans-reading-and-library-habits/. 35. Miller,  Carolyn;  purcell,  Kristen  &  Rainie,  Lee.  
Reading  habits  in  different  communities.  part  
2:  The  general  reading  habits  of  Americans.   
pew Research Center, Washington, 2012. http:// 
libraries.pewinternet.Org/2012/12/20/part-2-the- 
general-reading-habits-of-americans-2. 36. Hassell,  S.  &  Rodge,  p.  The  leisure  reading  
habits of urban adolescents. J. of Adolescent  &  
Adult Lit.,  2007. http://www.reading.org/Library/ 
Retrieve.cfm?D=10.1598/JAAL.51.1.3&f  =JAAL- 
51-1-Hughes-Hassell.pdf. 
37. Gambell,  T.  &  Hunter,  D.  Surveying  gender  
differences  in  Canadian  school  literacy.  J.  of  
Curr.  Stud.,  2000, 32,  689-719. 
38. Baker, L. & Wigfield, A. Dimensions of children’s  
motivation  for  reading  and  their  relations  to  
reading activity and reading achievement. Reading  
Res.  Quart.,  1999,  34,  452-77. 
39. Butcher, K. & Manning, M. Gender and reading  
preference.  pearson,  Allyn  Bacon,  prentice  
Hall,  2010. 
40. Huang,  Y.M.;  Liang,  T.H.  &  Chiu,  C.H.  Gender  
differences in the reading of e-books: Investigating  
children’s  attitudes,  reading  behaviours  and  
outcomes.  Edu.  Tech.  &  Soc.,  16(4),  97-110,  
2013. 
41. Vlachos,  filippos  &  papadimitriou.  Artemis.  
Effect  of  age  and  gender  on  children’s  reading  
performance: The possible neural underpinnings.  
Cogent Psychology, 2015,  2.  http://dx.doi.org/1 
0.1080/23311908.2015.1045224. 
42. Smith,  M.W.  &  Wilhelm,  J.D.  Reading  don’t  fix  
nochevys:  Literacy  in  the  lives  of  young  men.  
Heinemann, portsmouth,   NH,  2002. 
43. Magara, E. & Batambuze, C. Towards a reading  
culture for Uganda. African J. of Lib. Arch. and  
Inf.  Sci.,   2005,  15(1),  35-42. 
44. Heyes, C.M. & frith, C.D. Science, 2015. http://www. 
sciencemag.org/content/344/6190/1243091. 45. fernando, C. & Mary, K.A. Education, skills and  
learning: Understanding the rural-urban reading  
gap, 2012. http://cerforum.org/conferences/200305/ 
papers/S2CartwrightAllen.pdf. 
46. ferriman,  J.  Benefits  of  mobile  devices  in  the  
classroom.  http://www.learndash.com/benefits- 
of-mobile-devices-in-the-classroom/2013. 47. Gomez-Borbon,  p.  Ten  advantages  of  e-book  
readers,  2010.  http://www.lifehack.org/articles/ 
lifestyle/ten-advantages-book-readers.html  48. Anderson, N.J. Exploring second language reading.  
Heinle  &  Heinle,  Boston,  MA,  1999. 
49. Tseng,  M.C.  Computer  vision  syndrome  for  
non-native  speaking  students:  what  are  the  
problems  with  online  reading? J.  of  Int.  Learn.  
Res.,  2014, 25(4),  551-67. 
50. Well  &  Good.  Well  &  Good,  2015.  http://www. 
stuff.co.nz/life-style/well-good/teach-me/64519814/ 
reading-ebooks-in-bed-could-harm-health. 51. Thomas, Yinka (n.d.). Get a Good Night’s Sleep  
7 practical Steps.  http://www.sleepcouncil.org.uk/ 
wp-content/uploads/2013/01/Get-a-Good-Nights- 
Sleep.pdf. 
52. Wiart,  J.;  Hadjem,  A.;  Wong,  M.f.  &  Bloch,  I.  
Analysis of Rf  exposure in the head tissues of  
children and adults. Phy. in Med. & Biol ., 2008,  
53(13),  3681-95. 
53. Kuster,  N.  past,  current,  and  future  research  
on  the  exposure  of  children.  foundation  for  
Research on Information Technology in Society  
(IT’IS), foundation Internal Report. http://www1. 
itis.ethz.ch/index/index_itis.html  2009. 54. Morgana, L.; Lloyd, Kesarib; Santosh & Davisa,  
Devra Lee.  Why children absorb more microwave  
radiation  than  adults: The  consequences. J.  of  
Micr.  &  Ultras.,  2014, 2(4),197-204. 
55. pew Research Center. Teens and mobile phones.  
Washington: pew Research Center, 2010. http:// 
www.pewinternet.org/2010/04/20/teens-and-mobile- 
phones/. 
56. Borreli,  Lizette.  5  reasons  why  cell  phones  are  
bad  for  your  health.  http://www.medicaldaily. 
com/5-reasons-why-cellphones-are-bad-your- 
health-247624  (accessed  on  12  July  2013). 57. Schlangen, Luc. The effect of light on our sleep/ 
wake  cycle. philips  cycle  of  white  paper,  2014.  
http://www.lighting.philips.com/b-dam/b2b-li/en_aa/ 
experience/topics/education/lighting_  academy/ 
how-to-beat/daily-sleep-wake-cycles-whitepaper- 
fINAL.pdf. 
58. Thorat, p. Mobile business-The emerging trends:  
2010, http://thorat82.blogspot.in/2010/09/mobile- 
business-emerging-trends.html. 
353 

========11========

DJLIT,  VOL.  35,  NO.  5, SEpTEMBER   2015 
59. Hamblen,  M.  Computer  World.  http://www. 
computerworld.com/article/2489944/smartphones/ 
smartphone-prices-are-dropping--and-will-continue- 
to-dip-through--18.html  2014. 
60. Abdullah, M. & Siraj, S.  prospect and implementation  
of M-learning for future curriculum. In 4thInternational  
Conference on Distance Learning and Education  
(ICDLE), edited  by   Houssain  Kettani  &  Zhou  
Yanqun,  3-5  October  2010,  San  Juan,  USA.  
IEEE, New York. http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/ 
stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=5605998  2010. 61. Ericsson. Ericsson mobility report: On the pulse  
of the networked society. Ericsson. http://www. 
ericsson.com/res/docs/2014/ericsson-mobility- 
report-november-2014.pdf. 
About  the Authors 
Mr somipam R. shimray  is an MLIS student of  pondicherry  University, puducherry. He has qualified UGC JRf  Exam  in  2014.  His  areas  of  interests  include:  Design  and  development  of  user  interfaces  and  user  studies.  
Ms  chennupati  Keerti   obtained  has  Electronics  and  Communications Engineering degree from the Muffakham  Jah College of Engineering and Technology, Hyderabad.  She  is  the  member  of  IEEE  and  ACM.  Her  areas  of  interests  include:  Wireless  communication,  antennas,   and  mobile  publishing  and  reading.  
354 
Dr  chennupati  K.  Ramaiah   is  working  as  the  Dean,  School  of  Media  and  Communication  and  professor  at  the  Department  of  Library  and  Information  Science  at  pondicherry  University,  puducherry.  prior  to  that,  he  worked  as professor  and  Head  in  the  same  Department  from 2010-13 and before that he also worked as professor  and Head, Department of Library and Information Science  and University Librarian at Dravidian University, Kuppam  from 2008-2010. He worked as an Assistant professor for  6 years with Nanyang Technological University, Singapore  from  1999-2005.  prior  to  that,  Dr  Ramaiah  was  Deputy  Director  at  DESIDOC,  Delhi  and  worked  for  14  years  with    DRDO.  He  was  a  Commonwealth  Scholar  for  doing  phD  in  UK  in  the  field  of  Information  Science  in  England during 1989-1993. His formal education includes  Masters degrees in Chemistry and Library and Information  Science.  He  is  a  fellow  of  the  Society  of  Information  Science, and member of many international professional  bodies/societies.  He  has  published  over  110  papers  and  4  books.  His  ares  of  interests  include:  Multimedia  and  hypertext technologies, human-computer interaction, user  interfaces,  designing  e-books,  e-publishing,  e-learning,  archival  informatics,  and  bibliometrics. 

========12========

