DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 27, No. 1, January 2007, pp. 87-95
© 2007, DESIDOC

Delineating the Patent Data: A Case Study of Prolific
Patenting Institutions of India and China
Sujit Bhattacharya
National Institute of Science, Technology and Development Studies
Pusa Gate, Dr KS Krishnan Marg, New Delhi–110 012
E-mail: sujit@nistads.res.in

ABSTRACT
Technological capability/strength, market monopoly/success of R&D efforts are
some of the indications, patents that belong to an entity signify. However, a simple
patent count provides only a limited indication. Informetric analysis can be successfully
applied to reveal the underlying hidden characteristics of the patent statistics. At the
same time, caveats in analysing patent data and understanding the different attributes
of a patent/patenting system is required to undertake a proper analysis. An investigation
of prolific patenting institutions of India and China was undertaken to support the above
argument. Their patenting activity in the US was investigated for the period 1998-2002.
The attributes of the US patent system were used to distinguish the patent data. Patent
profiles in terms of technological domains/applications were uncovered by informetric
analysis. Effectiveness of the patenting activity, strategic and policy aspects were
derived from this exercise. The paper attempts to make contribution towards integrating
the features of the patent system, different aspects of patent statistics and tools of
informetrics for deriving meaning that can be used by a wider audience.
Keywords: Patents, patent statistics, prolific institutions, patent system, patenting institutions

1. INTRODUCTION
Product differentiation is the key to compete
and survive for high technology firms. At the
same time, firms have to make proper safeguards
to see that their innovation/invention is not
infringed upon. The firms in the process
have to compete with imitations of their own
technology/product. Protecting its technology
is one of the main reasons for which a firm
wants to get patents. Patents attached to
a product not only act as an indicator of
reliability for the product but, also show the

technological capabilities of the firm. Thus
analysing patents of a country or organisation
can reveal their technological capability,
proprietary knowledge and possibility of creating
novel patented products, etc. Inter-firm or
cross-country comparisons based on patent
analysis can indicate the monopoly a firm
has within a technological area, and product
differentiation it can undertake.
However, there are well known caveats
associated with the use of patent
statistics 1-3. Patent is only one of the ways

Part of this study could be undertaken because of the project sponsored by the Office of the Principal
Scientific Adviser to the Government of India to NISTADS.

to protect an invention and thus suffers from
incompleteness; secrecy, market lead, and
technological complexity. Control of
complementary assets are the other common
modes that firms employ to protect its
innovations. Importance and value of patented
invention varies considerable as also the
propensity to patented inventions varies across
industries. Different patent laws that allow
a particular type of patent, criteria in allowing
a patent in a particular field, etc. make
cross-country comparisons difficult.
Patents become an effective tool for an
organisation (in terms of competitiveness,
technology leadership, and proprietary knowledge
that can be used for commercial gains, etc.)
when it has a number of related patents in
an application area. In other words an organisation
holding a portfolio of patents in a technology
domain can benefit from its patents more
effectively4,5. Collaboration during technology
development among firms possessing different
complementary assets can turn out to be
very useful for the product to be commercialised.
High degree of collaboration/cooperation is
indicated in joint ownership of technology
developed and is reflected in joint patents.
Another useful approach is to have patents
covering different attributes of the invention
or to obtain patent in different types (an
attribute of a patent system of a country).
For example in the US patent system, patenting
is possible under three different types: utility,
design, and plant 6. Different aspects, i.e.,
functional aspect (utility patent), design aspect
(design patents) or the parts of a plant (plant
patent) of the invention can be protected.
Cited patents provides an indirect indication
of the value of the patent as it helps to
define the state of art in a technology field.
To derive meaning from patent statistics
and apply it in policy perspective that can
be used by a wider audience was the main
objective of this study. Prolific patenting
institutions of India/China in the US over a
five year period (1998-2002) were analysed
for the above objective. The extent these
organisations are building up key portfolios,
have different mix of patents to cover their
88

innovation, linkages in their patents profile
were also explored in the study. The granted
patents were taken, as these were the intellectual
property owned by the organisations. Analysing
patent applications is equivalent in bibliometrics
to analysing paper submitted rather then
actually published 7 .
Applications that are not granted patents
cannot be counted as new, useful or nonobvious. Overestimation in measuring
applications rather then patents granted and
their non-uniform manner of distribution across
countries has also been shown by Archambault7.
This again underscores the necessity of using
granted patents to show the effectiveness of
patents for an organisation.

2. METHODOLOGY
Patents granted to India and China in
US during 1998-2002 were downloaded from
the online (USPTO) United States Patents
and Trademark Office database. The downloaded
data was suitably converted into a database.
Prolific patenting institutions were identified,
and were the focus of this study. The patents
of these institutions were seggregrated under
the three types: utility, design, and plant
patents. Patents citing the granted patents
of India/China in this period were also extracted
from the USPTO database.
Each utility patent was assigned
classification code (class/sub-class/groups/
sub-groups) based on International Patent
Classification (IPC) (US Patent Office also
assigns its own classification codes). The
classification code attached to a patent define
the technological class of the said patent.
Each technological class is again a sub-set
of industrial sector. Based on elaborate
examination, Fraunhofer Research Institute
has linked sub-classes of IPC into 44 industrial
sectors 8 .
The present study used this classification
for identifying the industrial sectors that the
patents addressed. The first assigned IPC
code was used for attributing a patent to a
particular sector (patent office also uses the
first assigned code as the main technological
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(1)

class of the patents). However, the other
IPC codes were also taken into account for
identifying those patents that address multiple
sectors. Design patents protect only the
ornamental features; 34 design classes defined
by USPTO are there for classifying design
patents9. Concordance scheme is not available
for matching the design classes to the
technological sectors. Intensity of patents
being classified under a particular design
class was used to measure the activity in
each design class.
Further detailed investigation based on
the combination of different approaches was
done for identifying the technological domains
and application areas of patents belonging
to a particular sector. Co-word analysis of
the patent titles 10 was primarily applied to
uncover the technological domain/application
areas. Co-word analysis was undertaken at
two levels in this study.
The combination of words that extracted
the maximum number of titles within a sector
for each prolific institute was classified as
the major technological domain within that
sector, and within each technological domain,
co-word analysis was again undertaken to
extract the most important combinations.
This defined the application areas. The result
obtained were synthesised for easier
representation and understanding. IPC groups
and sub-groups of patents and in some cases
claims were also examined to remove uncertainty/
possible outliers in the above co-word approach.
In pharmaceutical patents, expert intervention
was necessary to validate the results. Coclassification analysis was applied to uncover
whether the said patent of a prolific institution
had also addressed more then one technological
sector.
In this study, sub-classes attached to
each patent document were used for coclassification analysis (sub-classes were used
for co-classification, as group of sub-classes
was the basis of identifying a particular sector).
Thus, patents that had sub-classes belonging
to different sectors were identified as addressing
multiple sectors.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Techol., 2007, 27(1)

3. RESULTS
China and India were granted 674 and
536 patents by USPTO, respectively during
1998-2002. There were a few organisations
in both these countries that played a key
role in the patenting process. Only eight
organisations had more then ten patents
during this period in India and accounted for
more then 80 per cent of all granted patents.
Even in China, there were only eight organisations
that had at least ten patents during this
period. These institutions were classified as
prolific patenting institutions (Table 1).
Unlike India, the relative share of patents
by the prolific institutions was considerably
less in China (36 per cent) to the overall
patenting. The patenting activity was spread
across a number of institutions in China
(314 organisations were involved in patenting
activity) unlike India were only 89 institutions
were involved. This may be the reason for
prolific institutions accounting for relatively
fewer shares of patents in the overall total
in China. The marked difference between
CSIR (accounting for 55 per cent of the total
patents) and the rest of the prolific institutions
in India highlights the skewed patenting activity
in India unlike that in China were the differences
in patenting activity among prolific institutions
were much less. Prolific organisations in
both the countries had majority of patenting
activity in the later period.
A major difference was observed in the
type of patents granted to the prolific institutions
of the two countries. In India, except for
CSIR, all the other seven prolific institutions
had only utility patents. CSIR had 13 plant
patents and the rest were utility patents.
None of the prolific institutions of India had
any design patents. In China, there was
considerable difference among the patenting
institutions in the type of patents they had.
China Petrochemical Corporation and SINOPEC
had only utility patents. On the other hand
Dong Guan, Flying Dragon, C.C.& L, and
Storm Electronics had only design patents.
Haier Group Corporation had one utility patent
and the rest design patents.
89

Table 1. Institutions with prolific patenting activity of India and China during 1998-2002
India
Organisation/Industry

Council of Scientific & Industrial
Research (CSIR)

China
Patents
(% share in the
total)
295 (55%)

Dr Reddy' s Research Foundation

34 (6%)

Ranbaxy Laboratories Ltd

29 (5%)

Dabur Research Foundation

15 (3%)

Indian Oil Corporation Ltd

Dong Guan Bright Yin Huey
Lighting Co. Ltd
China Petrochemical
Corporation

Patents
(% share in the
total)
62 (9%)
59 (9%)

Flying Dragon
Development Ltd
Research Institute of
Petroleum Processing
SINOPEC

24 (4%)

15 (3%)

C C & L Co Ltd

21 (3%)

National Institute of Immunology

12 (2%)

Storm Electronics Co Ltd

18 (3%)

Panacea Biotec Ltd

12 (2%)

Haier Group Corporation

16 (2%)

Lupin Laboratories Ltd

11 (2%)

HCT Ltd

10 (2%)

3.1 Collaborative Activity
Joint ownership of patents was indicated
by more then one assignee of the said patent.
CSIR, the most prolific Indian institution,
had just eight patents jointly assigned. The
linkages involved four research institutes and
one university. Dr Reddy's Research Foundation
had 29 out of its 34 patents in joint collaboration.
This involved two industrial firms. However,
majority of these, i.e., 23 were between its
own subsidiary. Dabur had two patents in
collaboration. One was with a university and
another with NII (another prolific institute).
Panecea Biotec had one patent in collaboration
involving a university. None of the other prolific
institutes had any jointly owned patents.
Out of the 59 patents of China Petrochemical
Corporation, 51 had joint ownership involving
three universities, eight industries, and four
research institutes. Twenty-one out of 22
patents of SINOPEC were in joint ownership
with China Petrochemical Corporation. This
showed the strong linkages between the
two oil majors in China. Haier Group Corporation
had 11 of its 16 patents in joint collaboration
with other entities. However, seven of these
joint patents were between its own subsidiary.
90

Organisation/ Industry

22 (3%)

Unlike collaboration by other prolific firms,
Haier's collaborative activity was in design
leading to design patents involving collaborating
partners.

3.2 Cited Profile
Cited patent indicates that it has contributed
in defining the background/novelty of the
invention/restricting the claim, i.e., scope of
the invention (contributed in all the above
aspects or at least in one of them) that had
cited it11. Thus, intensity of citations received
by patents belonging to an institution is an
important indication of its invention/innovation
getting noticed. The total citations received
till 2003 of the patents granted during 19982002 to the prolific institutions increased
with time. Thus, earlier patents have more
chance of attracting citations. By using citation
window, it is possible to nullify this effect.
However, for this study this method was not
used as the cited patents of an entity together
were looked at. Table 2 exhibits the cited
profile of the prolific institutions of India/
China.
It can be observed from Table 2 that the
number of patents held by an organisation
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(1)

Table 2. Cited characteristics of the prolific institutions in India/China
India
Organisation/Industry
(number of patents)

China

Total
citations
received
(% of selfcitation)

Citation
per patent
(excluding
selfcitation)

Organisation/
Industry
(number of patents)

Dong Guan Bright Yin
Huey Lighting Co, Ltd
(62)
China Petrochemical
Corporation (59)

Total
citations
received
(% of selfcitation)

Citation
per patent
(excluding
selfcitation)

17 (35%)

0.3 (0.2)

42 (26%)

0.7 (0.5)

67 (7%)

2.8 (2.6)

8 (0)

0.4 (0.4)

48 (10%)

2.3 (2.0)

Council of Scientific &
Industrial Research (295)

143 (38%)

0.5 (0.3)

Dr Reddy' s Research
Foundation (34)

53 (66%)

1.5 (0.5)

Ranbaxy Laboratories Ltd
(29)

38 (5%)

1.3 (1.2)

15 (5%)

1(0.5)

23 (48%)

1.6 (0.8)

3 (0)

0.25
(0.25)

Storm Electronics Co
Ltd
(18)

63 (16%)

3.5 (2.9)

Panacea Biotec Ltd (12)

33 (27%)

2 (2)

Haier Group Corp (16)

27 (26%)

1.7 (1.3)

Lupin Laboratories Ltd (11)

5 (60%)

0.4 (0.2)

HCT Ltd (10)

28 (7%)

2.8 (2.6)

Dabur Research
Foundation (15)
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd
(15)
National Institute of
Immunology (12)

(size) does not have a bearing on the citations
received by the prolific organisation in India/
China. Self-citations of some of the prolific
institutions were also very high and can be
interpreted in two different ways. It signals
that there was continuity in technological
developments by the organisation. However,
high degree of self-citation may also indicate
that other organisations were not interested
in the firm's technology.
A detailed investigation was also undertaken
of the type of organisations citing the patents
of the prolific institutions. CSIR had been
cited 55 times by itself. It had also attracted
citations from multinationals like GEC, Philips,
etc. However, except for Dabur, the other
prolific institutions received a few citations
from Indian entities. The number of distinct
organisations that were citing patents of the
prolific institutions in China was much higher.
There were a number of multinationals as
well as organisations within China who were
citing patents of these prolific institutions.
Table 2 also brings out the other details. An
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Techol., 2007, 27(1)

Flying Dragon
Development Ltd (24)
Research Institute of
Petroleum Processing
SINOPEC (22)
C C & L Co Ltd
(21)

organisation's patent being repeatedly cited
by another firm indicates the interest of that
firm in its technology emphasising possibilities
of licensing/co-licensing of the cited patents
or plausibly joint technology development
with the citing firm. Insignificant citations of
each others patents among Indian organisations
indicate that it is difficult to forge linkages
for the co-development of technology.

3.3 Sector Profile
Based on utility patents (as elaborated
in the methodology) it is possible to observe
the patenting activity in various sectors. Tables
3 and 4 depict the detailed analyses of the
technological profile of the prolific firms. ‘Relative
technology advantage’ index was constructed
to compare the activities of the organisations
in the major technological sector with share
of the country in the same sector 12. Relative
technological advantage of firms was defined
as:
RTA IJ = ∑ i ∑ j (Pij/Pj)/ ∑ i(Pi/P)
91

Table 3. Technology profile of prolific organisations/institutions of India
Organisation

Major technological
sectors (no. of
patents)
Basic Chemical (116)

CSIR

Pharmaceuticals (112)

Food & Beverages (15)

Dr Reddy’s
Research
Foundation

Pharmaceuticals (30)

Relative
specialisation
1.4

0.8

2.5

1.6

Major
technological
domains
Preparations of
Chelates of
Compounds

Catalyst, polyester,
polypeptides, colloids

Medicinal
Preparations

Anti-bacterial
Anti-fungal

Preparation of
Hetrocyclic
Compounds
Herbal formulations

*Various Compounds
(targeting multiple diseases)

Preparation of
Hetrocyclic
Compounds

*Various Compounds
(targeting multiple diseases)

Dabur Research
Foundation

Pharmaceuticals (25)

1.9

Cosmetic treatment, insect
repellents

Medicinal
Preparations

Anti-diabetic
Anti-hypertension
Anti-cancer
Dyslipedemia

Preparation of
Monocyclic/ Tricyclic
Compounds

Anti-depressant

Medicinal
Preparations
Ranbaxy Laboratories Ltd

Major application areas

Preparation of
Hetrocyclic
Compounds

Uro-selective
adrenoreceptor blocker
Anti-diabetic
Cefuroxime (antibiotic)
*Various Compounds
(targeting multiple diseases)

Pharmaceuticals (15)

2.2

Medicinal
Preparations

Anti-cancer
Anti-neoplastic
Betulynic acid (antiangeogynic acid)

Basic Chemical (15)

1.2

Chemical process

Catalytic cracking catalysts

Other Chemical (6)

1.4

Petroleum products
nuclear fuel (3)

20.0

Lubricating
compositions
Bio fuels

NII

Pharmaceuticals (9)

1.6

Medicinal
Preparations

Anti-cancer
Immuno-supressive

Panacea Biotech
Ltd

Pharmaceuticals (12)

2.2

Medicinal
Preparations

Anti-allergy
Anti-inflammatory
Cyclosporin (immunosuppressive)

Lupin Laboratories Ltd

Pharmaceuticals (12)

2.2

Medicinal
Preparations

Cephalosporin (antibacterial agent)

IOCL

where P IJ is number of patents of firm J in
sector iJ ; P J is number of patents of firm
j in all areas; Pi is number of patents of the
country in sector i; P is number of patents
of the country in all sectors.
RTA IJ greater then one indicates that
the organisation has higher activity/specialisation
92

then the overall activity of the country in that
sector, and vice-versa. RTA IJ equal or nearly
equal to one implies that the firm's specialisation
matches with the specialisation of the country
in that sectors/sub-sector. Thus higher the
value indicated more the relative advantage
of firm in a sector in the country (only the
major sectors in which patents were addressed
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(1)

Table 4. Technology profile of prolific firms of China
Organisation

China Petrochemical
Corporation

SINOPEC

Major
technological
sectors (No. of
patents)

Relative
specialisation

Major technological
domains

Major application areas

Catalysts acrylic
compounds

Basic chemical (43)
petroleum
products, nuclear
fuel (8)

4.0

Chemical process

6.5

Cracking liquid
hydrocarbon

Carboxylic compounds

Basic chemical (22)

5.6

Chemical process

Catalysts

Co-word analysis had extracted various compounds. Meaning of terms in brackets, derived from expert
inputs.

by the firms were only taken; hence index
has high values).
In general, CSIR reflected the overall
patenting activity of the IOP patents. It is
interesting to note that in spite of high degree
of activity in pharmaceuticals by CSIR, it
had RTA less then one. CSIR exhibits leadership
in the area of ‘food and beverages’. Only 15
patents of CSIR in ‘food and beverages’ dominated
the overall patenting activity of the country
(in this area). High RTA IJ value of IOC in
‘petroleum products’ indicated its dominance
in this area in the country. Both the prolific
firms holding utility patents in China (exception
of one patent of Haier) had high degree of
activity in basic chemicals. The other important
salient points can be derived from Table 3.
A patent addressing more then one sector
can have spin-off applications in different
sectors/sub-sectors and thus can be much
better appropriated. Co-classification analysis
exhibited that only few patents had addressed
multiple sectors. Out of 295 patents of CSIR,
only 26 patents had addressed multiple sectors.
Most of them were in pharmaceutical sector.
The other sectors prominently linked with
pharmaceutical were chemical (basic chemical,
pesticides and agrochemicals), and food and
beverages. Only two patents of NII and one
patent of Dr Reddy's had addressed multiple
sectors. Five patents of the China Petrochemical
Corporation and three patents of SINOPEC
were in multiple sectors. Basic chemicals
had linkage with petroleum products and
nuclear fuel in all the cases.
Using the approach as elaborated in the
methodology section, the design areas in
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Techol., 2007, 27(1)

which patents were granted to Chinese firms
were uncovered. Sixty-two design patents of
Dong Guan Bright Yin Huey Lighting Co Ltd
were covered within lighting. Similarly, Flying
Dragon Ltd had 22 of its 24 design patents
in the same class of lighting. Storm Electronics
Co had design patents related to accessories
of electronic devices, e.g., cover for mini
computer or a gun for electronic games,
etc. Co-word analysis of the titles of design
patents of each organisation with more details
is given in Table 5.
Table 5 essentially brings out the fact
that large number of design patents have
been taken by each of these firms to cover
essentially identical variations of a single
thing.

4. DISCUSSION AND
CONCLUSIONS
It is difficult to uncover the strategy
behind patenting activity of firms/research
institutions by just examining the patent
profile. But in spite of these limitations,
critical examination reveals some important
aspects and pointers. The results underscore
the fact that some firms in India and China
are seriously pursuing innovation/invention.
Another encouraging sign is that efforts to
obtain patent portfolio in some specific areas
of technology/design are visible. Hopefully,
this should translate into visible leads in
some areas. Indian firms having no design
patents are a matter of concern. However,
except for CSIR all the other prolific firms
have patents mainly in pharmaceuticals where
design patents do not fall. CSIR has a number
93

Table 5. Design activity of prolific institutions of China

Organisation
Dong Guan Bright Yin Huey Lighting Co Ltd

Various lamp shades/type s (47)
Lantern (2)

Flying Dragon Development Ltd

Torchlight related (8)
Various lamp shades/types (4)
Lantern (3)

C C L & Co Ltd

Calculator (5)
Torchlight related (2)

Storm Electronics Co Ltd

Electronic games (9)

HCT Ltd

Cosmetic container (7)

Haier Group Corporation

Freezer with drawer below(2)

of utility patents in machinery, electrical
tools, etc. Design patents in these areas by
CSIR would have given them important protection.
In spite of similar technological profiles
(pharmaceutical and chemical), no Indian
prolific organisation possessed joint patents.
For a research institute like CSIR, joint
technology development is important as it
can leverage the complimentary skills of a
firm to translate the invention into commercial
scale. Licensing, in general provides only a
limited appropriation. Most of the prolific
organisations in China are involved in design
patents. This calls into question the level of
invention/innovation of prolific Chinese firms
as utility patents are in true sense the result
of actual inventive/innovate activity. However,
the two chinese prolific firms that have utility
patents are both oil majors; their strategic
linkage is reflected by the number of joint
patents they have.
Organisations filing design patents or
plant patents may have different reasons for
doing so. It can be used to protect the
functional aspect of the invention that is
covered by the utility patent. Just like design
patents add some sort of protection to a
particular utility patent by means of protecting
the design, similarly plant patents provide
some kind of protection to the main utility
patent protecting invention related to the
plant. This may be true for an organisation
that has a portfolio of patents in utility category.
94

Application area of design

CSIR has taken some initiative in this regard
by covering its utility patent in mint extraction
with four plant patents in mint. The plant
patents claims new and distinct variety of
mint plant with high menthol content, high
biomass, high oil yield, tolerance to rust,
etc. Haier also has one utility patent in
freezer and two design patents covering this
utility patent.
In China, most of the prolific firms that
have patents in design category are holding
substantial number of design patents on
one particular manufactured good. Design
patents are very weak and appropriate only
in limited circumstances. Nevertheless, design
patents can be useful when overlapping protection
is created 13. For example a firm can focus
its R&D efforts towards creating novel designs
covering essentially identical variation of an
artifact. The firm can then file for proprietary
protection (design patents) on these different
designs. Therefore, if competitors were to
step in they would have to get around a
large number of weak patents, a task not
very easy to do so in many cases. The firm
may have the required license to manufacture
a particular product and thus wants to protect
its innovative design. It seems Chinese firms
are following this strategy. The study made
an attempt of patent analysis along with
understanding the different attributes of the
patenting system. It reveals new insights
that can help to access the technological
capability of an organization/country and can
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(1)

be important input for formulating technology
policies.

REFERENCES
1. Pavitt, K. Patent statistics as indicators
of innovative activities: possibilities and
problems. Scientometrics, 1985, 7,
77-99.
2. Basberg, B.L. Patents and the measurement
of technological change: A survey of the
literature. Research Policy, 1987, 16,
131-41.
3. Tong, X. & Frame, J.D. Measuring national
technological performance with patent
claims data. Research Policy, 1994, 23,
133-41.
4. OECD, Intellectual property: Technology
transfer and genetic resources. An OECD
survey of current practices and policies,
93-123.
5. Wakelin, K. Trade and innovation: Theory
and evidence. Massachusetts, Edward
Elger.
6. USPTO manual of patent examining
procedure, Ed 8, Ch 600, 1500, and
1600. 2003.

7. Archambault, E. Methods for using patents
in cross-country comparisons. In
Proceedings of the 8 th International
Conference on Scientometrics and
Informetrics, 2001 Sydney Bibliometrics
& Informetric Research Group, UNSW.
pp. 41-59.
8. Schmoch, U.; Laville F.; Patel, P. Linking
technology areas to industrial sectors.
Final report to the European Commission,
2003.
9. http://www.uspto.gov.go/classification.
10. Bhattacharya, S.; Kretschmer, H. & Meyer,
M. Characterising `intellectual spaces
between science and technology.
Scientometrics, 2003, 58(2), 369-90.
11. Meyer, M. What is special about patent
citations? Differences between scientific
and patent citations. Scientometrics, 2000,
49(1), 93-123.
12. Debackere, K; Luwel, M. & Veugelers,
R. Can technology lead to a competitive
advantage? A case study of Flanders
using European patent data. Scientometrics,
1999, 44(3), 379-400.
13. http://www.ipwatchdog.com/design_
patents.html.

Contributor
Dr Sujit Bhattacharya obtained his PhD from the Indian Institute
of Technology Delhi, New Delhi for his work on Informetrics. He has
a number of publications in international journals, has co-authored
two books, and co-edited one book. He is a member of the International
Collaborative Network, COLLNET; and also of the International Programme
Committee for the biannual International Conference of Scientometrics,
World Patent information and Research Policy. He has recently
completed a study on Indian Patenting Activity for the Office of the
Principal Scientific Adviser to the Govt of India. His areas of interest
include Scientometrics and Informetrics (patent-related studies) and
technology, trade and IPR. Presently, He is working as Scientist E1
at NISTADS.

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Techol., 2007, 27(1)

95

