DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 27, No. 2, March 2007, pp. 5-11
© 2006, DESIDOC

Library and Information Science Education in India:
International Perspectives with Special Reference to
Developing Countries
A.Y. Asundi and C.R. Karisiddappa*
Information Officer, Siddaganga Institute of Technology, Tumkur-572 101
*Professor and Chairman DLISc and Dean
Faculty of Social Sciences, Karnataka University, Dharwad-580 003

ABSTRACT
The paper presents a succinct profile and contributions of Indian LIS education
since its inception. It also attempts to bring to the fore how this profile presents its
international potentiality and perspective scenario in context to developing countries.
Keywords : LIS education, developing countries, UGC, distance education, India

1. INTRODUCTION
Among the countries imparting library
and information science (LIS) education, India
would rank within five nations chronologically,
in output and contribution to the development
of thought content. If it was Melvil Dewey
who made an auspicious beginning in the
west, then much more notable contributions
came from Dr Ranganathan in the east in
all domains of LIS knowledge, thought and
content. For LIS education and pedagogy
from India in general and from Ranganathan
in particular, the it has been un-matched
and the world has always turned towards
India for something new to emerge from and
excel. India has been a pioneer in education
and research in LIS, particularly among the
developing nations who are looking for a
just educational environment in this context.

What India can offer to the developing
nations in imparting best education,
training and research to the aspirants has
been discussed in this paper? It gives a brief
description of various aspects of LIS education in India and its implied suitability to the
aspirants of educatee from the developing
nations.

2. PROFILE OF LIS EDUCATION
IN INDIA
2.1 Genesis and Growth
LIS education in India started in 1911,
when the Baroda School was started by WA
Borden due to the initiative taken by Sayaji
Rao Gaikwad II, the then Maharaja of State
of Baroda. Since then, India has not looked
back and has been striding high in the ladder
5

of LIS education. Today nearly 100 Universities
in India are running the LIS courses and
imparting Certificate Course to MPhil and
PhDs.
This apart, several universities are
concurrently running Distance Education
Programmes too. The details of the developments
of LIS education in India are well recorded
in the status report of the Curriculum
Development Committee’s (CDC) Report on
Curriculum for LIS by the University Grants
Commission (UGC) 1.

2.2 UGC Efforts
The UGC efforts in the development of
LIS education are well evidenced by the
three committees that were constituted to
formulate model curriculum and pedagogic
guidelines for the LIS courses in India. The
Ranganathan reports on University and College
Libraries and Library Science Education were
the first landmarks in this regard. Later,
report of the Kaula Committee on Curriculum
Development in LIS Education was
published in 1992.
This was followed with the Karisiddappa
Committee report on Curriculum Development
in LIS in 2002. This committee brought into
focus the modular approach to curriculum
design and expanded it to suit the local needs2-4.
The impact of these efforts were first
seen in the continuous development of the
curriculum with changing times. Second,
the UGC recognised LIS as a discipline on
par with other pure and applied subjects.
Third was the growth of teaching departments
in various universities. And finally, it also
necessitated the need for qualified personnel
to teach the subject, which gave impetus to
start the masters and research degrees
programmes.
Thus the curriculum, developed over the
years for the LIS matches with the modern
and contemporary developments in the field
and has been responsible for the creation of
manpower to man the different types of
professional responsibilities, in practice and
teaching.
6

2.3 Role of Professional Bodies
and Other Agencies
The role of professional associations in
India in the promotion of the LIS education
and its systematic development has also
been noteworthy. The three main professional
associations—the Indian Library Association
(ILA), the Indian Association of Special Libraries
and Information Centres (IASLIC), and the
Indian Association of Teachers of Library
and Information Science (IATLIS)—have been
holding annual conferences at the national
and international levels to take stock of manpower
needs and supply of qualified manpower from
the departments. In particular, the IATLIS
has been focusing much closer on the education
sector than the other two; it widened the
scope of the membership to practicising
librarians so that the teachers and practioners
share a common platform towards the
developments of education sector and the
needs of the practice sector. The IATLIS
with ILA and IASLIC also organised jointly
a National Seminar on ‘Hundred years of
Library Science Education and its Future in
October 1987. IATLIS and AGLIS again
organised jointly a National Seminar on ‘IT
and its Impact on LIS Education and Library
Management’ in 1996 5, 6.
Two unique courses were developed by
the Documentation Research and Training
Centre (DRTC) and the Indian National Science
and Documentation Centre (INSDOC) to cater
to the needs of special libraries in particular.
However, the inculcation of the graduates
from these institutions in teaching programmes
have given a new direction to the educational
paradigm of LIS. While DRTC is an autonomous
central institute under the Indian Statistical
Institute, INSDOC is a constituent centre of
the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research.
The National Centre for Science Information
is also offering a postmasters degree course
with intensive application of IT to LIS.

2.4 Levels of Courses in LIS in
India
In India a variety of courses in LIS are
offered and as such the learners have a wide
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(2)

choice. From a three months Certificate Course
to two years Diploma Courses are available
to create para-professionals. The Bachelors,
Masters, MPhil and PhD degree programmes
are also offered by most of the universities
conducting LIS courses. Even at the Masters’
degree level, there are two courses offering
one year BLISc, and one year MLISc or a
two years integrated MLISc programme. Besides
these, library science is also offered as an
optional subject at the three years degree
programme to inculcate professional knowledge
with college level itself. The UGC report of
the CDC gives more details on the structure
of these categories 1.

2.4 Distance Education in LIS in
India
Besides the formal educational programmes
in LIS, India also has a good infrastructure
of distance education programmes in LIS.
As many as 52 universities are offering distance
education prgrammes in LIS; some of them
such as the Indira Gandhi National Open
University (IGNOU) are providing this facility
exclusively. IGNOU offers Bachelors, Masters,
and Postmasters degrees and even is in the
line to extend doctoral programmes in LIS
through distance education mode. The course
material and the audio-video lessons prepared
by IGNOU can match to any international
standards in this regard.

2.6 Curriculum Development and
Research Growth
As already mentioned the curriculum of
LIS has been continuously revised by the
departments at least once in five years. In
some cases, it is even once in three years.
It takes recourse to the progress of the
subject in its various dimensions. The three
committees, mentioned already, have been
the examples to this continuity of curriculum.
The research in LIS in India started at
a very slow pace because of the lack of
proper identity to the subject. First PhD in
LIS in India was awarded in 1950s. The
second came only after 20 years. But, today
the number of PhDs in LIS far exceeds the
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(2)

time frame; there are 1000 estimated PhD
holders in India and each one of them has
been guiding several students from their respective
departments. In the next five years the number
of PhD holders in LIS in India would be
around 5000—estimated at about five times
more then today. A national meeting on
Research in LIS was held in 1994 and numbers
of papers on this subject were published to
take stock of research output 7.

2.7 Infrastructure and Other
Physical Facilities
UGC’s initiative in providing adequate
infrastructure to the LIS departments has
enabled them to equip with IT laboratories
to provide intensive training in their use. It
is a matter of pride that among the developing
nations India has the best suited curriculum
with orientation to ‘technology applications’,
(India has been the earliest to include a
compulsory paper on library automation as
early as in 1980s). The National Accreditation
and Assessment Council (NAAC) under UGC
have provided enough impetus towards creating
good infrastructure, for both libraries and
teaching departments. The faculty to teach
the traditional and IT related subjects is
also available in good number as is evidenced
by the large number of conferences, workshops
and refresher courses organised by several
professional bodies, and the Academic Staff
Colleges. The IATLIS also organised a National
Conference on the Study of the Infrastructure
Facilities available in the LIS departments
of the country8. Besides, a statistical presentation
in this context has also been given
in the UGC Report 1.

2.8 IT in LIS Education
After the USA, the UK and some European
countries, India is one among the few countries,
where information and communication technology
(ICT)-oriented LIS teaching is being provided.
In late 1960s and early 1970s teaching of
computer application commenced in Indian
library science departments.The courses run
by the DRTC and INSDOC also included a
paper on ‘library automation’. The starting of
the INFLIBNET and the Online Information
7

Retrieval Experiments carried out at National
Aeronautical Laboratory and INSDOC gave
boost to the inculcation of new technology
trends. The contributions of private agencies,
in particular the online and CD-ROM database
search services started by Informatics (India)
are responsible for the initiation of technology
culture in Indian libraries and among the
library science teachers. A detailed account
of technology application in India libraries
and library science education has been given
by Kumar 9.
The National Information System in Science
and Technology/Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research (NISSAT/DSIR) and other
research and development organisations like
Defence Scientific Information and Documentation
Centre (DESIDOC) and Sectoral Information
Centres under NISSAT have also contributed
to this process of technology application in
libraries and the manpower development to
man many of these libraries and information
centres. Today, India with many projects on
digital libraries on hand can be considered
as technologically advanced in LIS education
with IT applications. Many national and
international conferences organised in this
aspect gives a clear idea of its technological
capabilities 10-13.

3. INTERNATIONALISATION OF
LIS EDUCATION
The profile of LIS education development
prescribed under above shows India’s unique
experiences in different aspects of LIS education
and place it on par with developed nations
in imparting LIS education to the aspirants
within and outside the country. Students
from Kenya, Ethiopia, Thailand and from
SAARC countries: and from many African
and South-East Asian regions are coming to
India under the fellowship of Indian Council
for Cultural Relation (ICCR) for pursuing studies
in LIS (from bachelors to PhD programmes)
and leading the LIS education mantle in
their respective countries.
In 2005 two Indian professors of LIS
were invited by the Danish Government to
participate in the workshop organised by
8

the Royal School of Library and Information
Science, Copenhagen, where the participants
were LIS educators from Africa, Asia and
Latin America14. The two scholars are members
of the Discussion Group formed by International
Federation of Library Association (IFLA) with
a special emphasis on LIS education in
developing countries. There is growing awareness
in the Asia-Pacific region about the training
and practice of library and information
professionals in the 21 st century and need
for a regional cooperation with the countries
like India, which is affluent with vast experience
of teaching, research and practice in LIS 15.
Study by Abdullahi, 16 et al. needs to be
referred here in order to surface the
appropriateness of India taking a lead-role
in this context, particularly with an emphasis
on developing countries. They made a theoretical
survey on “the importance of international
and intercultural opportunities in serving as
essential components in educating and training
library and information professionals.” The
scope of the paper is though limited to Europe
and North America, but the kind of opportunities
identified by them can be a good frame work
for the others to set-in their goals.
Promotion of distance education is another
area where internationalisation of LIS education
can be promoted. India, since last 25 years,
has been imparting distance education
programme is LIS, particularly through IGNOU.
IGNOU over the years has achieved substantial
experience in this area, has created excellent
course material using nation’s best subject
experts to write the lessons, and has also
broadcasted the lessons through its national
television network. Like India, many other
developing countries such as Ghana have
been utilising ICT for distance education
programmes. Martey17 in his paper has described
the ICT scene in Ghana from 1996 to 2004.
His paper emphases on the benefits that
distance learners in Ghana will derive from
an ICT-enhanced distance education.
The paper also makes some suggestions
as how academic libraries in Ghana can
assist distance learners. India with her experience
can also exchange the views with others in
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(2)

the developing world. The suggestions made
by Subba Rao in this context are also
worth mentioning 18.

4. STUDY OF ISSUES RELATING TO DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES
The broad perspectives on making LIS
curriculum viable for the global issues were
presented by Karisiddappa and Asundi19. They
also deliberated on major issues like emergence
of ‘information and knowledge society’. The
paper enlisted nine major factors that needed
inclusion in the LIS curriculum. Many of
them have now find place in the curriculum
on LIS developed by the CDC of UGC. The
curriculum has a viable balance between the
traditional and technological aspects, practices,
skills, and techniques. Karisiddappa 20 has
succinctly stressed the need for a model
curriculum for developing countries. Shiholo
and Ocholla21 in their paper have deliberated
on the training needs of LIS professionals
in Kenya. Their paper implies to seek international
collaboration in developing a need-based
curriculum. Indian expertise can be a part
of this exercise to fulfill the requirements.
Wijetunge22 stated that “Poor information
system has poor curriculum development in
Sri Lanka”. Ocholla and Bothma23 made some
detailed study on the status, trends and
challenges of library and information education
and training in Eastern and Southern Africa.
Similar studies have come from Mexico by
Morales 24 and from Croatia by Horvat 25.
In the “comparative case study of graduate
courses in library and information studies in
the UK, USA, India and Iran“ Mortezaie and
Naghshineh 26 have highlighted the need for
curricula revamping in terms of “diversity
of courses offered; university independence;
diversity of degrees offered; ease and flexibility
of the higher education system; updated
course programmes; emphasis on research;
and course and curricula development”. The
paper also laments on “a widening chasm
between LIS education in developing countries
and those in developed countries”.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(2)

In this context the paper by Asundi and
Karisiddappa 14 has presented a detailed
perspective on the developing countries needs
in their paper presented at the Copenhagen
workshop in Denmark.
Leif 27 has identified number of collaborative
aspects, which are not successful in Europe
but could be of relevant to developing nations.
The issues of collaboration can be examined
by the Indian LIS teachers to make concerted
efforts to achieve them. Asundi and Karisiddappa14
have also identified some areas of study
relevant to developing countries. Like the
Bologna Declaration—an international agreement
with the help of IFLA could be arrived at with
the Indian library and information science
departments working towards achieving the
collaborative and participative attitude with
the developing country schools.
Chaudhry28 identified “The aim to look
into projects undertaken to promote collaboration
between LIS education programmes in South
East Asia”. He suggested a plan for developing
a repository of learning objects for facilitating
sharing of teaching materials for improved
LIS education. Faculty development was identified
another important area of possible future
collaboration in the region with possible
involvement of international forums.
Wijetunge 29, made a descriptive survey
of LIS teachers of Sri Lanka. He identified
a strange reason for the dearth of faculty to
teach LIS subjects in Sri Lanka. He also
expressed lack of full-time teachers to teach
in LIS schools resulting in a set-back to
professional education in Sri Lanka. Though
the paper suggests for a complete manpower
survey of LIS professionals, the gap needs
to be filled-up as early as possible. Until
then neighbouring countries like India, which
has needed expertise can help under the
collaborative approach adopted by the
SAARC countries.
The two sections, the internationalisation
and the issues relating to developing countries,
should be placed in juxtaposition and
superimposed with the profile of the LIS
education presented in the Sections 2. The
9

international forums like IFLA have endorsed
this view as is evident from the formation of
Discussion Group under its purview. The
trends in LIS education are rather very
conspicuous and the influence of technology
is diversifying its approach. Hence, the countries
with both traditional approach and suitability
to adopt the technology will endure the durability
for the future.

noteworthy. However, the needs of the developing
countries are variable and they are looking
towards viable partners to suit their social,
cultural, economic and political environment.
In consideration of these aspects, India can
be considered as a viable partner in reshaping LIS education in developing countries.

4. CONCLUSIONS

1.

The LIS education in India has a unique
profile, as it started as a voluntary vocation
by many university libraries. This trend followed
for at least a decade or so. An independent
identity to the course was reached only in
early 1970s. Despite these lacunae, it has
progressed well and has attracted the world
focus particularly that of the developing world.
The profile of LIS education given in the
paper shows the landmark achievements in
its stride for recognition. Today, it has reached
a stage where it is being considered as a
course to be reckoned with technologically
affluent programmes, and being considered
on the agenda of apex bodies offering technical
education. It is influenced by within and
goes with concurrent progress made by India
in the field of IT. In traditional subjects of LIS
too, India stands different with scholarly
contribution by Dr Ranganathan and his
contemporaries and disciples. Dr Ranganathan’s
contributions are being considered in the
design of computerised information retrieval
systems. Eisenberg, Michael B, et al. 30
mentioned that an integration of traditional
areas and IT developments is seen vibrantly
in India as is evidenced by the PhD theses
generated by the departments of LIS of Indian
universities. The range of LIS subjects researched
in India presents a very broad base, expressing
in itself its potentialities and expertise in
conventional subjects like library classification,
library cataloguing, and library management
and in the specialised areas like, digital
libraries and open archives initiatives.
The internationalisation of LIS education
is an issue being discussed at many international
forums, and the role that Europe and North
America played in the early genesis, was
10

REFERENCES
Model curriculum for library and information
science. UGC, New Delhi, 2001.

2. University and college libraries. UGC Library
Committee Report, New Delhi, 1965.
3. Library science in Indian universities.
UGC Review Committee Report, New Delhi,
1965.
4. Library and Information Science. UGC
CDC Report, New Delhi, 1992.
5. Hundred Years of Library Science Education
and its Future. In ILA, IASLIC and IATLIS
National Seminar, October 1987, Department
of Library and Information Science, Nagpur
University, Nagpur.
6. IT and its impact on LIS Education and
Library Management. In ATLIS-AGLIS
National Seminar, 25-27 November 1996,
Department of Library and Information
Science, Osmania University, Hyderabad.
7. Seminar on Research in Library and
Information Science, 1994, Department
of Library and Information Science, University
of Mysore, Mysore.
8. IATLIS XVI National Seminar on Infrastructure
facilities for Library and Information Science
Education and Research, 28-30 April 1999,
Department of Library and Information
Science, Sri Venkateshwara University, Tirupati.
9. Kumar, P.S.G. Computerisation of Indian
libraries. B.R. Publishing, New Delhi, 1977.
10. Seminar on LIS Education in the Internet
Era, 7-9 February 2001, Department of
Library and Information Science, University
of Kerala, Thiruvanantapuram.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(2)

11. Digital Libraries: Dynamic, landscapes
for knowledge creation, access and
management. In 4th International Conference
of Asian Digital Libraries, 10-12 December
2001, Bangalore.
12. Digital libraries, edited by N.M.Malwad,
et al. In SIS’96 Annual Convention and
Conference, 18-20 Jan 1996, New Delhi,
New Age International Ltd, 1996.
13. International Conference on Database,
Production and Distribution (INFOTEX93), 28 November to 1 December 1993,
Bangalore.
14. Asundi, A.Y. & Karisiddappa, C.R.
Approaches to harmonise LIS education
in the developing countries the africa,
asia, Latin America (AALA). In Working
Seminar of LIS Educators from Developing
Countries, 10-12 August 2005, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
15. Ghosh, Maitrayee. Preparing information
professionals for leadership in the new
age. Lib. Hi Tech. News, 2006, 23(6),
12-15.
16. Abdullahi, Ismail.; Kajberg, Leif & Virkus,
Sirje. Internationalisation of LIS education
in Europe and North America. New Lib.
World, 2007, 108(1/2), 7-24.
17. Martey, Alfred. ICT in distance education
in Ghana. Lib. Hi Tech News, 2004, 21(5),
16-18.
18. Subba Rao, Siriginidi. Distance education
and the role of IT in India. The Elec.
Lib., 2006, 24(2), 225–36.
19. Karisiddappa, C.R. & Asundi, A.Y. Broad
perspectives of library and information
science curriculum for global issues: A
trend analysis for Indian requirements.
In XX IATLIS National Conference, 21-23
November 2003, University of Madras,
Chennai.
20. Karisiddappa, C.R. Library and information
science curriculum for the developing
countries. In 69 th IFLA Congress, 2003.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(2)

21. Shiholo, Benson Misco & Ocholla, Dennis
N. Changing trends in training needs for
information professionals in Kenya.
22. Wijetunge, Pradeep & Wilson, Jonathan.
Availability of information to LIS curriculum
developers and policy makers and the
status LIS education system: The case
of an information poor country, SET Bull.,
2000, 1(1).
23. Ocholla, Dennis & Bothma, Theo. Trends,
challenges and opportunities for LIS
education and training in eastern and
southern Africa. New Lib. World, 2007,
108(1/2), 55-78.
24. Morales, Estela. Library science curriculum.
Librarian Career Develop., 1995, 3(3),
15-19.
25. Horvat, Aleksandra. Fragmentation of the
LIS curriculum: The case of Croatia. New
Lib. World, 2003, 104(6), 227-32.
26. Mortezaie, Lila & Naghshineh, Nader. A
comparative case study of graduate courses
in library and information studies in the
UK, USA, India and Iran: Lessons for
Iranian LIS professionals. Lib. Rev., 2002,
51(1), 14-23.
27. Leif Kajberg: Cross-country partnerships
in international library and information
science education. New Lib. World, 2003,
104(6), 218-26.
28. Chaudhry, Abdus Sattar. Collaboration
in LIS education in south east Asia. New
Lib. World, 2007, 108(1/2), 25-31.
29. Wijetunge, Pradeepa & Willson, Jonathan.
A descriptive survey of library and information
science education personnel in Sri Lanka.
Asian Lib.,1998, 7(11), 315-24.
30. Eisenberg, Michael B.; Trombly, Carolyn
K. & Ruth, Lindsay D. Trends and issues
in library and information science. Syracuse,
N.Y., 1988. ERIC No. ED 314 099.

11

Contributor

Dr C.R. Karisiddappa obtained BSc from Mysore University, BLISc from
Karnatak University, MLISc from Banaras University, and PhD from Gulbarga
University. He served as the Librarian, JJM Medical College, Davangere
and joined the Department of Library and Information Science, Karnatak
University Dharwad as tutor. At present, he is the Dean, Faculty of
Social Sciences and President of Indian Associations of Teachers of
Library and Information Sciene (IATLIS). He has participated in 70 national
and international conferences and is associated with more than 50
universities of the country as a member of various Boards. He has also
served as a Convener of the UGC Subject Panel and is also associated
with NAAC Peer Committee. Dr Karisiddappa has guided 30 PhD students.
Recognising his over all contributions to the field of LIS education and
research, the Indian Association of Teachers of Library and Information
Sciences (IATLIS) awarded him the Motiw ale Best National Teacher
Aw ard for the year 2000. ILA has also honoured him with Dr P.S.G
Kumar Lifetime Achievement Aw ard at the 51 National Convention
held at Kurukshetra in December 2005. He is a life member of all the
major national associations of LIS as well as ISSI.

12

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(2)

This document was created with Win2PDF available at http://www.daneprairie.com.
The unregistered version of Win2PDF is for evaluation or non-commercial use only.

