DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 27, No. 2, March 2007, pp. 13-20
© 2007, DESIDOC

Need for National Consensus on Library and
Information Science Education in India

R.S.R. Varalakshmi
Department of Library and Information Science
Andhra University, Visakhapatnam-530 003
E-mail: rvsn1234@hotmail.com

ABSTRACT
Library and information science education in India is nearing to celebrate centenary
celebrations. However, several issues need to be resolved to meet the demands of the
contemporary information society. The paper reviews the growth of LIS education in
India, foresees the future trends and suggest for national consensus on some of the
basic issues.
Keywords: LIS education, information society, UGC, IT-based information, ICT, LIS curriculam

1. INTRODUCTION
Library and information science education
in India has played a significant role in the
growth of information society through its
planned efforts. However, the advent of Internet
has totally changed the ethos of professional
librarianship. The diversity in the information
environment now demands multi-skilled
candidates who can respond to the dynamic
nature of information sector.
The managements today are not only
looking for an academically high candidate,
but also a person with good computer and
communication skills who can develop and
manage IT-based information delivery systems.
Hence, the challenge before contemporary
LIS education is to train future information

managers in traditional principles as well as
in information and communication technologies
(ICTs). This calls for a curriculum that offers
creative things along with knowledge and
technical skills, which can encourage the
students and enable them to cope with the
emerging challenges.
An attempt has been made in the article
to review the trends of LIS education in India
under three important phases, genesis of
LIS education, LIS education during 194999, and emerging trends in the new millennium
in order to cover the important milestones
that occurred in Indian LIS education. In this
context, the emerging challenges in LIS education
have also been discussed and some suggestions
are made to improve future of LIS education
in India.
13

2. GENESIS OF LIS EDUCATION
The credit of starting a formal course of
library education in India goes to William
Alonson Borden and Asa Don Dickenson
who established training programmes at Baroda
and the Punjab University in 1911 and 1915,
respectively. Gradually other universities and
library associations like the Madras Library
Association (1929), the Bengal Library
Association (1935), Madras University (1931),
Andhra University (1935), Banaras Hindu
University (1941), Bombay University (1944),
Calcutta University (1946), and Delhi University
(1947) started the library science programme.
It was Dr S.R.Ranganathan who converted
the certificate course to one year postgraduate
diploma course in librarianship and later introduced
masters and research programmes in the
Delhi University. Lazur 1 stated that “One
can not but acknowledges here the single
contributions of that erudite scholar and an
able administrator Dr S.R.Ranganathan. He
was one of those renowned librarians who
contributed substantially through their theoretical
investigations to the recognition of library
and information science as a scientific discipline”.
The LIS education developed in India ahead
of many developing countries, and has a
strong foundation with significant contributions
of stalwarts in the field.

3. LIS EDUCATION DURING
1949-1999
In the five decades following the
independence, the LIS education underwent
metamorphic changes, both structurally and
functionally. Indian universities adopted the
University Grants Commission (UGC)
recommendations based on Dr S.R.Ranganathan
Committee Report (1969), and the UGC Subject
Panel on Report LIS (1980s) from time to
time. Certificate courses were confined to
associations and other organisations. Universities
offered graduate, postgraduate and research
programmes leading to MPhil and PhD. Besides,
Documentation Research and Training Centre,
Bangalore, and Indian National Scientific
Documentation Centre, New Delhi, started
advanced training in library science with emphasis
14

on documentation services. The ‘information’
component was given a high priority from
late 1970s and the nomenclature of library
science was changed to library and information
science as stipulated by the UGC. The trends
in LIS education system during this period
displayed its ability for expansion of structure
and content of course. Another landmark in
the annals of LIS was, starting of distance
education programmes initiated by the University
of Madras in 1981 followed by Dr B.R. Ambedkar
Open University, Hyderabad in 1982 and later
by a number of Schools of Correspondence
Courses/Directorates of Distance Education,
and many open universities. Initially, they
offered graduate programmes but later extended
it to postgraduate and research programmes.
A significant contribution of this period
was Curriculum Development Committee (CDC)
Report of UGC in 1992 under the chairmanship
2
of Prof. P.N. Kaula
. The report framed the
guidelines for the departments to revamp
the curricular programmes and enhance
infrastructure facilities. Impressive performance
of LIS education has been recorded since
then with qualitative and quantitative growth.
Frequently instituted curricular reforms and
policy initiatives taken under the ageis of
UGC have brought significant improvement
in respect of various parameters of LIS
education. However, there have been following
striking limitations during this period:
LIS education was being carried out in
the most traditional way for half a century
after independence,
Despite radical changes in library and
information system, the teaching/learning
experience of LIS students has remained
remarkably similar,
There was delay in inclusion of information
technologies for learning and adopting
educational technologies for teaching,
and
Review of past efforts reveals that most
of the problems are due to uncontrolled
admissions, minimal infrastructure, problems
of regional language and inadequate faculty.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(2)

The uniqueness of LIS education reforms/
revisions of this period lies in the facts that
(i) reforms of LIS education were undertaken
as part of UGC’s overall higher educational
reforms, (subject panels, CDC reports);
(ii) the reform process occurred well after
the developed and some Asian countries;
and (iii) it has evolved with specific focus on
developing professionals for managing the
existing library and information system, i.e.,
to say institution-oriented education.

4. CURRENT TRENDS IN LIS
EDUCATION
The 21st century is the age of globalisation
and has affected all facets of academic and
social life. LIS education too has became a
part of this transformation and needs to blend
global tendencies with the local responses.
The major challenge for LIS education now
is to be with the technology. Technology is
becoming an integral part of education and
LIS is not an exception. One of the important
features at present in India is reorganisation
of business, industrial and education sectors
with new technologies that may find new
jobs. The web/blog designers, the system
administrators, net-based service providers,
Internet information organisers, database
developers, and process analysts may be
the new possibilities for employment of young
professionals. Therefore, there is a growing
pressure on LIS departments to exchange
value of the professional knowledge in the
contemporary information society. In response
to the needs of new millennium, UGC has
recommended Model Curriculum 20013 wrapping
the technology around all concepts of LIS
curriculum so as to enable the student’s
learn and train according to the demands of
information environment. The LIS departments
are equipped with technologies and other
infrastructure to some extent, but whether
they are getting it transformed into expected
levels of student outcome is a matter of debate!
More than 100 universities and institutes
are offering courses in LIS at various levels3.
There are six levels of LIS education programmes,
viz., Certificate, Diploma, Bachelor’s, PG
Diploma, Master’s and Research degrees 4.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(2)

The courses are being offered under different
modes and schemes, viz., regular (on campus)
and distance (off campus); affiliated colleges
of universities; and associations and government
departments. Major contribution is by the
universities that run the course as one plus
one (BLISc + MLISc) or two years integrated
streams. Further there is another stream,
i.e., self finance, with variations in its structure
as universities offer them as a part-time
summer course, and are of one or two year
duration. Departments are now also offering
parallel courses like Masters in Information
Management (University of Mysore), and PG
Diploma in Digital Libraries (University of
Calcutta). Specialisation courses such as
one year PG Diploma Course in Health Sciences
Librarianship by Rajiv Gandhi University of
Health Sciences, Bangalore; two years Graduate
Training Programme by IIT Madras Central
Library, IIIT Bangalore, etc. are also in offing.
iSchools are the new entrants (ISIM, University
of Mysore). The objective is to provide information
professionals with competencies required by
the work place and expand the opportunities.

5. STATE OF AFFAIRS
In spite of all these developments, there
are several unresolved issues of LIS education.
In 1985, Amitabha Chatterjee observed that
proliferation of courses and numbers, degradation
of degrees, lack of infrastructure, lowering
of standards, effect of variations, difference
in course contents, relevancy and orientation,
lacunae in training and multiplicity of levels,
distance education, student characteristics,
lack of accreditation, etc., are some of the
problems that LIS departments have encountered.
In 2005, V.G. Thalawar identified lack of
uniformity in programmes being offered, lack
of checks and balances, inadequate finance
and infrastructure, emphasis on regional
language, fast changing technology and the
subject, lack of trained faculty in IT-based
activities, gap between teaching and practice,
lack of coordination between LIS schools
and libraries, increasing unemployment and
under employment as the limitations or gaps
in the contemporary LIS education. Arora
and Mujo-Munshi 5 in 2000, Lahiri 6 in 2002
and many others have also expressed their
15

dissatisfaction over the situation 6 through
various LIS Forums. Makako7 in 2006, based
on the findings of LIPER Project, inter alia
observed two prevalent issues: low interest
among well-educated graduates in Asia in
the public library market owing to low salary
and social status, and lack of understanding
among employers to accept LIS graduates
as knowledge workers.

5.1 Information Environment
based on IT–A hype or
Reality!
At the outset it appears that information
environment in the country is working with
the application of IT. There are ample examples
like IITs, IIMs, IISc, IIITs, and some University
and Corporate libraries, to support the argument.
But the LIS profession in India has a lopsided
growth. All libraries are not IT savvy. Not
many public and academic libraries are fully
automated and offering net-based services.
Indian information environment is peculiar
with a dual nature—well developed knowledge
centres in higher education and research
institutes, and under developed public and
school library system. Majority of libraries
are functioning with traditional print collections
or as hybrid libraries with a combination of
print and electronic collection. Karisiddappa8
in 2003 also made similar observation in his
analysis on LIS education.
Indeed, there can’t be a mismatch between
the training given to professionals and what
is required by various sectors of information
society. There is a requirement of focused
initiative to integrate technology into the
educational plan in a way that enhances
teaching, learning and creativity, and to what
extent the IT component should be included
in the courses? Majority of libraries, where
the outgoing students are getting employment,
are private engineering and degree colleges
and school libraries that appoint librarians
just for getting AICTE/NAAC or government
recognition and not to develop any knowledge
centres. The IT knowledge, which students
of these centres acquire can’t be practiced.
Further, these students are unwilling to specialise
16

and implement IT to a greater degree for a
meager salary (Rs 2500 to Rs 5000) that they get.
A uniform information environment, where
all libraries adopt and utilize IT advances is
not possible. Hence, the LIS departments
are bestowed with the responsibility of developing
the right personnel with appropriate caliber
to manage the libraries and information centres
of varied scope and nature, ranging from
small rural library to a well established digital
library. This requires redefining and reengineering
of LIS education programmes.

5.2 Proliferation of Numbers–Is
the Supply Matches the
Demand?
The admission criteria in LIS courses
has become so liberal that the number of
students coming out of the universities and
institutions is in thousands while the requirement
of the society is in hundreds; supply out
numbering the demands. The distance education
programmes have turned the universities into
teaching factories and have lessened the
professional standing and scholarly base of
LIS departments. The general observation
reveals that job opportunities for library
professionals have an insignificant growth.
A cursory review of advertisements in the
Employment News from October 2004 to
September 2006 revealed that there were
only 51 announcements for LIS personnel
(the figure exclude recruitment of trainees
by special and corporate sector and might
not have covered some advertisements of
private sector which may come to few hundreds).
Then why are we producing manpower in
algebraic numbers? Is it to meet the demands
of the information society or to increase the
financial resources of distance education
institutions or universities? The LIS departments
have to make a thorough introspection in
this regard.

5.3 Input of the System
The admission standards of the various
institutes offering LIS Courses are not uniform
to maintain quality. Owing to the low level
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(2)

image of the profession, average social sciences
graduates, who have neither language fluency
and communication skills nor basic awareness
of computers, opt for these courses. They
do not possess any soft skills. Albeit, the
students are being introduced to the philosophy,
principles, methods and techniques in general
with the idea that they will train themselves
to suit a specific situation either through
apprenticeship or on the job. But the profession
expects a fully trained professional out of
LIS schools. This is because academics
relentlessly push the profession toward theory
and abstraction, practitioners pull with equal
might toward day to day relevance 9. Then
how to achieve the target of transformation
of students as knowledgeable professionals
and train them as digital librarians in a span
of two years (18 working months) with low
level input and limited infrastructure for
processing!
It is a fact that majority of LIS departments
are lagging behind in the provision of
infrastructural facilities. Very few departments
are being supported by knowledgeable teachers
and the state-of-the-art IT infrastructure. Faculty
is not close enough to the field to give practical
instruction. Above all the courses are not
attracting any special funding from the
Universities, UGC or any other body. Sison’s10
observations are worth mentioning in this
context: “Where are we then with regard to
all these? Sad to say. Many of us are still
of the traditional mold. We need to change
our mindset not only to have the vision to
overhaul the traditional curricula in the training
of information professionals that we have
been using for the past several decades.
More important, we need to ‘retool’ and upgrade
our skills, to enable us to provide such training
and the services expected of us by our users.”

6. FUTURE OF LIS EDUCATION
There is a growing pressure on LIS
departments upon the use-value and exchange
value of the professional knowledge in the
contemporary information society. They are
under pressure from various quarters to sustain
with knowledge-based competition. Varaprasad11
foresees that “Knowledge management will
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(2)

become an integral part of LIS education
beyond the understanding of technology-centric
solutions. Library curriculum would need to
embrace both tacit and explicit knowledge
management skills.” The current trend of
Librarian 2.0/Web 2.0 is a new development
and LIS professionals need the ability, insight
and knowledge to influence this dynamic
environment.
The credibility of university education
system lies in its openness and flexibility
to change. Therefore, the future of LIS education
programmes is bestowed with following
responsibilities:
Maintenance of quality education through
effectiveness,
efficiency
and
responsiveness,
Change in structure and governance of
institutions from centralised to more
decentralised and self-financing,
Dealing with more technology and new
knowledge assets and processes, with
less facilities, and
Linking up more systematically the
educational supply to the profession’s
market value.
Reengineering of the LIS programmes
would require a national consensus.

7. NATIONAL CONSENSUS FOR
LIS EDUCATION IN INDIA
The LIS reforms in India especially from
1980s onwards, are largely ad hoc and unsatisfactory. The consensus at national level is
essential to mange changes in LIS education
effectively and for creating an emerging vision,
devising innovative plans and long term
architecture. Following issues require consensus
at national level:

7.1 Levels of LIS Education
Present trend is to develop a full-fledged
librarian out of a single course, i.e., library
science, documentation and information
technologies be mastered by each and every
17

student during the course duration 12. Nearly
all LIS schools have made attempts to join
the ‘IT bandwagon’. Cox 13 observed that,
“Despite the impact of e-books, e-journals,
and the web on our profession, library school
students still need to learn about printed
books—after all there is little sign that the
500 year old information revolution started
by the printed word is losing its significance”.
Therefore, let us stop thinking that one educational
degree is adequate; being professional requires
continuous learning and updating. Hence,
the LIS education need to be at two levels:
(i) traditional graduate level with introduction
to new concepts to develop manpower for
traditional library system that can be offered
by affiliated colleges and distance education
programmes, and (ii) advanced postgraduate
level courses to produce manpower suitable
for advanced information environment to be
offered on campus by universities. There
may be parallel courses at masters level if
there is adequate demand.

7.2 Core Curriculum
Biswas 12 observed that “first we have to
make substantial adjustments in our agendas,
especially in our core curriculum to have a
truly national direction in curriculum development
and its mandatory implementation”. What
do we mean by ‘core curriculum’? For a
subject to be core there must be agreement
in its definition and the length and depth of
its syllabus. Some may cover it in a week
while others may take it for a semester to
teach, that makes ‘core’ meaningless. Mulvaney
and O’Connor 9 stated that “If we are serious
about LIS being a profession, we need to
develop a true core curriculum and agree on
breadth and depth of subjects it should cover…”
The core curriculum should reflect the
needs of LIS profession, i.e., selection,
acquisition/access, organisation, consolidation
and repackaging, and retrieval/dissemination
of information available in print, micro or
electronic multimedia formats. The curriculum
for an information society has suggested
framework that includes the creation, collection,
communication and consolidation of information
as the core areas and has identified knowledge,
18

skills and tools to be imparted 14. Similar
framework may be developed with orientation
to recent trends. The remaining aspects can
be covered as optional with ample choice to
the student to select courses that suits to
his caliber and pace of study. UGC can
identify a university department as a ‘Curriculum
Development Centre’ to initiate reforms 12.
Alternately, there can be a Curriculum
Development Group under Indian Library
Association (ILA) or Indian Association of
Teachers of LIS (IATLIS) for devising curriculum
reflecting future needs of the industrial and
service sectors and continuous monitoring
of the curricular changes.

7.3 Teaching Techniques
The quality of curriculum can only be
realised when it is taught effectively. Quality
teaching is most likely to happen when it is
student-centered, because that’s where the
responsibility lies. Hence, there should be
recommended set of class room practices
and exercises that are conducive to enhanced
creativity, training the mind for problem
identification and solving keeping in view the
societal needs. The current education system
merely imparts bookish knowledge with little
attention to actual learning and understanding.
It should focus on development of problemsolving and conflict-resolution skills. The student
must take a leadership role in today’s distributed
information environment. This is only possible
when the students are imparted with principles
of the subject by faculty and trained in the
real library environment by professionals.
Teaching/learning strategies like independent
learning, field trips, problem-based learning,
case studies, independent group work, webbased learning, etc., can make students
active. Further the postgraduate courses should
be for minimum 24 working months; 18 months
of study and six months of internship.

7.4 Admission
Who are suitable for the course? Many
more students with background in science,
mathematics and computer science are needed12.
Jagtar Singh and Wijethunge15 also expressd
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(2)

a similar view while stating that “LIS departments
expect their students to be of a different
nature, that is an extrovert personality, with
entrepreneurial flair and ability to work well
as a team member”.

and maintain institutional quality, every
department, college or institution should
be strictly accredited.

There must be a mechanism to control
the proliferation of numbers and to ensure
expected attitudes from entrants, particularly
at the postgraduate level. The students now
being taught ought to provide an expanding
array of net-based information services and
be responsible for the information needs of
the users. If they are in limited numbers, indepth education and training is possible.
The intake should match the demands of
that region and in no case should exceed
20 students. The emphasis must be on
maintaining quality and high standards, rather
than expansion only16.

Virtuous cycle (two way relation) or
partnership between LIS education and profession
is essential to achieve the targeted goal.
Collaboration is required at two levels: among
the LIS departments of different universities,
for exchange of faculty and sharing of resources
for teaching and research, and between LIS
educators
and
practitioners
for
teaching and research.

7.5 Accreditation
Singh17 expressed that “To achieve academic
excellence, it is of utmost importance that
standards and norms of education be prescribed
and adherence to them be made mandatory.
Unfortunately, there is no national accreditation
body for LIS education in India.
As a result, new LIS schools are opening
at a fast pace following different patterns of
education and without the basic minimum
facilities, resulting in mass production of
professionals with sub-standard education
and having least or no exposure to practical
librarianship.”
The standards for LIS education should
stipulate the levels of programmes, admissions,
curriculum, infrastructure, collaboration and
employability. These broad categories will
provide a framework for linking performance
indicators within the subject. Teachers can
use these standards and profiles as guidelines
for planning activities including technologybased, in which students achieve success
in learning, communication, and life skills.
ILA has to take a lead role as suggested by
International Federation of Library Associations
(IFLA) and develop standards for LIS curriculum.
It should take the responsibility of accreditation
and tighten them at implementation. To upgrade
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(2)

7.6 Collaboration

8. CONCLUSION
There is no dearth of ideas and proposals
about LIS education in India, but there are
no constructive steps to rectify the situation
from the root level. The reforms taken so far
are of the superficial level. This leads to the
prevalence of passive nature among faculty,
students and professionals. Consequently,
it is not an easy task to prepare individuals
as practitioners with definable capabilities.
Hence, there is a need to develop strategies
with consensus at national level that helps
recombine points of strength in a synthetic
framework and work to overcome the weaknesses
and the flaws, both of macro-structural and
micro-analytic approaches. The call is for
commitment to build quality library education
programmes that reaffirms the historic role
of university departments. Let us adopt different
strategies and focus on things we can do to
reinvigorate the LIS education.

REFERENCES
1. Agarwal, S.P. & Lal, Manohar. Library
and information education in India:
Achievements and perpectives. In ILAIASLIC-GILA-IATLIS National Seminar on
Hundred Years of Library Education and
its Fututre,1985, Nagpur. pp. BA3.
2. Report of the Curriculum Development
Committee in Library and Information
Science. UGC, New Delhi, 1993.
19

3.

UGC model curriculum for library and
Information science. UGC, New Delhi, 2002.

4.

Thalawar, V.G. Quality education in library
and Information science: Some issues.
In IATLIS National Conference on Quality
Education In Library and Information Science,
Keynote Address, 27-29 October 2005,
Bishop Heber College, Trichy.

5.

Arora, Jagdish & Usha Mujoo-Munshi.
Accepting the challenges of information
technology: Reinventing the library and
information profession in the new millennium.
In SIS Conf. Proc., 2000. pp. 140-52.

6.

Lahiri, A. Interpretation of maladies. Infor.
Today and Tomorrow, 21(1), 1.

7.

8.

Miwa, Mikako. In Proceedings of the
Asia Pacific Conference on Library and
Information Education and Practice, edited
by Christopher Khoo, et al., 3-6 April
2006, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore. pp. 25.
Karisiddappa, C.R. Education and training
for information empowerment specialists
in the net work ed s ociety: Indian
experience. In Proceedings of 24th Annual
Conference IATUL 2003 on Libraries
and Educat ion in the Net work ed
Information Environment, 2-5 June 2003,
Middle East Technical University Library,
Ankara, Turkey.

11. Varaprasad, N. In Proceedings of the
Asia Pacific Conference on Library and
Information Education and Practice, Keynote
address on Singapore’s vision of the
21 st century library service, 3-6 April
2006, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore.
12. Biswas, S.C. Education and training of
information professional of the 21st century:
A future perspective. In Dr P.S.G.Kumar
Festschrift on library and inforamtion
profession in India: Reflections and
redemptions, Part I, edited by C.P. Vasisht
& M.P Satija. B.R. Publications, Delhi,
2004. pp. 223-35.
13. Cox, R. J. Why survival is not enough.
American Libraries, 2006, 6/7, 44.
14. A curriculum for an information society:
Educating and training information
professionals in the Asia Pacific region.
UNESCO, 1998.
15. Singh, Jagtar & Wijetunge, Pradeepa.
Library and information science education
in south Asia: Changes and opportunities.
In Proceedings of the Asia Pacific
Conference on Library and Information
Education and Practice, edited by
Christopher Khoo, et al., Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore.

Mulvaney, John Philip & O’Connor, Dan.
The crux of our crisis. American Libraries,
2006, 7/8, 38.

16. Sharma, R.N. Development of library
and information science education in
south asia with emphasis on India: Strengths,
problems and suggestions, J. Edu. LIS,
2005, 46(1).

10. Sison, Josephine C. Information education
strategies for the east and south east
asia and the pacific regions, The
ASTINFO News Letter, 1996, 11(1) 11.

17. Singh, S.P. Library and information science
education in India: issues and trends.
Malaysian J. Lib.Infor. Sci., 2003, 8(2), 1-17.

9.

20

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(2)

This document was created with Win2PDF available at http://www.daneprairie.com.
The unregistered version of Win2PDF is for evaluation or non-commercial use only.

