DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 27, No. 2, March 2007, pp. 21-26
© 2007, DESIDOC

Education for the Information Management
Profession: Challenges and Opportunities

K.S. Raghavan
Documentation Research and Training Centre
Indian Statistical Institute, Bangalore-560 059
E-mail: raghavan@drtc.isibang.ac.in

ABSTRACT

The paper addresses the implications of a few major emerging trends in the design
of educational programmes for the information profession. It describes the emergence
of the knowledge society, the phenomenon of the globalisation, and convergence of the
technologies. It also describes the direct bearing these phenomena have on education
for the information management profession.
Keywords: Information management, knowledge society, globalisation, knowledge economy

1. INTRODUCTION
Some of the key characteristics of
globalisation that we are witnessing are:
The emergence of new kinds of trade
in services,
Technological revolution in communication
that has made the globe itself the site
of operation for major organisations,
and
The growing influence of market forces
practically in all spheres; innovationdriven supply and supply-driven demand.
Success and utility of all social systems
are assessed in terms of their ability to

sense and manage changes rapidly and favourably
with changing times. Models for assessing
any organisations’ success often relates to
its capacity in terms of wealth generation
and management. These apply equally to
manpower development programmes. The
phenomenon of globalisation of higher education
is probably among the more recent entrants
on the globalisation scene.
The changes initiated by the emergence
of knowledge economy are visible since the
last decade of the 20 th century. Some of the
key characteristics of the knowledge economy
are: the recognition of the importance of
knowledge and information as key inputs for
all development-related activities and
programmes, and the transformation of societies
21

into global villages as a direct consequence
of the globalisation and increasing business
processing outsourcing (BPO) and knowledge
processing outsourcing (KPO).
These phenomena are not unrelated; in
fact they enjoy a mutual ‘cause and effect’ relation.

2. GOAL OF THE PROFESSION
AND THE FEAR OF
ISOLATION
The goal of the information profession
has remained unchanged: provision of efficient,
effective, convenient and cost-effective access
to information to those who are in need of
it. The five laws of library science emphasise
this. In the knowledge economy, however,
the role and degree of importance of information
and the speed at which access to relevant
information is often sought
have changed
substantially as a direct consequence of
the increasing informatisation of the society.
The evolution of the profession in recent
years has been a direct consequence of
such changes (Table 1).
The information society, is characterised
as a society in which low-cost information
is in wide and general use. It is also referred
to as the knowledge (-based) society, to
emphasise the fact that the most valuable
asset is investment in intangible, human
capital and the key factors determining growth
and development are knowledge and creativity.
The greatest challenge that the LIS profession
in India (and probably elsewhere too) will
face in the coming years is the distinct
possibility of isolation triggered by the emergence
of a parallel and a more sophisticated information
management profession. There is a paradigm

shift in the ways in which information is
generated, published, accessed, communicated,
disseminated and utilized. New information
technologies are playing a central and key
role in the emergence of a range of mechanisms
(with a wider range of labels that include
libraries and other memory institutions, digital
libraries, institutional repositories, digital
archives, open archives, knowledge management
systems, learning resource centres, knowledge
resource centres, to mention a few); a range
of careers and a new industry centered on
information. Information systems of all kinds,
including libraries and knowledge management
systems, are fields of institutional investment:
they are major commitments of resources
to building and putting to use certain facilities.
This can only be justified in terms of the
extent to which these facilities augment
and enhance human and organisational
capabilities; or in terms of the disadvantage,
loss and negative impact resulting from not
having such facilities. The same may be
said of investment in institutional mechanisms
aimed at training manpower to work in libraries
and information systems. Their utility and
value (or lack of these) has to be measured
in terms of their ability to train suitable and
relevant manpower for the emerging job market.
Going by the significant amount being invested
by major organisations to augment their
knowledge management/information facilities,
it indeed appears that organisations have
begun to see investments in information/
knowledge management as important for
their growth. Since, this information sector
is not limited to the libraries; it is a potential
job market for the information manpower
being trained. The important question is
whether this sector will look to the LIS
schools and their educational programmes
for their information manpower needs? Three

Table 1. Evolution of the information profession
Era

22

Main thrust

Pre-industrial age

Storage and preservation of information materials

Industrial age

Collection, development and organisation of information

Knowledge
economy

Enhancing access to information

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(2)

factors, likely to have a bearing on manpower
development programmes in the information
field are:
The requirements of the emerging
information systems and the emerging
job markets,
The changing manpower needs and
requirements in the traditional libraries,
and
The nature of job positions being occupied
by products of LIS Schools.

3. EMERGING SCENARIO
Two recent studies have sought to examine
the nature and complexion of the emerging
information job market. Table 2, which is
based on some recent job notifications on
the Web, gives an idea of the nature of
changes that have taken place in terms of
skills and knowledge expected of potential
recruits in the traditional library job market.
It is obvious that the nature of requirements
even in the traditional libraries is significantly
different from what normally constitutes the
course contents in a LIS education programme
at the master’s level.
Table 3 shows the nature of job positions
occupied by a random sample of 32 students
who graduated from the Documentation Research
and Training Centre, Bangalore, and obtained
their Associateship in Information Science
between 1996 and 2005.
Another factor which will influence the
nature of demand of information professionals
in the future, is the corporate sector. India
is fast emerging as a major source for outsourcing
knowledge work and is also trying to emerge
as a global player in manufacturing and supplying
products for certain types of industries (like
auto-components). In order to be competitive
globally many of these new businesses and
even the older industries are modernising.
More than ever before, corporate institutions
are beginning to realise the importance of
an adequate facility within their organisations
for effective information management. A check
of six large corporations who have major
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(2)

operations based in Bangalore (including IBM,
Infosys, Honeywell, GCI Solutions, etc) indicated
that all of them have created a unit within
their organisation responsible for knowledge
management.
All these clearly suggest that there are
certain common denominators that will drive
the demand for information professionals of
the future. These are:
New methods and forms of work
organisation
requiring
effective
communication skills,
The need for and desire to put to effective
use the tools and technologies for
harnessing and utilising both tacit and
explicit knowledge in organisation-building
activities,
The emergence of the corporate sector
as a major destination for information
professionals. This naturally comes with
a higher demand for accountability,
performance measurement, etc., which
seems natural given the global players
who have set up shops in India and the
initiation of the processes of globalisation
of the Indian industry. More and more
organisations appear to be realising
the importance of hiring an information
specialists in the business-development
process
The transition from paper to digital and
multimedia resources,
Dis-intermediation of the process of
searching for and accessing information,
and
The increasing demand for specialisation
within the LIS profession and the shift
from ‘ownership’ to ‘access’ via networks
in traditional libraries.
Familiarity in the use of IT appears to
be an essential requirement at all levels and
for all positions. It is against this background,
need to examine manpower development
programmes for information professionals is
required. It does indeed appear that there is
a profound gap between the course contents,
23

Table 2. Skills/knowledge expected of LIS professionals

Job title

Skill/knowledge requirements

Electronic Service
Librarian

Web architecture principles, database design, web authoring and graphic design,
scripting language, develop complex websites, Macromedia MX, hardware and software
for text and image digitization

Preservation Field
Services Officer

Preservation education, word processing, spread sheet, software program, web design
and maintenance

Associate Director of
Public Services

Knowledge of electronic and print reference sources, technology for reference services,
library user education, digital technology, Web authoring tools and standards, foreign
language expertise

Automation Librarian

Horizon databases, OPACs, Sybase SQL, Unix, Novell Netware and Windows, W/MCSE
certification

Library Director

Management of Voyager integrated library system, scientific databases and e-journals,
MARC tag field, OCLC cataloguing, LC subject heading, MS access, Excel, PowerPoint,
Word.

Bibliographic and
Technical Services
Coordinator

OCLC Cataloguing, metadata, ILL, MARC format, batch loading, retrospective
conversion, computer applications in libraries.

Programmer/Analyst,
Digital Library
Development

Apache, Tomcat, Java/JSP, database design, MySql/Postgres, XML, XSLT, CSS, Perl,
metadata standards such as METS, MARC and MIX, and digital library protocols such
as OAI, web design, digital repositories (DSpace preferred), working in a Unix/Linux
environment, working with digital images, in particular jpeg 2000.

Web Developer

HTML, DHTML, XML, CGI, and Java, Web development tools such as Acrobat,
DreamWeaver and Fireworks, relational database systems such as Oracle and MySQL,
CSS, RSS.

Digital Librarian/Cyber
Infrastructure for
Biodiversity and
Ecosystems

Digital formats, conversion alternatives, metadata standards, access and navigation
tools, digital preservation issues, digitisation and multi-media/non-text formats, building
electronic libraries in cyberspace, biodiversity/biology/ecology/conservation biology

Digital Library Program
Head

Digital library services-digital image conversion projects, management and delivery of
electronic full text, Web delivery of multimedia formats, and metadata file management.
Image capture and delivery technologies, full-text mark-up and searching methods,
database management systems, HTML, SGML, XML, CGI, programming languages:
SQL, C, C++, Java, and Perl, hardware and software applications in DOS, Windows and
Unix environments, library and information standards (e.g., MARC, Z39.50), library
integrated systems, and issues and developments in digital library development.

Web Development
Librarian

Database design and development, e.g., Microsoft Access and SQL, Web database
middleware development (e.g. cold fusion), Internet technologies, subject indexing and
classification including metadata schema, Web user interface design and evaluation.

Librarian for Digital
Repository

Digital libraries, electronic archives, institutional repositories, or equivalent open access
vehicle, basic metadata schemas, especially Dublin core, HTML.

the knowledge and the skills most students
learn in schools and the knowledge and
skills they need to work effectively and
efficiently
in
typical
21 st
century
communities and workplaces.

4. CONCLUSIONS
If manpower development programmes
in context of India have to remain relevant
in the coming years, it is important to seriously
examine the employability and suitability of
24

the products of our programmes in terms of
both the qualitative and quantitative requirements
of the emerging job market.
Some of the exercises initiated in other
countries as a response to some of these
developments needs a look here. Two of the
most important projects/documents in this
context are the Kaliper Report (USA), and
the LIPER Project (Japan). These undoubtedly,
are among the most comprehensive and
important exercises carried out in recent
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(2)

Table 3. Nature of employment of LIS graduates (1996-2005)

Sector

No.

Library–corporate houses

4

Specialised information work–corporate sector

*
4

Library–college

3

Library–research/university

4

Library–others

4

Faculty positions

2

Research/higher studies

4

Knowledge management–corporate sector

2

Software development–corporate Sector

2

Self-employed/consultant

2

Marketing of information products/services–corporate sector

1

* Technical writer, Instructional designer

times. One of the major trend identified by
these surveys is: though library jobs remain
important, LIS curricula have begun addressing
requirements of broad-based information
environments and information problems to
prepare students for jobs in other environments
and situations.
The emergence of i-schools also represents
a response by the academia, especially the
LIS schools, to the paradigm shifts taking
place. The i-school movement in India has
just begun with the opening of the ISIM in
the University of Mysore in association with
both information industry and academic
institutions within and even outside the country.
This should be seen as a logical next step
in the series of exercises that have been
initiated by a number of agencies including
the curriculum restructuring exercises of the
University Grants Commission.
As already mentioned the greatest challenge
for the LIS profession and LIS schools in the
near future is the distinct possibility of isolation
triggered by the emergence of a parallel
information management profession. That
there is a need to redefine the boundaries
of our profession in order to continue to be
relevant in terms of developing and providing
human resources for the typical 21 st century
workplaces, which require knowledge and
skills of a different kind and of a different
order, should be evident from the foregoing
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(2)

discussion. Another opportunity that has just
begun to open is the emergence of information
content industry resulting in proliferation of
information products and services that are
not library based. The information content
industry, which is still in its infancy in India,
offers enormous scope for growth in terms
of opportunities for content creation for the
Web and the online industry.
What do we need to do to our manpower
development programmes to ensure that
information professionals will continue to
make a difference as they indeed did for the
scholarly community of the 20 th century?
Perhaps a factor that can justify the LIS
profession is the increasing recognition that
with the increase in the sheer quantity of
information is crucial to ensure that quality
information becomes easily searchable and
accessible.
As James Morris puts it:“The challenge
is to move from infobesity to infodieting”.
While we need to make our information systems
and institutions including libraries user friendly
and wanted (the number of searches in Google
in a day exceeds the total number of visitors
to all the libraries in the US in a whole year),
we also need to look beyond libraries, which
is where the future of the information profession
clearly lies. The keys to remaining relevant
in the changing market place, therefore, are:
25

To focus on value-addition processes;
find new applications for established
and proven techniques/processes that
librarianship has developed over a century
and more, and
Innovating with the structure of
specialisations that are being offered
in our educational programmes.

FURTHER READING
1. Raghavan K. S. & Agrawal, Nupur. Has
the market place for information professionals

changed? In Preparing information
professionals for leadership in the new
age, edited by Christopher Khoo, et al.,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
409-15.
2. Raghavan, K.S. & Urs, Shalini R. Managing
information in the networked environment:
Preparing next generation information
workers. In Information Services in a
Networked Environment: CALIBER 2000,
edited by R. Vengan, et al. INFLIBNET
Centre, Ahmedabad, 2000, pp. 2.72-2.85

Contributor

Prof. K.S. Raghavan is a professor at Documentation Research and
Training Centre (DRTC), Indian Statistical Institute, Bangalore. Prior
to joining DRTC, he was Dean (Academic) and Professor and Head
of the Department of Information Science, University of Madras. He is
a member of the IFLA Section on Classification and Indexing. He also
served as a visiting professor at the School of Information Science,
Federal University of Minas Gerais (UFMG) in 2003. His research interests
include: knowledge organisation in the digital environment, multilingual
thesauri, lateral semantic relations, and scientometrics. He has edited
a number of books and special issues of journals.

“The best way to predict the future is to invent it”
— Alan Kay

26

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(2)

This document was created with Win2PDF available at http://www.daneprairie.com.
The unregistered version of Win2PDF is for evaluation or non-commercial use only.

