DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 27, No. 2, March 2007, pp. 27-36
© 2007, DESIDOC

Financial Sustenance of South Asian Library Schools: A
Case Study of National Institute of Library and Information
Sciences of Sri Lanka in Retrospect

Pradeepa Wijetunge
National Institute of Library and Information Sciences
University of Colombo, Colombo 03, Sri Lanka
E-mail: director@nilis.cmb.ac.lk

ABSTRACT

The paper discusses the financial issues of the library schools residing in the
public universities especially in the South Asian region. It specifies the particular issues
faced by the library schools because of their small size, high proportion of women as
staff and students, lack of research and their tendency to relate more to the professional
world than the academic world. It provides a detailed SWOT analysis of the National
Institute of Library and Information Sciences (NILIS). It also describes the Ansoff Matrix,
which is a commonly used tool by the business organisations to develop market–product
strategies. The paper analyses the education programmes commenced by the NILIS
during 2003-2005 in the light of marketing-product strategy. It discusses the success
of the endeavour using the Boston Matrix, which is a tool used to measure the success
of the market–product strategy. The paper also highlights some threats posed by the
environment, which hinder the successful implementation of the programmes and
concludes that an authority to manage financial matters and qualified staff with a sound
k no wled g e o f f ina n cia l r e gu la tio ns is e ss e n tia l f o r t he su c c es s o f th e
market–product strategies.
Keywords: SWOT analysis, Ansoff matrix, Boston matrix, NILIS, South Asian library schools

1. INTRODUCTION

the South Asian region exist within the public
university environment.

Library school is defined, in the context
of this paper, as the department, institute,
or school, which offer formal education
programmes in Library and Information Sciences
(LIS). The majority of the library schools in

Public universities in South Asia depend
mainly on government funds for their sustenance
and face many constraints as a result of
fund limitations. Naturally, these constraints
are trickled down to the library schools residing
27

within the public universities. However, library
schools may experience the gravity of financial
constraints more than the other academic
departments, because of the certain special
characteristics.
Library schools are considered weak
because of their small size, high proportion
of women as staff and students, lack of
research and their tendency to relate more
to the professional world than the academic
world. The perception of others of LIS as a
weak academic discipline contributes further
to the financial crises already faced by them
through the government cut backs 1.
Williamson 2 in his most influential report
on American LIS education commented that
one reason for library schools to lack prestige
enjoyed by other professional schools is the
total lack of productive scholarship. He made
a distinction between the professional work
and the clerical work and emphasised different
kinds of training required by each group.
There is no sophisticated body of theory
underlying modern library education because
the profession generally, and library education
specifically, have not made it a matter of
central concern. Even today, library and
information education is seen in this light by
most university academics 3. This situation
is not uncommon in the South Asian context.
Naidu 4 observed with respect to the financial
status of library schools, that it is very difficult
to convince the administrators that LIS is
very different from political science or sociology.
University as a social institution is based
on two kinds of capital; cultural and financial.
The existence of the university depends on
the exchange of one form of capital for the
other. By providing cultural capital like knowledge,
inventing technology and educating citizens,
universities seek financial capital. It exchanges
this cultural capital for appropriations, tuition
fees, endowments and gifts. A university’s
ability to command and control cultural and
financial capital effectively becomes its reputation.
The better the reputation of a university,
more secure is its position among the other
producers of culture 5. LIS perceived as a
discipline without much theoretical foundation
is considered as a threat to the university’s
28

mission of producing cultural capital. In the
context of exchanging cultures, library schools
are expected to produce cultural capital and
financial capital in order to contribute to the
university’s goals and reputation. The financial
viability of LIS programmes, especially when
they exert pressure on the limited funds is
strongly questioned by the university academics
as well as the administrators. Do they represent
a cost or a benefit? Do they promise a
reasonable return or investment? Do they
threaten the financial security of the university
are questions often asked about the library
schools. If library schools cannot provide
positive answers to these questions, there
is a danger of being gradually wiped out by
the more powerful, both politically and financially,
within the university. Hence, library schools
need paying attention to the stabilisation of
its financial strength within the university
environment.

2. NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF
LIBRARY AND INFORMATION
SCIENCES
National Institute of Library and Information
Sciences (NILIS), Sri lanka was established
in 2000 and is partly funded by the government
treasury through the University Grants
Commission of Srilanka. Most of its grants
is mainly spent on staff salaries and maintenance.
NILIS is, therefore, expected to generate
adequate funds through its education programmes
for its sustenance and development.
By the time NILIS was established in
2000, there were two key institutions in Srilanka
already offering LIS education for the past
thirty to forty years (Department of LIS at
University of Kelaniya was offering undergraduate
and postgraduate courses and Sri Lanka
Library Association was offering a threeyear part time course for paraprofessionals).
It is customary for any business organisation
to carry out a formal market survey and
design a formal business plan before commencing
production and marketing. This is also true
for the educational organisations as well.
Before commencing any education or training
programme it is essential to formulate a
DESIDOC Bull. of Inf. Tech, 2007, 27(2)

marketing strategy. This has to be preceded
by a careful study of the institute’s infrastructure,
its environment and the potential customers.
The main elements, before commencing any
venture, which need attention, are:
Customer (and potential customer)
numbers, profile and mix,
Customer perceptions, needs, preferences,
buying patterns, and trends, by subsector, if necessary,
Products and services, mix, values and
trends,
Demographic issues and trends (especially
if dependent on consumer markets),
Future regulatory and legal effects,
Prices and values, and customer
perceptions in these areas,
Distribution and routes to market, and

the university senate and other regulatory
bodies of the university so that the
quality is maintained.
More autonomy as an Institute affiliated
to the university, than a faculty of a
university.
Location of NILIS in the capital city
with easy access to many.
A number of reputed libraries in the
close vicinity.
Language policy of University of Colombo
allowing courses in Sinhala, Tamil and
English which supports NILIS to offer
its programmes in any of these languages.
Availability of a wealth of high quality
academics of the University to support
in curriculum design and teaching.
Considerable number of senior LIS
professionals in close vicinity to provide
support in curriculum design and teaching.

Competitor activities, strengths,
weaknesses, products, services, prices,
sales methods, etc. 6

Substantial amount of teaching/learning
resources provided under World Bank
credit.

But there was no time for NILIS to engage
in such time consuming market surveys because
the spotlight of closure was getting directed
at NILIS and there have been no significant
academic activities since its inception. Therefore
a primary market analysis was carried out
in 2002 at the institutional level using the
already available data in the form of a SWOT
analysis.

Significant amount of classroom space.

2.1 SWOT Analysis of NILIS
The strengths and weaknesses of the
NILIS in 2002 as per SWOT analysis were:
Strengths
University of Colombo which is the parent
body of NILIS has a high reputation.
NILIS is authorised by a ordinance to
design and implement any type of
education/training programme in LIS.
NILIS programmes are controlled by
DESIDOC Bull. of Inf. Tech, 2007, 27(2)

Presence of a Senior Assistant Bursar
to handle finances.
Opportunity to design new education
programmes.
Weaknesses
Absence of any established education
programmes and planned curricula ready
to be implemented.
Opportunities
Opportunities and threats to NILIS at
the beginning were:
Ability to develop partnerships with the
other faculties of the university.
Ability to offer cooperative programmes.
Large potential market segment in the
education sector that required training.
29

Direct support and recognition of the
Ministry of Education.
Opportunity to specialise in Teacher
Librarianship and School Librarianship.
Opportunity to promote NILIS among
school library sector through the Ministry
of Education.
Absence of any special programmes
already running for school library sector.
Facilities available to offer CPD programme.
Availability of several course outlines
for School and Teacher Librarianship
planned by an international consultant
to NILIS.
Availability of hitherto untapped market
segments in traditional library sector
other than school libraries.
Availability of untapped market segments
in the information sector.
Enthusiasm of many LIS professionals
to follow new education and training
programmes.
Threats
Existence of two other main providers
of LIS education.
Recognition of them as the sole education
providers in LIS by the society.
Lack of awareness of NILIS among public.
Limited market share of the traditional
library sector for too many providers.

Lack of promotional prospects for the
library professionals, which prevents
them from following any education/training
programmes.
Poor salaries, which does not warrant
self funding of their education and training.
Lack of funds for training LIS professionals
in the parent organisation.
Many prospective students living
significantly far away from NILIS making
it difficult to attend classes.
Many prospective students being mature
adults whose learning needs are different,
and
Absence of a definition or promotional
schemes within the Ministry of Education,
for newly designated teacher librarians.

2.2 Market-Product Strategy
When designing education programmes,
NILIS needed a strategy to serve as a guide
to decide on the directions in which it should
concentrate. Ansoff Matrix (Strategic Assets
2001) developed by H. Igor Ansoff, a common
tool used in this kind of situations, was
used to plan a marketing-product strategy
for NILIS based upon the SWOT analysis
(Table 1).
The matrix demonstrates the major choices
that any organisation encounters in its quest
for growth—should it target new or existing
markets with new or existing products. The
directions in the boxes are suggested paths
for the organisation’s growth strategy.

Table 1. Ansoff matrix
Existing
products

New
products

Existing
markets

Market
penetration

Product
development

New
markets

Market
development

Diversification

Source: Chapman 1995

30

DESIDOC Bull. of Inf. Tech, 2007, 27(2)

2.2.1 Market Penetration
Market penetration is developing sales
of existing products to the existing market(s).
This requires a greater effort in sales and
marketing to achieve higher product sales;
the goal is a greater market share.
In a growth market, it may be entirely
appropriate to develop existing products and
strengthen marketing activities. If the market
is growing, many organisations are able to
increase sales without increasing overall market
share. In contrast, market penetration in a
static or declining market will be much more
difficult and will require considerably more effort.
Since the organisation is dealing with
products and markets that it already knows,
this is a low risk strategy as all the parameters
are known to some extent. As a result of
this, it is also likely to be a relatively low
cost strategy. Market penetration is appropriate
if there is plenty of a market share to be had
at the expense of competitors, or if the
market is growing fast and is large enough
for the growth. In the LIS context market
penetration occurs when marketing strategies
are intensified to attract more conventional
students for the ongoing courses. But in Sri
Lankan, the market share of LIS courses is
not growing healthily, so it is not
easy to practice this.

2.2.2 Market Development
Market development occurs when a company
attempts to sell its existing products into
new markets. The new markets could be
geographically based, either within the home
country or abroad or alternatively the new
market could be altogether a new market
segment. New markets can also mean new
sub-sectors within the market—it helps to
stay reasonably close to the markets you
know and which knows you.
Moving into completely different markets,
even if the product/service looks good, holds
risks because this will be an unknown territory,
and almost certainly will involve working through
new distribution channels, routes or partners.
DESIDOC Bull. of Inf. Tech, 2007, 27(2)

If there is a good market share and good
product/service range then moving into
associated markets or segments are likely
to be an attractive strategy. The advantage
for the company of this strategy is that it
does not need to invest in new product
development—the main expenditure will be
in the area of marketing and sales. This will
reduce the risk associated with new product
development.
In the context of LIS education, delivering
distance education programmes and marketing
the existing programmes internationally to
attract foreign students fall under market
development strategy. Different delivery methods,
especially distant learning are being used
by the British, North American and Australian
library schools particularly as a means of
increasing student numbers and the income.

2.2.3 Product Development
Product development strategy involves
developing new products for sale in existing
markets. In most companies this is a process,
which will be ongoing as no company can
last for long selling only its current range of
products. Taking this route enables the company
to utilise its existing knowledge and skills
to develop new products for a market that
it understands. Although there is some risk
in any new product development, it is far
less than developing products for new markets.
Many retail companies follow this route, as
they constantly refresh their product lines,
to reflect changing consumer tastes. Marketing
in general and market knowledge in particular
are key skills for this strategy. Product
development is an attractive strategy if product
has a strong market share in a particular
market. Such a strategy can be a suitable
reason for acquiring another company or
product/service capability provided it is relevant
to the market and the distribution route.
Since the number of LIS professionals
and the employment opportunities in the
information profession are comparatively less
in Sri Lanka, all library schools conducting
the same type of programmes will cause a
division in the market segments among these
31

institutions, making all of them weak. Therefore
new product development must be used by
the library schools in a carefully planned
manner for the successful survival of all.

2.2.4 Diversification
Diversification occurs when a company
decides to sell newly developed products
within a new market. This is a bold strategy,
which involves a good deal of risk for the
company as it is moving away from the
products and customers, which it has served
up until this point. This strategy is only
undertaken when there are very good reasons
to do so—this could be because of dramatically
falling sales or may be new technologies,
which have opened up completely new markets
representing a big opportunity for the
company. This sort of activity should be
implemented carefully through meticulous
testing and piloting. There are a wide range
of possibilities for achieving diversification,
but they fall into two main groups; related
and unrelated diversification.
The related diversification involves developing
new products to sell in new markets, but
within the same industry or broad area as
before. It is an established fact that the
numbers of students for LIS programmes
are low and that this is a hindrance to maintain
good quality programmes. Therefore, in the
context of LIS education new market,within
the discipline of library science, could be
approached, i.e., book publishers and booksellers,
authors, and journal editors.
A considerable number of new undergraduate
programmes have been started by the library
schools in the developed countries. These
are not traditional in content, but focus more
on specialised fields (information systems,
information science, information management,
etc.), cater to the new information professions.
The unrelated diversification occurs when
a company decides to enter a new business
area as well as developing new products
and finding new customers. This is a high
risk strategy as the company will have only
a limited amount of knowledge about the
new area. The American library schools are
32

actively pursuing closer links within their
universities. All schools wish to project an
image within their parent institution of being
an integral and productive part of the graduate
and research programmes. Most felt that
their image has been heightened in recent
years, especially in the fields of education,
communication and business. Syracuse,
Pittsburgh and Michigan universities have
created alliances with engineering, computer
science, and public policy for heightened
visibility, which has its rewards.

2.3. Market-Product Strategy
of NILIS
According to the Ansoff matrix discussed
above, NILIS as a new institution did not
have any existing products or existing customers
at its inception. Therefore, market penetration,
product development or market development
were not the strategies it could implement.
The direction for development of NILIS
programmes was diversification. Following
list indicates the education and training
programmes developed by NILIS during 2003
to 2005:
Certificate in School Librarianship (CSL):
A six month course for school library staff
who had no training in librarianship before.
Certificate in Teacher Librarianship (CTL):
A six month course for teacher librarians
who had no training in librarianship before.
Certificate in Public Librarianship (CPL):
A six month course for public library staff.
ICT for School/Teacher Librarians (ITTL):
A six month course for school/teacher librarians.
Diploma in Teacher Librarianship (DTL):
A one year diploma course for trained teachers.
Postgraduate Diploma in Teacher
Librarianship (PGTL): A one year (full-time)
course for teachers with a Bachelors degree
from a recognised higher education institute.
Postgraduate Diploma in Library and
Information Science (PGLIS): A two years
(part-time) course for those with a Bachelors
degree from a recognised university. This is
DESIDOC Bull. of Inf. Tech, 2007, 27(2)

an entry point for the new entrants to the
profession.

staff qualified in education, information
technology, management and staff training.

Masters in Teacher Librarianship (MTL):
A one year (full-time) course for teachers
with a Bachelors degree and PG Diploma in
Education or any other discipline from a
recognised higher education institute.

Especially, the teacher librarianship
programmes are offered with the support of
visiting faculty from the Faculties of Education
and Finance and Management of the University
of Colombo. For DLIM a wide variety of
professionals are involved in teaching a number
of subjects external to the LIS discipline,
i.e., Mass Communication, Records
Management, Application of office Machines,
etc.

Diploma in Library and Information
Management (DLIM): A three year course
for young school leavers.
Mandatory Training Programme (MTP)
for Assistant Librarians of universities: A
six month training course for Assistant Librarians
in teaching and learning strategies.
Diploma in English (DELIS): A one year
diploma programme for Library and Information
professionals.
These programmes can be grouped in
a matrix of diversification as indicated in Table 2.
First quadrangle indicates the programmes,
which contain a major proportion of LIS discipline.
The target groups of these courses are those
who are already employed in school and
public libraries and whose duties are mainly
traditional library tasks. Classes are conducted
by the senior lecturers of NILIS and professional
librarians qualified in LIS who serve as visiting
faculty. With these programmes, NILIS is
remaining within the traditional boundaries
of libraries.
Second quadrangle is empty because
NILIS does not have a sufficient number of
qualified staff in any discipline other than
LIS to offer in completely different disciplines.
Third quadrangle indicates the programmes
offered to the LIS profession also, not alone
by the NILIS staff but in collaboration with

Fourth quadrangle indicates programmes,
which are totally removed from the jurisdiction
of LIS. MTP is conducted mainly by trained
staff of the Staff Development Centre of the
university. DELIS is run by the staff qualified
from Faculty of Education in teaching English.
A couple of other programmes of this nature
are under consideration currently.
Significant fact of these programmes is
that none of them are offered by the other
LIS educators of Sri Lanka. CPL, CSL, CTL,
DTL, PGTL, MTL, MTP and DELIS are innovative
programmes offered in Sri Lanka for the first
time. Thereby, NILIS has been able to avoid
competition from other LIS providers and at
the same time it has not posed a threat to
the ongoing programmes of the other providers.
NILIS has strongly utilised the strengths
and opportunities discussed in Section 2.1.
It needs mentioning here that not only
formal regular education and training programmes,
but also Continuing Professional Programmes
in the form of workshops and national and
international conferences are conducted very
often. These take the forms of related
diversification alone (workshops for public
and school librarians), related diversification

Table 2. Matrix of diversification

Alone

In partnership

Related diversification

Unrelated
diversification

1.
CPL, CSL, CTL, ITTL,
GLIS

2.

3.
DTL, PGTL, MTL, DLIM

4.
MTP, DELIS

DESIDOC Bull. of Inf. Tech, 2007, 27(2)

33

in partnership (workshops for special librarians
in IT, writing and publishing scholarly articles
for university librarians and information literacy),
unrelated diversification in partnership (marketing
strategies for academic administrators).

2.4 Application of Marketing Mix
Elements
Though the market-product strategy is
the most effective, there are certain other
crucial elements, which make these strategies
successful. These elements are referred to
as marketing mix elements. They are the
variables on which the organisation has control
and are used in different combinations to
satisfy the target market7. The product, price,
promotion and place (distribution) are the
key marketing mix elements or the ‘four Ps’
of marketing. A typical marketing mix consists
of a product at a price targeting a customer
in a particular place and promotion to tell
the customers about the availability of
the product.
Product: Any service or product that would
satisfy the customer needs or wants. Based
on customer needs and wants different types
of courses are offered by NILIS. They are:
short courses, postgraduate courses, practical
training sessions in the library, workshops,
seminars, national conferences, and international
conferences.
Price: Cost to the customers should be
attractive. Two pricing formulas are being
used in appropriate occasions to maximise
sales and revenue.

‘four Ps’ are not adequate for service marketing
context. The main argument is that usually
services are produced and consumed
simultaneously. Service delivery personnel
of the organisation and customers frequently
encounter each other. Due to intangible
nature of services, customers look for additional
clues for understanding the nature of
service experience.
They argued further that traditional four
Ps framework needs to be expanded by
adding three more elements, which can be
controlled by the service organisation for
satisfying the customer. They are:
People: All humans who play a part in the
service delivery and influence the buyer’s
perception. NILIS has several groups of people
who can make excellent contribution essential
for the success of programmes. They include
permanent teaching staff, visiting faculty from
the university, other visiting faculty, library
staff, clerical staff, and finance staff.
Physical Evidence: Environment in which
service is delivered and where the customer
and the company interact; teaching/learning
resources, classrooms, peaceful university
environment and infrastructural facilities of
the university.
Process: The actual procedures, mechanisms
and flow of activities by which the service
is delivered. A smooth and controlled flow of
course
delivery
is
maintained
to
satisfy the customers.

3. MEASUREMENT OF SUCCESS
Place: Programmes should be at a place
convenient to the customers. Depending on
the needs, programmes are conducted on
site and off site at various locations.
Promotion: Communication with customers
to raise their awareness about the products.
These activities take the form of: Newspaper
advertisements, brochures, presentations,
press releases, target group oriented promotional
programmes, demonstrations, sampling, annual
reports, and journal articles.
Zeithmal and Bitner 8 have argued that
34

The Boston matrix model (Table 3) is a
tool for assessing existing and development
products in terms of their market potential,
and thereby implying strategic action for
products and services in each category. Some
of the elements of the Boston matrix are:
Cash Cow: These are the products which
bring in high income to the organisation
based on the previous investments. Products
in this quadrangle need maintenance and
protection activity, together with good cost
management, not growth effort, because there
DESIDOC Bull. of Inf. Tech, 2007, 27(2)

Table 3. Boston matrix

Growing market
Mature market

Low market share

High market share

Problem child

(Rising) star

Dog

Cash cow

Source: Chapman 1995

is little or no additional growth available.
Since NILIS has started its programmes just
three years ago, it still needs time for its
products to develop as cash cows.
Dog: These are products which have low
market presence in a mature or stagnant
market. There is no point in developing products
of this nature. Many organisations discontinue
products/services, which fall into this category.
Perhaps very soon ITTL programme will fall
into this category with the establishment of
countrywide IT centres by the Ministry of
Education, and offering IT programmes free
of charge to teachers.
Problem Child: These are products which
have a big and growing market potential, but
existing low market share, normally because
they are new products, or the application
has not been spotted and acted upon yet.
Many of the programmes offered by NILIS
belong to this category, especially because
it is a new institution, which is yet to be
known by many irrespective of a plethora of
publicity events. At the same time most of
the programmes offered are new hence it
will take some time to draw the attention of
the prospective customers.
Rising Star: These products, are those which
have good market share in a strong and
growing market. When a market is strong
and still growing, competition is not yet fully
established. Demand is strong; saturation
or over-supply do not exists, and so pricing
is relatively unhindered.
These products produce very good returns
and profitability. With the recruitment of over
2000 new graduates as Teacher Librarians,
there is a potential of PGTL and MTL shifting
to this quadrangle.
DESIDOC Bull. of Inf. Tech, 2007, 27(2)

4. CONCLUSIONS
As a new educational institution with a
wide range of strengths and opportunities,
NILIS has been able to survive the closure
and grow successfully during its early period.
However, for any marketing-product strategy
to become successful in the university
environment, it is essential to have the necessary
legislative authority to make financial decisions.
NILIS as an institution affiliated to the university
enjoys this authority more than a university
faculty or department. At the same time, it
has a highly qualified Senior Assistant Bursar
with a sound knowledge of government’s
financial regulations and support staff which
facilitates smooth running of financial matters.
Yet it is essential to mention here that if the
following environmental threats are eliminated
status of this particular library school will be
much more enhanced:
Lack of promotional prospects for the
library professionals, whichprevents them
from f ollowing any education training
programme
Poor salaries, which does not warrant
self funding of their education and training,
Lack of funds for training LIS professionals
in the parent organisation,
Many prospective students living
significantly far away from NILIS making
it difficult to attend classes, and
Absence of a definition or promotional
schemes within the Ministry of Education,
for newly designated teacher librarians.
The other library schools within the South
Asian context, which exists in a similar
social, political, economical and technological
context, may take this case study as a
prototype for the generation of much needed
35

revenues by identifying their own SWOT and
mixing the marketing elements in an
appropriate manner.

REFERENCES
1. Large, Andrew. Undergraduate library and
information studies programmes in North
America. Edu. for Inform., 1997, 15(2),
137-51.
2. Williamson, Charles C. Training for library
services. Merrrymount, New York. 1923.
3. Ostler, Larry J.; Dahlin, Therrin C. &
Willardson, J.D. The closing of American
library schools: Problems and opportunities.
4. Naidu, N. Guruswamy. Library science
education in developing countries:
Constraints and challenges. In LIS education
in South Asia, edited by P.B. Mangla.

36

Medallion, Ludhiana, 2004. pp. 59-64.
5. Bourdieu, Pierre & Passeron, Jean-Claude.
Reproduction in education. Newbury Park,
Cal. Sage, 1990.
6. Chapman, Alan. Business plans and
marketing strategy. Available at
http://www.businessballs.com/
7. McCarthy, E.J. Basic marketing: Managerial
approach. Richard D. Irwin Inc. Ed. 6, Illinois.
8. Zeithml, V.A. & Bitner, M.J. Services
marketing. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1996.

FURTHER READING
1. Janakiraman, M. Marketing mix in the
context of library and information products
and services. DESIDOC Bull. Info. Technol.,
1998, 18(3), 11-19.

DESIDOC Bull. of Inf. Tech, 2007, 27(2)

This document was created with Win2PDF available at http://www.daneprairie.com.
The unregistered version of Win2PDF is for evaluation or non-commercial use only.

