DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 27, No. 3, May 2007, pp. 13-20
© 2007, DESIDOC

Blogs: A Powerful Tool for Accessing Information
M. Natarajan
National Institute of Science Communication and Information Resources
14, Satsang Vihar, New Delhi-110 067
E-mail: m_natarajan@hotmail.com

ABSTRACT
The article defines blogs (also known as weblogs), their history, characteristics,
and functions. Different types of weblogs have been discussed especially their contents
which change daily and the issues discussed by the users on the blogs. Some of the
weblogs software like Really Simple Syndication (RSS) and the Library Weblogs and
their uses in libraries have also been discussed. The article analyses content coverage,
updation users, creators, and maintenance of the blogs. The future trend of Blogs with
the challenges librarians have to face to meet the users requirement, have also been
discussed.
Keywords: Blogs, weblogs, RSS, blogger, cyberslapp, Internet

1. INTRODUCTION
The information landscape has changed
dramatically over the past 10 years the way
of communication. The e-mail, Internet and
the world wide web have changed the
communication and learning habits of the
society. Blogs are the latest form of mainstream
personal communication. They are popular
in the fields like technology, marketing, media
and law, with professionals using these to
write about everything from gardening to
politics. While some are very personal, others
a focal point for people to express their
views of the current news. Blogs have become
the perfect platform to espouse ideas, publish
thoughts online, influence society, engage
in global discussion, and promote oneself
Received 19 March 2007

as a thought leader online. Blogging tools
have brought new capabilities such as web
publication and communication to average
people, especially non-technical users. These
are designed to facilitate simple and fast
creation of web content without much technical
or programming skills. Many companies are
recognising the marketing potentials of weblogs.
A blog is a web-based publication consisting
primarily of periodic articles, normally in reverse
chronological order.
A weblog is a website or page that is
the product of (generally) an individual or of
non-commercial origin that uses a date-limited
or diary format, and which is updated either
daily or at regular intervals with new information
about a subject, range of subjects, or personal
13

details. This information available on a weblog
may have been written by the author of the
log, obtained from other sources on the web,
or can be contributed by others, or a combination
of all these. The information is usually topical
and timely, and can be viewed as a developing
commentary on a situation, event or subject.
Weblogs are also referred to as logs, blogs,
web logs, and so on 1 .
The Webopedia defines blogs as, 'a
web page that serves as a publicly accessible
personal journal for an individual'. In 2005,
the word blog was included for the first time
in the US. Merriam-webster dictionary although
it has entered the Oxford English dictionary
in 2004. Typically updated daily, blogs often
reflect the personality of the author 2 .
Canadian weblog expert Peter Scott
has developed a widely-accepted definition
of a blog or weblog as, 'a web page containing
brief, chronologically arranged items of
information'. Some commentators insist that
a weblog is a personal web page. The
success model of a web blog is given below.

2. HISTORY OF BLOGGING
Weblogs are a relatively recent Internet
phenomenon, dating back to late 1990s.
The success model of a weblog is depicted
in Fig. 1 3. The term weblog was initially
coined referring to a server's log file and
then expanded to include the meaning of
online personal journaling. Later on, the word
blog was adopted to refer to personal journaling4.
The shorter version, blog, was coined by
• Type of information
• Posting volume

Peter Merholz in 1999. He pronounced it
'web-blog', which was inevitably shortened
to blog. He broke the word weblog into the
phrase 'we blog' in the sidebar of his weblog.
This was interpreted as a short form of the
noun, and also as a verb 'to blog' meaning
'to edit one's weblog or a post to one's
weblog'. The weblog editor being referred to
as 'blogger. Dave Winer contributed with setting
up servers, which weblogs would ping to
update themselves. Blog reading utilities such
as blogrolling use the aggregated update
data to show a user when their favourite
blogs have new posts. A blogroll is a list of
links that create a context for a blog. Bloggers
normally share a blogroll to increase their
online presence 5 .
The emergence of the blogger, i.e., the
weblog development software (made available
by Pyra Labs in 1999) started the beginnings
of blogging. With the slogan push-button
publishing for the people on its home page,
blogger made an enormous impact on the
world wide web. The blogger home page's
promise of instant communication power by
letting users post their thoughts to the web
whenever the urge strikes was something
that many people found attractive 6 .
According to Winer, the first weblog
was the website, http://info.cern.ch/, built
by Tim Berners-Lee at CERNER Corporation.
From this page Tim Berner-Lee pointed to
all the news sites as they became online.
In 1999, the first free build-your-own weblog
tool was developed. Since then several blogging
software packages have been created, which

Content
value

• Presentation
• Organisationn

• Tool characteristics
• Usability & Sociability

Technology
value

Weblog success
(Popularity)
• Success categories

• Visitors/commentators
• Blogroll

Social
value

• Host affiliation

Figure 1. The Success model of a weblog.
14

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

combine user-friendly interface and format
flexibility. With server-based systems, bloggers
don’t need to manage the software, while
with web interfaces, travellers can blog from
anywhere on the Internet. Blogging enables
news feed to be updated on a site from
different locations quickly and easily7 .

3. BLOGS SEARCH ENGINES
Specialised search engines have responded
to the rapid growth of blogs. Google blog
search (http://blogsearch.google.com),
Technorati Feedster (www.feedster. com/),
and Blogpulse (www.blogpulse.com/) being
some of the top choices. Blogpulse performs
another valuable function by graphing trend
results based on keywords in blog postings,
a useful way to see what the blogosphere
is currently buzzing about 8.

areas such as hardware, programming, games,
and so on. The Weblog, the Shifted Librarian,
http://www.theshiftedlibrarian.com is a personal
weblog created by Jenny Levine, an information
professional9.
Weblogs are therefore virtual soapbox
or personal journal to community space for
learners or any community with a shared
interest. It is a democratic and enabling medium,
which enables people without web authoring
skills or technical knowledge to publish their
views and share them. It can also host features
including links to external websites and
news feeds. Weblogs can complement existing
library services, and could be used to support
local reading groups, clubs and other special
interest groups, adult learning, and homework
activities for children.

5. WEBLOG CHARACTERISTICS
4. FORMS OF WEBLOGS
Weblogs may take many different forms–
a diary, a news service, a collection of links
to Internet resources, a series of book reviews,
reports of activity on a project, the journal
of an expedition, a photographic record of
a building project, or any one of a number
of other forms. Most weblogs display material
for the current month or the current week,
with older material being archived on the
site for browsing and/or searching. Some
weblogs have other useful features–like links
to similar weblogs, or links to the most
important Internet resources in the field of
coverage of the weblog, or a way to make
contact with other people who read the weblog,
or access to software and services. Weblogs
may be a single-person effort or cooperative
projects. Some are a one-way mean of
communication between writer and audience;
others allow readers to post comments to
the weblog. One of the reason that commentators
tend to disagree about the usefulness of
weblogs is that they discuss a particular
type of weblog rather than weblogs as a
whole 4. There are a variety of weblogs, all
doing different things. The single most popular
weblog is probably Slashdot, created by
programmer and graphic artist Rob Malden
and his colleagues. Slashdot is an extended
weblog, which carries discussion threads
contributed by individuals in many subject
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

Blogs are characterised by the following:
Blogs are intended for general public
consumption.
Weblogs allow readers to enter their
own comments to individual posts.
Weblogs links generously, allowing readers
to follow conversations between weblogs.
Weblogs are serial.
The style is informal and personal.
Blogs are like a short public lecture.
According to Winer (www.scripting.com),
weblogs have the following characteristics:
Personalised: Weblogs are designed
for individual use (multi-person weblog
is also possible through collaboration,
such as the ‘‘team blog’’ offered by
www.blogger.com). Their style is personal
and informal.
Web-based: Weblogs can be updated
frequently. They are easy to maintain
and accessible via a web browser.
Community-supported: Weblogs can
link to other weblogs and websites,
enabling the linkage of ideas, and hence
15

stimulating knowledge generation and
sharing between bloggers.
Automated: Blogging tools help bloggers
to present their words without the hassle
of writing HTML code or program; instead,
bloggers just need to concentrate on
the content 10 .

6.

FUNCTIONS

There is a personal point of view
There is an opportunity to contact/
collaborate with the author
Viewers will find topical material that
will (usually) relate to them
Issues of the day are generally those
that are discussed in detail

The basic functions/activities which can
be carried out using a Blog are:

They respond to, rather than create news

It is easy to use and bloggers with
little know-how can set it up with blogging
software. The basic technology effectively
allows access to a website via a back
door and people to add content

They are written in a format with the
most recent material at the top, while
older material is further down the page,
or stored in an archive, which is almost
like reading backwards through a book

It allows people to have conversation
and give their rapid feedback not only
in the same blog, but also in other
blogs. Newspapers and journals are
not able to print comments from the
readers immediately and reply
instantaneously
It is subject to self-correction. It is
easy to retract a statement and/or to
provide the parties with their right to
reply. It facilitates ease of publication
and correction of information which might
be false or damaging and makes it
difficult for bloggers to ignore requests
to take down defamatory or illegal materials
They have a wide reach enabling bloggers
to link everywhere around the world
It has the ability to disseminate specialised
knowledge, although the accuracy of
the news cannot be guaranteed, unlike
conventional news. Blogging combines
the functions of an editor and author
Blogging is an effective way to make
people notice

7.

KEY ELEMENTS

Despite their differences, weblogs have
several key elements in common:
Content changes on a daily (sometimes
hourly) basis
16

Blogs can be maintained by one person
or a group of people and can be from personal
or business purposes, but they almost retain
the key feature of having a list of articles
or posts in reverse chronological order. Most
Blogs allow readers to post comments, creating
an interactive environment with multiple points
of view1.

8. BLOGGING TOOLS
SOFTWARES
Weblogs started to gain popularity after
Pitas.com launched the first free build-yourown-weblog tool, and few others like blogger
released their blogging tools. These tools
provided the ease and affordable opportunity
for non-technical persons to communicate
online.
Nowadays, most eblogs are powered
by hosting services or standalone software;
although a few bloggers like Rebecca Blood
(www.rebeccablood.net), still hand code their
sites. Many popular weblog hosts such as
Blogger, ModBlog, and Xanga offer basic
services free, which are good for new bloggers
or general users who are happy with limited
server spaces and standard features. Blogs
are terrific information resources, but their
companion software Really Simple Syndication
(RSS), is what really makes them powerful.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

9.

LIBRARY WEBLOGS

A number of Internet search engines
and directories (such as Yahoo! and Google)
provide information about, and lists of, weblogs,
and some include pages from weblogs in
their search results. In addition, weblog creation
sites such as Blogger maintain lists of weblogs
that have been created using their service.
There are now some specialist weblog search
engines, the largest of which, Technorati,
claimed to be “watching” 1,064,313 weblogs
in October 2003. The library weblogs were
found through just three specialist directories.
The first was Scott’s “Library weblogs” page,
which lists weblogs (professional and personal)
that are maintained by librarians, and weblogs
that deal with library and information related
topics, as well as library weblogs per se. It
is arranged in alphabetical order by country.
The second was the DMOZ Open Directory
Project page of “Organizational weblogs”,
which lists library weblogs, weblogs from
other organisations, and some librarianmaintained weblogs. It is arranged in alphabetical
order by the name of the weblog. The third
was the author’s (Clyde) own teachingWeb
page of “Weblogs”, on which the list of library
weblogs is arranged in alphabetical order by
the name of the library. The Yahoo! weblogs
directory listed no library weblogs that were
not already on at least one of the three
specialist directories 6. The top ranking site
from Libdex, which contains a list of library
weblogs by country, also features articles
on weblogging by and for information
professionals, most of whom are based in
the U.S. and Canada.

9.1 Subject Weblogs
Some library blogs are more expertoriented with a specific subject focus. Canadian
John Dupois runs Confessions of a Science
Librarian (http://jdupuis.blogspot.com/) and
posts items of special interest to academic
science librarians, but with a sense of humour.
Another Canadian, Randy Reichardt, has
set up The (sci-tech) Library Question which
features information for engineering and science
librarians, including reviews of science-related
websites and traditional print reference sources.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

Michelle Kraft's The Krafty Librarian
(www.kraftylibrarian.blogspot. com/) regularly
looks at medical librarianship issues. Library
legal issues are approached by several blogs.
Englishman Paul Pedley's Keeping Legal
(www.keepinglegal.com/) contains legal issues
of both UK and US. Sabrina I. Pacifici focuses
on law and technology news in bespacific
(www.bespacific.com/). Daily postings provide
updates on issues including copyright, privacy,
censorship, the Patriot Act, ID theft, and
freedom of information. Her blog's subject
organisation includes a category for libraries.
Also Mary Minow's LibraryLaw Blog (http:/
/blog.librarylaw.com/librarylaw/) covers issues
concerning libraries and the law with latitude
to discuss any other interesting issues 11 .

9.2 Library Weblogs for Young
Readers
Many public library weblogs seem to
be devoted to children and teenagers. Several
are described as teen pages or teen news,
and are linked to library reading activities.
Spring Valley library has a teen page which
offers a prize to readers who have read ten
books. The Caestecker Public library, Wisconsin,
USA, is a library which serves a population
of 3000 residents but still provides a weblog
devoted to children's literature. Weblogging,
in a controlled environment, can provide young
people with a safe, shared web space to
develop writing skills and share experiences.

9.3 Local Councillors' Weblogs
The local councillors in the UK (often
referred to as elected members were illinformed about the role public libraries play
in progressing local and national government
agendas. Library managers in the UK were
urged to remedy this situation by ensuring
that councillors with responsibility for public
libraries, well informed and by getting them
involved in library activities. This led to the
development of local councilors weblogs.
Some forward-thinking local councillors already
have weblogs and use these as a simple
communication channel between them, the
local authority, and people working and living
in the area. Councillors and libraries share
17

a virtual space and have closer contact to
the communities they serve. The weblog
might also feature links to other weblogs
provided by council services, such as social
services, the police, and school 12 .

10. ANALYSIS OF LIBRARY
WEBLOGS
Library weblogs (55) were found in only
three countries: the USA, Canada, and the
UK with by far the largest number being in
the USA (46), Canada (6) and the UK (3).
Given the popularity of blogging in countries
like Australia, New Zealand, France, and
Iceland, it is surprising that more countries
are not represented in the list. However,
checks of local search engines and professional
websites in these and other countries failed
to find any evidence of library blogs. This
does not necessarily mean that there are no
library weblogs in other countries; rather
weblogs that may exist are inaccessible
through search engines and directories. Out
of the 55 weblogs, 25 are maintained by
public libraries, 21 by academic libraries, 5
by special libraries, 2 by multi-type library
network and one each by national library
and school board library. The purpose of the
weblogs are to provide news and information
for users, links to recommend internet resources,
book reviews, information about new books,
provide entertainment for users, news or
information for librarians, book discussions,
research tips and communication among
librarians (in a library system) 6 .

11. USES OF WEBLOGS
Blogs are easy to use as these require
no knowledge of html or configuration of
systems. Generally, they offer searching,
indexing, categorisation tools, and trackback/
shareback mechanisms, whereby content
on a given topic can be aggregated and
tracked. These are used by librarians in
reference work and information provision more
so because weblog entries also result in the
pages of search presented by some of the
public search engines. In the reference setting,
their strength lies in their general acceptance
and their references to a range of opinions,
18

as well as to new sources of information and
commentary. Few libraries have created weblogs
to communicate with their users or for publicity
and promotional purposes.
There are many ways in which blogs
and RSS feeds can be used in the academic
library environment to promote and market
library services and resources to faculty and
the students. A feed reader is a lightweight
open source aggregator that supports RSS
and ATOM formats. To access RSS feeds
from different blogs, one need to download
a feed reader on their computers. There are
several RSS readers available. A web-based
free service called Bloglines, can also be
used to subscribe to different RSS feeds
indicated by either an RSS or XML icon from
variety of blogs. Once the URL associated
with these icons is copied and pasted onto
the Bloglines account or in any feed readers,
feeds for that site become available. Feeds
from blogs can be accessed from anywhere
and anytime. Bloglines is a news aggregator
of many online information sources, such as
websites, weblogs, and news services, now
broadcast their content to the web in socalled 'syndicate feeds' or 'news feeds' with RSS.
Librarians are using blogs in unique
and diverse ways. Using an RSS feed, librarians
are customising blog posts for their departmental
liaisons, or using RSS to html converters to
incorporate blog posts into educational software
such as Blackboard. Blogs such as Jenny
Levine's site and Shifted Librarian
(www.theshiftedlibrarian.com/) are widely read
and dealt frequently. Other blogs, such as
the director's blog that appears on the home
page of the Ann Arbor Public Library
(www.aadl.org), offers announcements and
an immediate, shareable chance for feedback.
Another unique blog, Superpatron (http://
vielmetti.typepad.com/superpatron/) is written
exclusively by library patrons 13 .
Some possible uses of blogs in an
academic environment are:
Personal knowledge management
Class/cohort (announcements, schedules,
readings etc)
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

Posting student work for viewing/comment
by peers
Personal journal with viewing/comment
by teacher/tutor
Publication of tutor essays, links or
commentary to seed discussion
Community forum
'Citizen' reporting
e-Portfolio/PDP
But all these uses in an academic
environment are at an early and exciting
stage of development.

12. LEGAL IMPLICATIONS
The biggest problems arise when bloggers
reveal proprietary or confidential information,
and post content that defames the person.
Increasingly, a number of employees are
losing their jobs for violating company policies
over their blogs giving rise to a new term
called 'dooce dodging'. According to Macmillan
English dictionary to be ''dooced'' means
losing your job over something you wrote in
your Internet weblog.
Corporate blog is a blog published by,
or with the support of an organisation. The
main concern of Corporate blog is the lack
of editorial control and the danger of an
inadvertent disclosure of company trade secrets.
More and more employees are using their
personal blogs as a vehicle to vent frustrations
about their work situation and company policies.
However, they risk recriminations from their
employers, even though their blogs and PCs
are privately owned and blogging is conducted
outside of their working hours. There have
been cases of people being fired for writing
about life inside their companies on blogs
not affiliated with their employers. Companies
are grappling with how to deal with workers
who write personal blogs that discuss their
employers. To prevent possible reprisals from
employers and censorship, many organisations
are recommending that bloggers remain
anonymous to protect themselves from
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

recriminations and censors. The Electronic
Frontier Foundation (EFF) recommends bloggers
to remain anonymous maintain their personal
identity and to preserve their right to anonymous
online speech and freedom of expression. A
new form of lawsuit, called CyberSlapp, is
increasingly being used by companies and
public figures to compel the Internet service
providers to reveal the identities of their
anonymous critics.
Copyright protects the form of expression
of a creator against copying. Copyright protection
is given to the authors of 'original works of
authorship,' including literary, dramatic, musical,
artistic, and certain other intellectual works.
Copying the whole, or nearly the whole of
a text written by someone else on their
blog, or putting a copyrighted picture on the
weblog without the right holder's consent is
copyright infringement 14 .

13. FUTURE TREND
A new form of blogging activity is
moblogging or mblogging or phone blogging,
to create a moblog. Moblogging is done
from a mobile phone or a handheld computer.
Moblogging might involve updating a traditional
weblog via sms or e-mail from a phone or
adding photographs or sound to a traditional
weblog from a camera phone. Or it might
involve the creation of a moblog using specialist
moblog software, and maintaining it only by
mobile. "The trend is set to transform an
already successful web medium into something
new, at-hand, and suited to our increasingly
mobile lifestyles", says Amy Cowen 15 .

14. CONCLUSION
Blogging is still a grey area, but it is
already showing signs of being the next
battleground for litigation with arrests being
reported and cases being lodged before the
courts. Blogging has allowed millions all
over the world to exercise their right to legitimate
free expression. However, freedom of expression,
though an absolute right, is bounded by the
rights of others. Bloggers who write anything
negative, false or defamatory about a corporation
or an individual are opening themselves and
19

their companies up to the possibility of libel
suits. For other bloggers, the law has been
used to stifle legitimate speech. Weblog
success may not simply be determined by
the content that created the interest in the
earlier blogging days. Instead, the embedded
ability of weblogs to create popularity and
to nurture social interaction through its
technological features may also be a significant
contributor to weblog popularity.
In essence, the choice of the right
technology or development of more appropriate
technologies may create a distinct advantage
in the highly competitive top-levels of the
blogging world. Moreover, the findings may
be applied to the design, development, and
implementation of other types of interactive
and/or dynamic websites or web applications.

REFERENCES
1. Phil Bradley. Search engines: Weblog
search engines. Retrieved from http://
www.ariadne.ac.uk/issue36/search-engines/
intro.html.
2. Wikipedia.org. "Borda count". Retrieved
from en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Borda_count.
3. Scott, P. Blogging: creating instant content
for the Web. Retrieved from http://library.
usask.ca/scottp/il2001/definitions.
html.
4. Young, Michelle L. Blogging: An introductory
look at an old pastime in a new medium.
Library Hi Tech News, 2006, 8, 27-28.
5. Clyde, Laurel A. Weblogs–are you serious?
The Electronic Library, 2004, 22(5), 390-402.

6. Clyde, Laurel A. Library weblogs. Library
Management, 2005, 22(4/5), 183-89.
7. Blood, R. Weblogs: A history and
Perspective. Retrieved from www.
rebeccablood.net/essays/weblog_
history.html.
8. Ramos, Miguel & Piper, Paul S. Letting
the grass grow: grassroots information
on blogs and wikis. Reference Services
Review, 2006, 34(4), 570-74.
9. Maxymuk, John. Bits and bytes blogs.
Managing Library Finances, 2005, 18(1),
43-45.
10. Du, Helen S. & Wagner, Christian. Weblog
success: Exploring the role of technology.
International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies. 2006, 64, 798-98.
11. Library Weblogs–list of library weblogs
by country. Retrieved from http://
www.libdex.com/weblogs.html.
12. Garrod, Penny. Weblogs: Do they belong
in libraries? Retrieved from www.ariadne.
ac.in.uk/issue40/publiclibraries/intro.html.
13. Barger, J. Weblog resources FAQ. Retrieved
from www.robotwisdom.com/weblogs.
14. Mercado-Kierkegaard, Sylvia. Blogs, lies
and the doocing: The next hotbed of
litigation? Computer Law & Security Report,
2006, 22, 127-36.
15. Cowen, A. Blogging goes mobile. Retrieved
from www.cooltown.com/mpulse/0803mblogging.asp.

Contributor
Dr M. Natarajan obtained MSc, BLISc, and PhD from University
of Madras. He has worked for all types of information services,
marketing, computer netwoking, MALIBNET, etc. His areas of
interest include digital library, digital water marking technology,
web-based education, knowledge management, and knowledge
sharing. He has published more than 75 papers in various national/
international journals and has more than 26 years of professional
experience. Presently, he is scientist at NISCAIR, Delhi.
20

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

