DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 27, No. 3, May 2007, pp. 21-30
© 2007, DESIDOC

Networking and Consortia Management Techniques
Rama Nand Malviya and Anil Kumar
Indian Social Institute, 10 Institutional Area
Lodhi Road, New Delhi-110 003

ABSTRACT
A single library has limitations of maintaining books/documents/journals and other
materials demanded by its client or users. To overcome these types of problems,
cooperation among the libraries was initiated and a new concept “Library Consortium”
came into existence with a wide coverage. The paper describes the concept of library
consortia, networking and consortia management techniques and future of
consortia efforts.
Keywords: Networking, library consortia, consortia management, OCLC, e-journals

1. INTRODUCTION
The development of consortia is the
outcome of the desire for resource sharing.
The global prime example is OCLC (Online
Computer Library Centre). OCLC is the leading
global library cooperative, helping libraries
to serve people by providing economical
access to knowledge through innovation
and collaboration. Others like Virginia’s VIVA,
Ohio’s OHIOLINK, etc. are newer consortia
on the scene having one common goal like
pooling their collective financial resources
to increase greater economic control over
their marketplaces.

library networks and digital libraries are attempting
to achieve today. The ultimate vision of resource
sharing through networking of libraries poses
a completely digital environment in which
the user identifies the required resource in
electronic form through a comprehensive system
of metadata and then simply connects to it
without knowing where it resides. This seamless
access is possible by integrating the resources,
services and functions of multiple libraries
through a high degree of collaboration.

An article “Universal library: A plea for
placing any desired book within the reach
of any person wishing to make reasonable
use of same”, published in Public Library
in 1905, depicted a picture of what the

The origin of collaborative activities among
libraries can be traced back to the last quarter
of the 19th century. For about one hundred
years, these programmes centered around
printed materials. Several such initiatives
survived and flourished while a few died.
Nearly a century after Melvil Dewey wrote on
cooperation, library network stepped into the
electronic era through online cataloguing system.

Received 21 July 2006, Revised 1 October 2006

21

The extreme success of cooperatives such
as OCLC and its relevance till date underscore
the need of appropriate strategies for the
survival and success of networks. Such
strategies are required primarily for the
organisational development of the networks
and selection of relevant services to be offered.
The mode of delivery and access to the
information has been evolving in a new direction,
over the past twenty years. For last few
years, through the ubiquitous web, users
seem to have acquired a new power to reach
the information directly. Old programmes such
as cooperative acquisition have been extended
to group purchase of site license by the
consortia. Consortia/networks are also engaged
in producing virtual union catalogue on similar
or disparate systems using Z39.50 protocol
and advancing the service further by introducing
client initiated borrowing. In all senses, the
distance between the user and his required
information is gradually decreasing. As libraries
are facing new challenges for information
management, in the gradually evolving digital
environment, library networks are re-orienting
their functions to meet these new challenges.
The need of resource sharing through
networking of libraries, in our country, does
not require any special mention. Several
initiatives have been taken, over the last 15
years, by various agencies, to establish/
coordinate networking activities at
various levels.There have been a few attempts
over the years facilitating resource sharing
among Indian libraries. The National Union
Catalogue of Current Serials in India (NUCCSI)
of INSDOC has been a good source in this
direction. However, it needs little more effort
in updating. A few city–based networks like
ADINET, BONET, CALIBNET, DELNET, and
MYLIBNET and PUNENET and the national
level INFLIBNET are developments in library
cooperation. The DELNET provides access
to good number of databases and union
catalogues of both books and journals.
But success in this area is not
commensurate with the need. On the other
hand, access to electronic journals has drawn
wide interest among the libraries. Libraries
22

are banding together to get maximum benefits
for consortia purchase of such electronic
publications. Various initiatives have been
taken by different government agencies to
facilitate group purchase activity. But networking
programs must not overemphasise the buying
power only and we must strive to ensure
that a full-fledged networking environment
settles in all dimensions. Consortia do not
exist in air. Successful consortia exist to
expand further the mission of member-institutions
by strengthening them. With this objective,
it is very relevant to have a look at the
strategies and techniques adopted by the
networks elsewhere and the type of strategies
that will be relevant to countries such as ours.

2. CONSORTIA GOALS
The consortia being an association of
like-minded libraries and in the present context
to provide access to books, documents, journals,
e-journals and databases. It can have its
own structure of governance and can act as
a corporate body on behalf of all the members
with set goals and benefits mentioned below:
Increase the access base,
Rational utilisation of funds,
Ensure continuous subscription,
Qualitative and quantative resource
Avoiding price plus models, i.e., pay
for up-front products, not for research
and development,
Enhancing the visibility image of the library,
Improve existing library services,
Harness developments in it,
Cost sharing for technical and training
support,
Increasing user base–access from user’s
desktops of users.
A library consortia formation can be at
local, state, national, and inter-institutional
levels for making the resources and services
available both within the premises of members
and outside for the benefit of members.There
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

are a number of basic issues that consortia
members should be aware of, like number
of simultaneous users, number of participants
in the consortium, security methods, pricing
formula, negotiation for consortia, which may
differ according to the setup, etc.

3. FORMATION OF A CONSORTIUM AND ITS ELIGIBILITY
CRITERIA
Eligibility criteria has to be framed for
the libraries to participate in a consortia to
achieve a common objective. An organising
body is necessary to be formed from each
library and among them one acting as a
Chairperson on rotation basis to lead the
consortium. The organising body will streamline
the activities of participating library and send
recommendations to the top management of
participating libraries for implementation to
provide, user service, better collection
development, emerged economic concept in
relation to library affairs, efficient dealings
with the publisher and development of the
human resources.
One of the vital activities of the organising
body is to take decision on the following
financial aspects:
Whether consortium funds be created
to subscribe the core journals in multiple
copies at a discount price,
Controling the fund and to decide the
limit of contribution from each library,
Whether the participating libraries, to
whom the responsibility to negotiate with
some publishers are vested by the organising
body, will send remittance to the publishers
for multiple copies from its own fund
and transfer fund subsequently among
the member libraries, and
Maintaining a standard procedure/guidelines
to avoid any adverse remark from the
external/central audit.
As per the guidelines framed by the
organising body, each individual library will
prepare a list of titles for resource sharing
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

based on the requisition from the users and
may also initiate to contact a group of publishers
for negotiation/discounts. All the member
libraries under library consortia must extend
cooperation to make it a total success.
Preparation and finalisation of the list of
core journal titles to be subscribed by all
libraries as per the existing demands of the
users and the union list of titles should be
covered under resource sharing programme.
This vital activities should be undertaken
with a cooperative effort. The Council of Scientific
and Industrial Research has come up under
one umbrella of consortium with ELSEVIER
Publisher where it is able to access full text
of 200 journals along with many other convenient
links on Science Direct Database. At the
end of every subscription year, activity of
the consortium must be evaluated to overcome
the shortcomings, if any.

4.

RESPONSIBILITIES OF
MEMBER LIBRARY

Every member library of the consortia
should share the following responsibilities:

4.1 Collection Development
It is the foundation of efficient services
for every library irrespective of its size and
type. Collection may be print-based or digital.
Print-based collections will be dominant in
many disciplines for at least a decade, but
the increasing availability and cost of digital
materials may account for half or more of
total acquisition budget in the next five years.
Coordination expansion and strengthening
of collection can be planned by a group of
libraries in consortium-based relationship to
avoid duplication, unnecessary blockage of
space and misuse of funds.

4.2 Negotiation of Group Pricing
Every year the cost of journals, books
and electronic resources goes up. The funds
allotted to purchase the required material
are not sufficient. Traditionally journals are
published in printed form but are available
in electronic format also. Renowned publishers
like Academic Press, Elsevier, Kluwer, John
Wiley, ACS, etc., can be contacted to negotiate
23

for a discount rate for procuring printed journals
and access of online documents in India as
are being availed by the consortia of other
developed countries.

4.3 Standard Resource Sharing
With the preparation of a core list of
subscribed journals, the participating libraries
in addition have to prepare a list of periodicals
for resource sharing.

4.4 Development of Union
Catalogues
Preparation of union catalogues which
reflect the list of current periodicals subscribed
by all the participating libraries could be
very useful. Each participating library should
take the responsibility to prepare union catalogue
on their turn. It would be very useful to
develop a resource database to make total
holdings available by every participating library.
Participating libraries should have individual
Web page to reflect the resources available.

4.5 Document Delivery
All the participating libraries should allocate
e-mail identification to receive the requests
at one place and each library will make an
agreement to attend this request.

4.6 Strengthens the Communiction System
Networking among the participating libraries
and upgradation of communication system
is very much essential for easy and early
retrieval of resources.

4.7 Conducting Training
Programme
A library’s success depends on its talented
and dedicated staff. To prepare and develop
a work force ready to cater best services to
its users each participating libraries should
give importance to training and reorientation
of the staff. Staff members should be allowed
to visit other libraries to make themselves
conversant with the new concept, ideas,
and procedures.
24

5. ORGANISATIONAL MODELS
OF NETWORKS/CONSORTIA:
A STATIC APPROACH
Right selection of organisational model
brings requisite strength for the survival of
any organisation and so is the case for
library networks. A wide variety of consortia
exists today all over the world; each being
shaped by a number of cultural, political and
financial needs and factors. These range
from rather very simple to very complex
organisations. The predominating patterns
that are found in the nature of the consortia are:
Loosely-knit federation: Characterised by
the voluntary participation of member libraries
and running without any central stuff or funding.
It has low overheads but at the cost of a
satisfactory level of return. Without a central
authority there is no or little group purchasing power.
Multi-type/multi-state network: Covering
heterogeneous members with respect to the
programme, client and administrative structure.
Tightly-knit federation: May have a sponsoring
agency and a focussed membership. Some
dedicated staff coordinates the programmes
but they do not really control the programme.
The funding from the parent institutions may
be supplemented by some external support.
Centrally-funded statewide consortium:
It has a central funding, which augments
what each member can purchase from their
own fund. The central agency secures the
contract and pays a substantial part of the
cost. Members jointly agree to purchase
items based on the shared interest. Separate
stuff is available for carrying on the programmes
and the central administration has a role in
formulation of programmes and policies. With
a central source of dedicated funds, member
libraries have more of an incentive to collaborate
than with any of the other models.
Most of the existing library networks
can be identified to have one of these
characteristics. In this taxonomy, buying power
has got an emphasis and hence the source
of funding becomes a pivotal point as it is
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

directly related to buying power. Obviously,
the centrally funded consortia can have a
large pool of funds and many libraries are
willing to put up with such a structure, if
economic benefit is high. Ability to make a
pool of resources is an important issue as
evinced from a case of VIVA (The Virtual
Library of Virginia). VIVA, for example, realised
$5 million in financial benefits during the
first year (1994) only by purchasing resources
as a consortium.
But overemphasising buying power implies
limited vision of the growth of the organisation.
Strategy of development of network, on the
notion of appropriation of power through central
funding is static in nature. In such a set up,
members do not feel solidarity with others.
Hence spreading the network culture, where
it does not exist, is neglected as each member
thinks that it is someone else’s responsibility.
On the other hand, when members commit
their own fund, return in a most beneficial
way becomes a target, which leads the members
to engage in a business like practice and
behave in a responsive and flexible manner.
This confirms the adage that “there is a
world of difference between paying
and being paid.”
In addition, in the countries where
collaborative activities are not very strong,
such models as mentioned above may not
be conducive primarily because it does not
ensure simultaneous growth of the members
and the network. In these models, the growth
and performance of a network are measured
in terms of increase in funding from central
agency, number of site licenses purchased,
number of organisations brought under the
membership, etc. The benefit of the member
is measured in terms of amount saved through
group purchase. The utility is measured in
terms of number of searches conducted,
pages downloaded, etc. Importance of such
data is undeniable. But such data does not
indicate how much the library has advanced
itself using the network. The issue of strengthening of the member libraries is to be factored
in the developmental strategy, for overall
success of networking.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

A network is as strong as its weakest
member. Programmes such as union database,
virtual union catalogue, facility to provide
client initiated borrowing demand a certain
degree of maturity of the members so that
each can play an active role and interact
with other members on the same terms.
Issues such as expectation of member libraries,
their strength and weakness are to be considered
to adopt meaningful and yet flexible programmes.
Only incremental and developmental structure
of a network can foster simultaneous growth
of a network and its member libraries.

6. DEVELOPMENTAL MODEL
FOR NETWORKING
Consortia models are not well-defined
and vary depending upon types of participating
libraries, parent organisations they belong
to, subject areas they cover, purpose of
coming together, and so on. Consortia could
be a club of highly decentralised/centralised
organisations. The characteristics of consortia
model are also influenced by other players
like publishers and vendors. Highly decentralised
models suffer due to non–availability of common
agenda, no external funds, central sponsor
and central staff. On the other hand, highly
centralised models overcome these lacunae
and also get maximum discounts. Participant’s
oriented models may be a group of organisations
of a particular geographical location, a discipline
or the ones from same parent organisation.
Purpose oriented models may serve to give
access to e-Journals and other contents,
avoid duplicate acquisitions or train library
personnel. Client oriented models could be
according to educational background like
technical and professional.
Members of a consortium may belong
to different parent organisations, following
different administrative rules. The subject
areas covered geographical location and user
categories are other variations. The other
players in the game like publishers, aggregators,
vendors, subscription agents and document
delivery centres may have their own policies.
As a result one has to look into number of
issues, be it strategic or technical or practical.
In an ideal situation, all members should
25

contribute to the network according to their
respective capacites. The aim is to make
each library play an active role in the newer
areas of access and knowledge sharing instead
of remaining merely an instrument for knowledge
acquisition or passive receiver of services.
Termed as knowledge economy model by
Owen and Wiercx, such networks should be
both sensitive to unique local condition and
flexible in their application. The networks
should develop hierarchically, from simpler
to complex and from stand-alone to mutually
integrated organism. In the total life cycle,
a network may be in one of the stages as
enumerated below:

6.1 Networked Library Stage
At this stage, the stress is on making
individual libraries achieve the highest level
of integrated network services internally. Members
should have specific objectives and should
put them in the context of an ideal situation.
Three components, namely functions, systems
and processes should be integrated in such
a way that resource discovery within the
system becomes easy for the end-user. The
underlying principle here is that a network
or partnership with external agency is not
a way of avoiding responsibility, on the part
of a library, in the area of collection development,
providing bibliographic control and access
services. The library itself as a network creates
a culture for collaboration within the system
and thus becomes capable of participation
in external collaboration from a position of strength.

6.2 Cooperative Network Stage
In the second stage, the strong services
of a group of networked libraries are offered
to other members. This is the starting point
for external collaboration and it also promotes
efficient use of resources on a wider scale.
At this stage, some of the networked libraries
function as servers. Servers serve their own
users as well as the user community outside
the parent organisations. Servers should
be generally domain-specific and within the
domain they may provide full range of services
such as resource description, discovery, storage
and user support. In small countries, such
26

servers can undertake the responsibility of
offering service at national level. But for the
large countries, a group of servers in a specific
domain may offer such services at the national
level. Gradually, these servers can acquire
infrastructure as well as databases and site
licenses related to the domains and offer
services to other libraries on par use basis.
Some libraries are purely recipient in nature.
The domain in which such libraries receive
services from servers, and are not to be
developed full scale within the organisation
though such libraries should be fully networked.
But some libraries serve both as server and
client as they may offer services to others
in one domain and receive services from
other servers of different domains.

6.3 Knowledge Environment
Stage
This final stage stresses more on useroriented perception of the network and not
on the way systems and functions are to be
organised. While the previous two steps look
at how cooperation can improve specific functions
in the system, this model attempts to improve
service through cooperation to meet the full
range of need of the end users. The endusers are allowed to have access through
any member, to the entire range of services,
offered by the cooperative.
German and Cullen have named these
three stages as initial, intermediate and developed
state. Table 1 depicts the features of these
three stage developmental model attuned to India.
Wide geographical dispersion of libraries,
varying degree of automation and networked
libraries in India require developmental model
to be further attuned to Indian conditions.
The system should be developed in such a
way that the libraries at all levels, including
those which are still operating in conventional
mode can avail themselves of some benefits
from the entire system. To this end, a dual
strategy should be adopted to advance both
the networked library stage and cooperative
network stage simultaneously. To implement
such dual strategy, the networked library
stage and cooperative network stage should
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

Table 1. Functions of library networks at different stages

Functions
Resource acquisition

Resource description

Resource discovery

User access
User support

Initial stage
Printed documents CD-ROMs,
some dial-up connections

Advanced stage
Full remote access to
resources, dedicated
Internet links, most
material in e-format
Manual cataloguing, Some
Catalogues supplemented by Integrated resources,
shared systems (like OCLC)
resource lists of networked
discovery system,
materials
metadata used
comprehensively
OPAC on PC bibliographic data Local e- and networked
Full network access to all
describes mainly printed
resources included in OPAC internal and external eresources
remote catalogue access e- resources, integrated
mail delivery
resource discovery system
On-site limited delivery
Users can access system
Full on site and remote
offering some help
access
Library staff give face-to-face
e-guide to library e-mail
Human support + full
service
queries
computer-assisted support
for information discovery
and access process

act in a feedback mode. The fully networked
libraries within a geographical region should
make a handholding to form a cooperative.
Unless there is a strong similarity in domain,
such handholding should be restricted within
a geographical region. Within the cooperative,
strongest libraries should be identified as
servers. However, server libraries need not
be restricted to subject domain only. Thus,
to a cooperative there can be domain-specific
servers in the areas such as social sciences,
health science along with servers offering
online cataloguing, ILL, etc. A nodal agency
within a geographical area can act as change
agent and switching centre for libraries, within
that area, which are not yet fully networked
entities. These nodal agencies and domain
specific servers, from all the regions across
the country should be linked to facilitate
rapid spread of support to develop networked
libraries. To keep the initial cost down, such
a nodal agency should be within an existing
organisational set up.
Some of the existing networks can also
play the role of nodal agency. In the long
term, a group of servers in a particular subject
domain can offer what can be termed as
service at national level. These servers can
form the backbone for such a consortium as
INDEST and can obtain infrastructure and
site license to provide services for others on
par use basis. A question may raise here on
whether the concept of user license will
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

Intermediate stage
More offline e-resources,
access by networked
workstations

permit such usage? While attempts are being
made to arrive at the definitions of the terms
like fair use, user license in digital environment,
servers should define their user base. But
it should also be noted that the issue of fair
use, user license are getting new definition
in this electronic era.
Hence, the servers have to look for the
proper definition of their user base. Recipient
libraries will be of two kinds. The libraries,
which are already moving towards networking
internal components belong to one group.
Another group consists of libraries intending
to continue in the manual mode for some
more time. The libraries of this second category
may avail themselves offline catalogue card,
ILL service, database searching facility through
some designated servers. Thus, a small group
of libraries, located within a region, should
not only take care of their own need but they
will also cater to the needs of the less
privileged. As the records will come from the
nodal agency, in case of services like offline
catalogue card, there should be a record
identification number for each record. When
such recipients will decide to go for automation,
they can simply get machine readable data
once more from the agency by ordering through
the record identification number. Some of
the recipient libraries, over a period of time,
will become capable of being placed in the
cooperative networks and thereby increasing
the strength of the cooperative. However,
27

libraries of this category have to show distinct
signs of progressing towards networked libraries.
This approach of network development
is based on the premise that development
and evolution are keys to robust contextually
responsive partnership. Libraries enter into
the systems at one point and move along
a continuum, ending ideally in an advanced
knowledge model stage.

6.4 Strategies for Programme
Implementation
A good strategy in the area of programme
implementation complements the strategy
of organisational development. The simple
reason for the tremendous success of OCLC
is that OCLC focused from the beginning on
those library functions and services that can
be effectively shared and was built on a
model of financial reward to contributing libraries.
This underscores the need of: (i) relevant
programme formulation, (ii) increasing the
visibility of the network, and (iii) proportionate
financial reward system to the servers.
Relevance of a programme may not be
restricted to only functional needs of the
members. Sometimes such programmes may
be directed towards the philosophical needs
also. Journal Access Core Collection (JAAC)
is one such programme aiming to retain the
diversity among the member collections. This
programme by California State Universities
(CSU) is an example of libraries making
their demand to vendors and not accepting
what the vendors are offering. Initial concept
of JACC was to offer electronically every
periodical title (about 1300 titles) owned by
15 or more CSU libraries.
The JACC model reflects a new approach
for e-journal licensing based on CSU’s needs
rather than established aggregator’s offerings.
It reflects a customised database, not an
existing one. The goal is to strengthen core
journal resources and provide seamless access
to these web-based journals through a common
interface.
JACC has provided a model for a group
of libraries to get together and express their
28

needs to the vendor community. This programme
also brings into focus the inevitable conflict
or incongruity that is created through consortia
acquisition whereby groups of libraries strive
to get more titles less expensively than would
each library by going it alone. This effort
leads consortia to sign onto large packages
that either bundle titles or forbid cancellation
of previously held subscriptions. By trying
an increasing percentage of library funds to
the large package that severely limit cancellations;
librarians may be subsequently forced to
cancel subscription of single titles with smaller
publishers.
Programmes like JAAC promotes a balance
of acquisition based on the scholarly merit
of the journals and not on the status of the
publishers. While deciding on the programmes,
a considerable debate may be generated on
universal requirements of the service to be
offered. This can be true particularly for
programmes like joint system development,
virtual union catalogue development, etc.
Universal requirements should not be overstated
though some services gain efficacy from
consistency. Those requirements should be
imposed when pay-off is large and the cost
of consistency is minimal.
The visibility of the networks is one of
the ingredients for success. This cannot be
accomplished simply by promotion through
brochure or website. The best way to make
a library network visible is by showing it
works. In many social service sectors, model
areas are created where the length and the
breadth of those areas are covered by that
service.
This strategy serves a dual purpose.
First, an existing model can be used as
reference to build the next one. Second,
such a model gives first hand feedback on
the bottlenecks that can hinder such cooperative
activities. A model cooperative network of
libraries, in one or two areas can establish
itself as a dependable and visible institution.
A suitable financial return is the best
incentive for the contributors of the cooperative.
Although sharing resources is the ultimate
objective, consortia need to behave in a
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

calculated and businesslike fashion as well.
A financial return system can also compensate
the operational cost of the contributors to a
great extent.

7. THE FUTURE AHEAD
The plethora of electronic journals and
issue of proprietorship of electronic products
by the subscribing libraries have already
brought another task to the door of the consortia.
Several consortia efforts are already ongoing
to create digital archives. This enormous
task provides another fertile ground for
collaborative activities. To generate a critical
mass of digitised text, to build up a scalable
collection, responsibility for the long-term
maintenance of digital resources on behalf
of depositors, are all in the arena of
shared activities.
Given the expensive nature of the resources
necessary to create digital collections and
to build the infrastructure that allows access
to them, the only way to build such a collection
is through sharing the job. Unless the libraries
are ready to discharge duties in a collaborative
environment, such future tasks will be difficult
to be accomplished. After all one should
learn to crawl before walking and to walk
before running.
Eliciting institutional commitments from
server libraries and transforming such
commitments into action should be part of
the strategies of consortia/networks formation.
Hence some kind of agreement documents
are to be prepared specifically by the libraries
at the cooperative network level. As the services
are to be provided to the external world by
these libraries, various existing infrastructure
within the organisation may be required. To
remove the scope of any impediments, an
explicit willingness of the parent institute
will be helpful.
It is clear that the technology of the
web, the increasing importance of electronic
resources, and the advances in the resource
sharing systems have created new opportunities
for consortia. Beyond these technological
and economic motivation, in consortia, the
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

librarian’s instinct for collaboration, which
can help at a time of great uncertainty and
rapid changes is quite visible.
Joining a consortia, integrating intellectual
access, providing for both physical and electronic
development process are all the distinct steps
moving towards 21 st century libraries.
Development in modern resource sharing,
whether they be document delivery services
or computing services, do not alter the ethics
of librarianship.
Keeping in view the old traditions and
applying them in the new environment will
make institutions grow and provide useful
service for the betterment of resource sharing.
Libraries and information providers must
jointly develop and agree upon what constitute
and effective measure of the use and value
of electronic information so both parties can
demonstrate better returns on investment.
For any form of consortium contract to work,
it must be fair and equitable to both parties.
To reap the benefits of e-information and
consortia movement, we need to overcome
the rigid administrative and audit rules. In
India, we need to network the minds of
administrators and librarians.
Consortia efforts are time consuming,
frustrating and difficult to build and sustain.
But still, they are potent, social, economic
and political forces in reducing the unit cost
of e-information and increasing the resource
and user base and help libraries to achieve
more collectively than they could accomplish
individually.

REFERENCES
1. Arora, Jagdish & Agarwal, Pawan. Building
digital libraries in a Consortium mode:
Towards a national consortium. In TERI–
International Conference on Digital Libraries,
2004. New Delhi, TERI, 292-311.
2. Bostick, S.L. The history and development
of academic library consortia in the United
States: An overview. J. Acad. Lib., 2001,
27( 2), 128–30.
29

3. Ching, S.H.; Poon, W.T. & Huang, K.L.
Managing the effectiveness of the library
consortium: A core values perspective
on Taiwan e-book net. J. Acad. Lib.,
2003, 29, 304–15.
4. German, G.E. & Cullen, R. Models and
Opportunities for library cooperation in
the Asian region. In International Seminar
on Networking for Library Development
in the Arab States, Beirut, 2000.
5. Steve, Hitchcock; Carr, Leslee; & Wendy
Hall. A Survey of STM online Journals
1990-95: A calm before the storm. http:/
/journals.ecs.soton.ac.uk/survey/survey.html.

30

6. Osburn, C.B. The place of the journal in
the scholarly communications system.
Lib. Res. Tech. Ser., 1984, 28, 315–24.
7. Owen, J.S.M. & Wiercx, A knowledge
models for networked library services.
Brussels, Commission of the European
Communities, 1996. Project Report No.
PROLIB/KMS 10119
8. Sridhar, M.S. Resource sharing among
ISRO libraries: A case study of consortia
approach. SRELS J. Inform. Manag.,
2002, 39, 41.

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

