DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 27, No. 3, May 2007, pp. 31-38
© 2007, DESIDOC

Customised Web-based Services at SERC Library
with Special Reference to Alert Services
A. Hariharan*, Chitra M Hariharan, M. Mymoon
A. Abdunnasar and S. Suryakala
Structural Engineering Research Centre Library
CSIR Campus, Taramani, Chennai- 600 113
*E-mail: hariharan_ah@yahoo.com

ABSTRACT
The primary aim of any library is to provide timely and quality services to its
users. Advent of new technologies have made it imperative for libraries to absorb,
adopt, adapt, and to provide IT-based services to the users. Libraries are now
providing customised web-based services at the users’ desktops. Users, particularly,
scientists, who are engaged in time-bound research and development projects,
need to be alerted about the nascent literature in their respective fields. Librarians
are providing current awareness services to meet these requirements. A few
libraries and many e-publishers are providing alert services to keep the users
informed about the latest additions to their collections and other information relating
to the users’ areas of interest.
This paper describes the experiences in using the AutoLib library software
and explains in brief the various innovative and useful web-based library and
information services and the alert service being provided at the SERC library.
Keywords: SERC library, Web OPAC, JAPAR, Greenstone library software

1. INTRODUCTION
Technology is playing an ever increasing
role in all organisations today and libraries
are no exceptions. The volume and complexity
of information is increasing exponentially
causing librarians to use IT tools to access,
organise and disseminate information more
efficiently. Library users expect customisation
and to meet their changing needs and
expectations, Web-based services are being
Received 5 June 2006, Revised 30 September 2006

built integrating traditional and modern practices.
Customised Web-based library services being
provided in the Structural Engineering Research
Centre (SERC) library have been designed
to be used in real-time high-availability web
sites. The interfaces provided help to make
the best use of the library’s resources and
facilitates provision for interactive searches.
SERC library in addition to web OPAC, offers
customised services such as auto reminder,
research alert, current awareness service,
31

online project research profile service (OPRPS),
online project research diary (OPRD), Journal
article performance analysis reporter (JAPAR)
and institutional repository through Greenstone
digital library software.

Auto overdue reminder service (AORS)
Research alert service (RAS)
Cover and contents page services
Articles published by the scientists

2. WEB-BASED SERVICES
Present-day library services have not
only metamorphosised as automated systems,
but have also specialised by providing services
through the library Web pages. Web services
are being offered using various Web softwares
and tools such as RDBMS (MS-SQL, Oracle,
MySQL), mark-up, scripting and programming
languages (html, asp, jsp ) and Web servers
(IIS, Tomcat). SERC is using AutoLib library
software, which integrates all the above
technologies to provide Web-based services
to its users.
The library automation has provided
integrated solutions for the in-house operations
and Web-enabled services on the campus
Intranet using the modern Web tools
and techniques.
SERC library has about 1,05,017 records.
The library has created and maintaining the
following databases
Technical books, reports and theses,
Journal articles,
Journal issues,
Back volumes,
Standards (codes),
Compact discs, and
Microfiche on the intranet.
The library is providing following webbased services using all the above databases:
Library portal
Web OPAC
Online project research profile service
(OPRPS) and online project research
diary (OPRD)
Auto alert service (AAS)
32

Institutional repository

2.1 Library Portal
SERC library provides various services
through its library portal (Fig.1)–a single
window to access library resources – through
Intranet. The portal gives a brief description
of the library. It provides information about
collection, staff, library committee, rules and
regulations, services offered, journals subscribed,
building, floor plan, publication, membership,
useful websites, etc. It also provides direct
links to home pages of important journals in
the area of civil and structural engineering
published by Elsevier, ASCE, Blackwell,
ACS, ASTM, Wiley, Springer, Royal society
of Chemistry, Oxford University Press, and
ASME, etc.
Several free e-resources available on
the internet are being collected, consolidated
and made available through the SERC portal.
Link to the database of articles published by
the SERC scientists has also been provided.

2.2 Web OPAC
Web-based online public access catalogues
(Web OPAC) is one of the Web- based services
offered by SERC library. As a catalogue,
Web OPAC demonstrates advances on traditional
OPACs, especially in terms of remote access
by users and their potential to integrate
many document types and sources via a
single interface. A Web-based hypertext OPAC
holds the promise of easy search interaction
with the databases and retrieval of relevant
information.
SERC library Web OPAC has various
links like personalised service, books, book
reports, journal articles, search report, journal
issues, standards, back volumes, conference
articles, non-book materials (CD ROMS and
microfiche), general search, useful websites.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

Figure 1. SERC library portal.

The service is made available at the users’
desktop on Intranet. More than 150 desktops
are connected to the server through the Intranet.
The web OPAC provides the following
search interface to access library resources:
Simple Search: Simple search allows the
users to search based on all the mandatory
fields of the documents such as author,
title, subject, accession number, keyword
separately and also in combination of these
fields.
Advanced Search (Query Builder): The
web OPAC helps to search resources using
Boolean and other logical operators on access
points like title, keyword, year, etc. on an
Intranet environment from any where in the
campus. The Web module has advanced
query builder, which allows users to search
the database using a field or combination of
fields based on any conditions (search string
in a character field such as author, title etc.
or any where in the field starting with a word
or in a numeric field such as accession
number, price, etc. by using operators like
>,>=,<,<=,= combined with Boolean operators
AND, OR, NOT. This module helps to generate
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

various types of search reports in various
formats like MARC, CCF, etc. Users can
generate reports in customised formats (user
can choose fields to be displayed in search
out put). The search result can be sorted in
any desired order at multiple level.
Restricted Search: Restricted Search allows
to search the documents based on all the
mandatory fields by typing letter by letter.
Dictionary-Based Search: The Web module
has dictionary for author, subject and publisher.
By clicking the link, users can access the
required information.

2.3 Online Project Research
Profile Service and Online
Project Research Diary
Online Project Research Profile Service
(OPRPS) is one of the personalised service
that serves as a tool to collect and organise
resources for use by individual users and
helps scholars stay informed of the new
resources added by the library. Users no
longer need search the online catalogue regularly
to be aware of new resources. The Web33

based user interface program with their login
and password has been made available on
the Intranet. This allows the users to create
and maintain their dynamic user profiles,
hitherto maintained by the library staff. Users
can judge, by both the number and
appropriateness of the resources retrieved,
just how broad or narrow, and also how
relevant, are their search profiles. Once the
user is satisfied with a particular search
profile, he can then save the profile (though
it can be edited again at any time). The user
can run their profile against the records added
and retrieve these documents filtered by the
date in which records have been added,
document types, etc. (Fig. 2).
With the proliferation of full-text journals
and the availability of e-resource repositories
and sophisticated integrated library system,
the process of providing current awareness
service has been re-emphasised and reshaped.
The concept is simple, but powerful and
personalisation of services is the key to
institutional engagement for the digital library.
OPRD is a unique feature, which allows
the users to search the databases of the
library for a particular research topic and

make personal research notes on the retrieved
documents after referring/reading the same.
The information put into the system remains
private and OPRD enables them to keep
track of the referred literature, modify comments
or notes for each document referred. This is
of vital use for future research activities,
writing research papers, project proposal
presentations, reports writing, etc. OPRD
works on a login and password and is individualcentric. The users have largely benefited
from both the OPRPS and OPRD.

2.4 Auto Alert Service
A software tool has been developed to
provide auto alert service which automatically
runs all user search profiles (described above
in OPRPS) against the records added every
day. The system then e-mails, to each scientist,
a report of the new records that meet the
criteria in his or her saved profile (Fig. 3).

2.5 Auto Overdue Reminder
Service
It is very difficult to keep track of the
overdue documents and inform the user as
and when documents fall due for return, even

Figure 2. OPRPS research profile.
34

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

Figure 3. Article alert service through e-mail.

in an automated system. Therefore, an auto
overdue reminder service (AORS) has been
designed and implemented. This program
keeps track of the overdue books daily in
the morning when the system is booted. It
identifies overdue documents on the day
and sends a reminder to the users’ mail box
(Fig. 4).The alert overdue reminder messages
are sent daily until the overdue documents
are returned. The overdue collection has been
considerably reduced after introduction of
this service.

2.6 Research Alert Service
Research Alert—a monthly Central Alert
Service (CAS) is being offered as an inhouse alert service, primarily to cater to the
needs of the engineer/scientists of the Centre.
Core periodicals have been identified and
articles are keyed into the database regularly.
These articles are grouped under 21 main
areas covering core Research and Development
areas of the Centre.
Users have seamless access to the research
alert database from any PC that is connected
to the campus Intranet. In-house studies
have shown that this service is being used
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

extensively. This service is also being offered
on a subscription basis, since 1997.

2.7 Cover and Contents Page
Service
The cover and contents pages of books
are being scanned as and when bought in
the library and linked to the respective record
at the time of cataloguing the books. The
user can view the content pages in the Web
browser along with the bibliographical details
while searching at his work place itself. This
helps the user to browse the contents of
books easily from his terminal anywhere in
the campus.

2.8 Articles Published by the
Scientists
A database of articles published in journals
by the scientists of SERC since 1969 has
been created using the Web-enabled software
called journal articles performance analysis
reporter (Fig. 5). Users can search the database
based on author, article title, journal name,
year of publication, subject, country, impact
factor, etc. Many reports and statistics, such
as number of articles published by a scientist
in a journal or in a given year, can be generated.
35

Figure 4. Auto overdue reminder service.

Figure 5. JAPAR.
36

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

2.9 Institutional Repository
An institutional repository has been set
up to archive all the publications acquired
by the SERC using Greenstone library software
(Fig. 6). At present, articles published by
the SERC scientists in the Journal of Structural
Engineering, published by SERC, have been
identified and archived, Metadata for the identified
articles based on Dublin Core has been created.
A full-text index has also been created for
all the articles available in the repository
which is available on the Intranet for full-text
searching and browsing.

3. CONCLUSION
Users expect seamless access to library
resources in multiple contexts outside library
systems. Web-based services act as vehicles
in an otherwise depersonalised digital
environment. The personalised web-based
services developed and offered at the SERC
library accept the reality that people are
finding information on the Internet. These
services provide a way to integrate other

resources with the library resources, which
have been evaluated and selected by the
library professional. This will encourage the
use of the local collection and will also
provide easier access to digital holdings.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank the Director,
SERC for his consent to publish this paper
and also the Chairman, Library Committee
for his constant encouragement.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Henrickson, H. & Hofman, S. IIS 6: The
complete reference. Tata McGraw Hill,
New Delhi, 2003.
2. Gunderloy, M. & Jorden, J.L. Mastering
SQL server 2000. BPB Publication, New
Delhi, 2005.
3. Powell, T.A. Web design: Complete
reference. Ed.2. Tata McGraw Hill, New
Delhi, 2003.

Figure 6. Instititional repository.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

37

4. Smith, E.A. ASP 3 programming bible.
IDG Publishing, New Delhi, 2000.

5. Autolib User manual. 2006 Autolib Software
Solutions, Chennai, 2006.

Contributors

Mr A. Hariharan is presently working as a Senior Technical Officer
at Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai. He received degrees
in MA, BLiSc, AIS (INSDOC), and Diploma in German. He has over 30
publications to his credit, has delivered more than 50 lectures on various
topics and conducted more than 50 training programmes on various
topics such as CDS/ISIS, Internet, digital library, web technology, network
technology, library automation, RFID technology, GSDL, DSpace, etc. His
main areas of interests are library automation, e-learning and information
portal, web-based library and information services, digital libraries, information
literacy and professional activities.He is the president of Society for
the Advancement of Library and Information Science (SALIS).
Ms Chitra M. Hariharan obtained her BSc from the Bangalore University,
BLiSc from the Kerala University, and MLiSc from the University of
Madras. She is at present working as Officer-in-Charge (Scientist) at
Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai. Her notable achievements
are establishment of a completely automated modern library, initiation
of programmes and services for enhanced usage of library resources
including research alert, introduction of customised Intranet services,
development of database of papers published by Scientists of the Centre
since inception, and development of institutional repository.
Dr (Ms) M. Mymoon obtained her BSc, BLiSc and MLiSc from the
University of Madras. She completed her PhD in 2001. Her areas of
interest are scientometrics, library management, reference service and
application of IT in LIS. Presently she is working as Technical Officer
in the Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai.

Mr A. Abdunnasar obtained his MLiSc from Kerala and passed the UGC
NET examination. After working as a librarian in the Spring Valley School
from 1997 to 2001, he moved to Structural Engineering Research Centre,
Chennai as Junior Technical Assistant. His areas of interests include
IT applications, web designing, etc.

Ms S. Suryakala graduated from the Madras University, and obtained
BLiSc and MLiSc from the Annamalai University. She is working as
senior library assistant since 1991 at the Structural Engineering Research
Centre, Chennai. Her areas of interests are library management, and
IT applications in the library services.

38

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(3)

