DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 27, No. 5, September 2007, pp. 5-16
© 2007, DESIDOC

Changing Paradigm for Information Professionals
in Knowledge Management Age
S. Ganguly
Indian Institute of Management, Prabandh Nagar
Sitapur Road, Lucknow-226 013
E-mail:sganguly@iiml.ac.in

ABSTRACT
Knowledge has become the key driving force in the present day. Gone are the days
when organisations and institutions were reluctant and complacent in sharing of
information. Today, every organisation has understood the importance of knowledge.
Organisations all over the world are utilising technology tools to make their systems
more competitive and dynamic. This paper aims to stimulate information professionals
to explore the potential impact of Knowledge Management (KM) and also examines the
role of information professionals to take the added advantage of KM to improve the
effective application of their skills.
Keywords: Knowledge management, information professionals, knowledge workers, LIS
professionals, groupware

1. INTRODUCTION
One of the most complex issues facing
libraries today is managing change. The
decisions libraries make are becoming more
complex, the risks are greater, and the resources
both human and fiscal are becoming scarcer.
There are many key issues facing libraries
today that relate to the ability of the library
to allocate and make maximum use of these
scarce resources1. Productivity and innovation
are the factors that generate the value. Both
of them are applications of knowledge at
work. The fundamental social parts of the
knowledge society nowadays are the “knowledge
workers”. The economic challenge of the
post-capitalist society therefore will be the
productivity of knowledge and knowledge
Received 12 February 2007, revised 30 May 2007

workers. Knowledge means a supreme good
for use; knowledge leads to success of social
and economic results 2 .
As knowledge and information lead to
power, the performance of a contemporary
organisation is actually proportional to the
usage of the communication channels. The
implications of knowledge sharing for the
new knowledge-based economy are substantial.
In a knowledge-based competition, it is generally
assumed that organisations have different
and unique knowledge, which they use to
create sustained competitive advantage. But
knowledge sharing allows organisations to
access the same basic knowledge, which
produces competition. This in turn changes
the way that an organisation must operate
5

and the mechanisms for governing transactions
in the new economy3 .

interchangeably used, and have been the
topic of a lot of debates and discussions.

The management of information and
knowledge has long been regarded as the
domain of LIS professionals. Librarians and
information professionals are formally trained
in identifying, selecting, organising and
disseminating information and knowledge to
the users. So, with their traditional knowledge
and skills, can the librarians be transformed
into knowledge managers? However, in order
to find an answer to this, it is necessary to
understand the processes involved in knowledge
management and its similarities with information
management.

Most organisations attempting a KM solution
often find it difficult to differentiate information
from knowledge. A useful differentiator as
described by John Seely Brown is that while
information is fundamentally dis-embeddable
and therefore transportable and re-embeddable,
knowledge is not. Knowledge lives in its
context. Therefore, it is possible to disembed information from one place and use
it elsewhere; however, it would not be possible
to dis-embed a piece of knowledge unless
it is lifted with its context intact.

3. DEFINING KNOWLEDGE
2. THE D, I, K, W QUARTET
Some of the fundamental issues on what
has come to be known as the D, I K, W
quartet are:
Data: Is discrete content and does not make much
sense by itself.
Information: Is processed and collated data.
Knowledge: Is highly contextualised information
enriched with individual interpretation and expertise.
In the organisational context, knowledge can also
be looked at as information that is tested against
the business rules of the organisation and found
to be valid by knowledgeable individuals and is
therefore elevated to a level of validated information
or knowledge.
Wisdom: Is in a different realm altogether profoundly
born out of intuition, and deep insight being the
key pre-requisites. Clearly, it would be sacrilege
to even suggest that it is something that one can
“manage”. So, while people can talk with great
verve about data and information management,
and now about knowledge management, wisdom,
one would feel is best left in its pristine state,
untouched by automated efforts to manage it. At
best it can be shared, but that is not within the
scope of our current discussions.
Data is the entity with the least amount
of confusion. Everyone understands it and
is comfortable dealing with it. The information
and knowledge are often understood,
6

The widespread attention now paid to
knowledge issues makes it important to be
precise about the basic understanding of
knowledge 4 . Because of its intangible and
fuzzy nature, defining knowledge precisely
is difficult. What is knowledge for one person
may be information for the other. The definition
of knowledge according to Webster’s New
Encyclopedia Dictionary is:
(i)

Understanding gained by actual experience
(like knowledge of carpentry).

(ii) The state of being aware of something or
of having information or range of information
awareness.
(iii) The act of understanding; clear perception
of truth.
(iv) Something learned and kept in mind.
Knowledge has also been defined as
core competency, which is based on collective
learning of an organisation. This involves
knowing how to coordinate diverse operational
skills and integrate them with multiple strains
of distinctive capabilities 5. According to Tom
Peters: “Knowledge is not the technical
accumulation of information. The crucial factors
are the format of the information, the credibility
of the information, the zippiness of the information,
the degree to which it’s attached to credible
people and instant availability” 6. According
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

to Chaudhary7, the term knowledge in itself
consists of three elements: Know, Learn,
and Edge as shown in the Fig. 1.
But, in the present environment, the use
of these traditional methods has become a
liability, as these methods have not been
found to offer competitive advantages to the
firms 5,8. Despite the difficulties in defining
knowledge, it is well agreed that knowledge
is an organised combination of ideas, rules,
procedures, and information. To manage
knowledge efficiently, an organisation needs
a highly flexible and adaptable organisational
structure. Prahlad and Hamel suggests that
in the present environment, organisations
should structure on the basis of their core
competence, inherent dynamics, and flexibility
to sustain high level of environmental uncertainty
and chaos 5,9. Knowledge management is
thus a process of facilitating knowledgerelated activities such as creation, capture,
transformation, and use of knowledge10. The

KNOW

KM process includes a range of activities
ranging from learning, collaboration, and
experimentation to integration of diverse sets
of tasks and implantation of powerful information
systems, such as Internet, Intranets and
Extranets.

3.1 Tacit and Explicit Knowledge
Nonaka and Takeuchi 8 have described
following processes for the conversion of
tacit and explicit knowledge, which they believe
are crucial to create value:
Tacit to tacit (socialisation): Where individuals
directly share and test the knowledge.
Tacit to explicit (externalisation): The transformation
of knowledge into a tangible form through
documentation or discussion.
Explicit to explicit (combination): Combining
different forms of explicit knowledge such as
documents or databases.

L

Be aware of
Be familiar with
Be acquainted
with

L
E
A
R
N

EDGE

An intense or striking
quality (a quality or
factor that gives
superiority over close
rivals)
A slight advantage over
somebody/something

To be informed
To gain knowledge,
skill or ability
To be skillful

→ The term Knowledge in itself is a process of learning to know and to have
an edge over others.
Figure 1. Three vital components of knowledge.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

7

Explicit to tacit (internationalisation): Where
individuals internalise knowledge from documents,
discussion or learning into their own body of
knowledge.
These ideas are being widely used by
different knowledge workers depending upon
their working environment.
3.1.1 Tacit to Explicit
In this model, activities on the left side
– those that focus on converting tacit knowledge
into explicit knowledge–include processes
for:
Building databases that share best practice
Directories (yellow pages) of skills and
expertise
The formal gathering and integration of
knowledge about customers, competitors,
market environments, and product
development
Intellectual assets management
Mapping and signposting knowledge
Consultancy firms such as PriceWater
House Coopers (PWC) focus many of their
KM activities on building explicit knowledge
bases, together with cultural change activities
oriented towards improving consultants’ ability
and willingness to record and reuse what
they have learnt on assignments.
Individuals

Group

Tacit

Tacit

Explicit

Explicit

Individuals

Group

Tacit

Tacit

Explicit

Explicit

communications platforms to facilitate the
exchange of knowledge with sophisticated
functionality.
3.1.3 Explicit to Tacit
Dow Chemicals started its approach to
KM by taking stock of its patents–its intellectual
assets–designing processes that identified
what assets they owned, whether they were
being used, which had potential for additional
exploitation, and how that could be realised.
The initiative increased revenue manifold.
Individuals

T acit

T acit

Explicit

E xplicit

3.1.4 Explicit to Tacit and Tacit to Tacit
Approaches on the right and at the top
of this model focus on sharing, nurturing,
and building tacit knowledge and are primarily
concerned with facilitating interaction between
people and the development of partnerships,
networks, and communities of interest. This
include spaces and facilities designed to
encourage both formal and informal conversations,
ways of sharing best practice and lessons
learned through discussions, master classes
and stories, and also through individual
development and learning.
Individuals

3.1.2 Explicit to Explicit
The technology axis focuses on access
to explicit knowledge and the facilitation of
communication between individuals, resulting
in the development of Intranets, portals and
8

Group

Group

Tacit

Tacit

Explicit

Explicit

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

4. KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT
Knowledge management is particularly
concerned with tacit organisational knowledge
and various non-typical valuable information
resources to the users as to the hierarchy
and structure of the organisation. Knowledge
management processes follow best practice
procedures and benchmarking when a range
of collaborating organisations use them.
As knowledge is increasingly becoming
the key strategic resource of the future, our
need to develop a comprehensive understanding
of knowledge processes for the creation,
transfer, and deployment of this unique asset
is also becoming critical. Facing the challenges
of a globally expanding and highly competitive
knowledge-based economy, the traditional
organisations are urgently seeking the
fundamental insights to help them nurture,
harvest, and manage the immense potential
of their knowledge assets to provide the
capability to excel at the leading edge of
innovation11.
Librarians have developed and applied
many KM principles with regard to academic
library services. However, they have done
little to use organisational information to
create knowledge that can be used to create
further knowledge and to improve the functionality
and higher educational processes. In many
ways, KM incorporates principles that academic
librarians have developed and used with scholarly
information for many years. They have applied
these principles and others to organisational
information in ways that create new knowledge
to improve organisational effectiveness 1 .
12

Chase found that KM has the following
benefits which can be applied in libraries:
Improved decision making (89 per cent)

Improved products/services (73 per cent).
Knowledge and KM play a significant
role in securing the cooperation. Transorganisational sharing and exchange of
knowledge serves as the foundation for the
development of trust and relationships. The
concept of social capital is useful in understanding
how to build and maintain the relationships,
which are necessary to achieve high-order
innovation in cooperative, and knowledgedriven business environment 3.
Libraries will gradually become more and
more independent from their respective
organisations because of the interdependence
on user services, resource sharing through
cooperation, coordination, and because of
change in the culture which will enable managers
and employees at every hierarchical level to
make decisions in common.
The KM in this context involves the entire
system of knowledge transfer from the
generation, construction, diffusion and use.
This will require librarians to go beyond their
contemporary role of knowledge storing,
organisation, retrieval, and access to the
global transformation and creation of
information. This is a challenge and an opportunity
for librarians to move their activities, and to
enlarge their sharing to the scholarly
13
communication process
. Anyone working
in the field of knowledge and information
management will require a range of skills,
some of which can be grouped in the following
categories related to knowledge and information
management14:
Knowledge of sources: Print/electronic,
internal/external, whom to ask, how to
look, its evaluation
Subject knowledge and understanding.

Improved efficiency of people and operations
(82 per cent)

Information and records management:
Indexing and abstracting methods, database
development, thesaurus construction, retrieval/
delivery methods, electronic storage, retention
policy, structuring records, legislation,
standards and controls

Improved innovation (73 per cent).

Internal and external networks

Increased responsiveness to customers
(84 per cent)

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

9

Users/patterns of usage: Needs analysis,
satisfaction measures
Current awareness services: monitoring/
updating, abstracting news services
User advice and training
Contribution to knowledge and information
strategy.
Knowledge management is one way to
develop and apply the organisational knowledge
needed to improve library operations and,
ultimately, library effectiveness. It also enables
libraries to generate organisational knowledge
for higher education institutions 15 .

5. WHY KM?
According to Sharma16: To serve clientele
well and remain in business, companies must
reduce their cycle time, operate with minimum
fixed assets and overheads (people, inventory
and facilities), shorten product development
time, improve customer service, empower
employees, innovate and deliver high-quality
products, enhance flexibility and adaptation,
capture information, create knowledge, and
share and learn knowledge. None of these
are possible without a continual focus on
the creation, updation, availability, quality
and use of knowledge by all the employees
and the teams at work and in the marketplace.

6. THE CORE PROCESSES OF KM
Heisig has outlined the following key
processes involved in KM:
(i)

Create new knowledge: Measures and
instruments that promote the creation of
knowledge are, for example, the acquisition
of external knowledge (mergers, consultants,
etc.), the setting up of interdisciplinary
project teams that include the customers,
and the application of lessons learned
and methods to elicit tacit knowledge.

(ii) Store knowledge: Store knowledge in manuals,
databases, case studies, reports, and
the tacit knowledge of the employees
who work in the organisation.
10

(iii) Distribute knowledge: Provision of right
knowledge to the right person at the right
time is the main aim of the core task
‘distribution of knowledge’. Internet and
Intranets can play a crucial role in achieving
this objective. Other aspects of the distribution
of knowledge are the transfer of experiences
of new employees by training on-the-job,
mentoring, and coaching techniques.
(iv) Apply knowledge: Appropriate application
of knowledge for the benefit of the organisation
is the fundamental aim of the KM.

7. KNOWLEDGE SOLUTION
MODELS
The most common phenomenon we come
across is the typical D, I, K, W quartet, a
linear transformation model as depicted in
Fig. 2. But according to Natarajan and
Shekhar17, it can be divided into two models—
independent knowledge solution model and
information to knowledge transformation model.

7.1 Independent Knowledge Solution
Model
A knowledge solution can very well be
created without automating all the underlying
information layers. There is really nothing
like a mandatory chronology to be followed
for implementing KM solutions. A major
misconception that a number of people have
is that unless an organisation has traversed
the path of implementing IT solutions, it
cannot be ready for KM. While it certainly
helps if people are technology savvy, the
existence of automated applications for
information processing is not always a prerequisite. For example, Medical Helpline Service
using videoconference facility to operate a
critical case does not require any information
system in action. That is what is defined as
independent knowledge solution model.

7.2 Information to Knowledge
Transformation Model
Several companies have successfully
managed to implement KM solutions through
information systems foundation. Knowledge
generation in such cases, pretty much follows
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

the linear transformation as depicted in
Fig. 2.

8. KNOWLEDGE TECHNOLOGIES
AND KNOWLEDGE SHARING

In all these solutions, knowledge as an
entity sits on top of the D, I, K pyramid.
Efficiently designed IT systems that automate
the end-to-end process chain in any organisation
act as the acquisition mechanism within
which knowledge is often embedded.

8.1 Technology Aspect

Knowledge solutions, interfaced to these
systems, then attempt to enhance the quality
of information through expert analyses to
transform them into knowledge. They also
identify packets of embedded knowledge within
the information layers through sophisticated
business-intelligence tools. These solutions
fall under this category.
Should an organisation choose either
one model or the other, or both, and if so,
in what order; are there other parameters
like level of IT maturity, culture and investments
that plays a role? While the independent
model strives to create a connected environment
for both people-to-people interaction and for
knowledge sharing, the transformation model
establishes the vertical connection between
people and information systems for knowledge
extraction.
If the requirement is for tacit knowledge
or experience to be available or shared, the
independent knowledge solution is generally
suitable. On the other hand, if it is explicit
knowledge that is required, then the transformation
model is more appropriate.

Data

There are a large number of technology
tools which support the entire KM endeavour.
A KM tool utilises technology tools from
standard off-the-shelf e-mail packages to
sophisticated collaboration tools designed
specifically to support community building
and identity. Generally, tools fall into one or
more of the following categories:
Knowledge repositories
Expertise access tools
e-learning applications
Discussion and chat technologies
Synchronous interaction tools
Search and data mining tools.
Selecting an appropriate tool is a critical
issue. A wrong technology is not just a
financial loss but it also creates bottlenecks
for the entire system, affecting the productivity
of the knowledge employee.
8.1.1 Corporate Intranet
One of the hottest technologies for
knowledge sharing is corporate Intranet. The
Intranet has the potential to be a valuable
strategic asset for an organisation. A well-

Information

Add value by analysis, correlating and
summarising
Independent knowledge
solution model

Knowledge

Transformed by contexualisation, experience, interprettation, discussion
Transformation model

Figure 2. Linear transformation model.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

11

designed corporate Intranet acts as a single
interface across the entire enterprise. It also
acts as a centralised pool of knowledge. It
is an effective communication infrastructure
through which knowledge workers can exchange
their ideas.
Intranet can thus act as a supporting
tool for initial and ongoing training requirements
of an organisation. It is also a platform for
an online community of staff, particularly for
those in geographically isolated locations to
remain in contact with their organisation.
Pankaj has enumerated some successful
tips for implementation of corporate Intranet
to address the following issues:
Review of existing Intranet, if any, or the
options available in the market
Determine Intranet goals. What kind of
value it will reflect to the organisation
Identify stakeholders—current users and
future users
Cost implications involved in it
How it is going to be integrated with the
present system so that it generated the
maximum benefits
Awareness and capacity building of the
stakeholders for an effective usage of
Intranet.

8.1.2 Groupware
In the past few years, the learning
organisation concepts have shed new light
in this field. Groupware encompasses a set
of functions designed to help members of a
group with tasks of interest to the group as
a whole. Electronic mail, database, shared
document databases, and electronic forums
are the components of a groupware solution.
Groupware does more than provide economies
of time and space: it also encourages group
members to pool their knowledge and experience,
resulting in thorough information processing
and better decision making at a reasonable
cost.
Groupware technology is designed to
facilitate the work of groups and may be
used to communicate, cooperate, coordinate,
solve problems, and compete or negotiate.
While traditional technologies like the telephone
qualify as groupware, the term is ordinarily
used to refer to a specific class of technologies
relying on modern computer networks such
as e-mail, newsgroups, videophones, or chat.
Groupware is both software and group process.
It can both enhance a group, and productively
insulate members from the group. It offers
significant advantages over single-user systems.
Some of the most common reasons people
want to use groupware are:
Faster, clearer, and more persuasive
communictation

Once the above issues have been
addressed, following key points will arise for
implementation of a corporate Intranet:

Communication possible even in remote
areas

Usability study and stakeholders feedback

Cuts down travel costs/business logistics

Prototype development and pilot testing

Creates a sharing platform

Content audit

Forms common interest groups

Development of Intranet design

Saves time and cost in coordinating group
work

Migration of the existing content

Facilitates group problem-solving

Promotion of the Intranet among stakeholders

Enables new modes of communication
such as anonymous interchanges or
structured interactions.

Intranet security issues.

12

Enables telecommuting

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

Groupware helps to bring experts together
quickly so that they can pool their knowledge
and with the right guidance, work effectively.
Following are some of the areas in which
groupware has generated significant benefits:
Collaborative research which brings teams
from different organisations and locations
closer for innovative research
Faster development of new products and
services soliciting inputs from the users
More innovative products and services
for closer dialogue between different functions
and experts
Better matching products and services
for ongoing dialogue with customers based
on their needs and satisfaction
Better market planning for closer interaction
between the creators and the users of
marketing programmes
Market development for cleaner identification
of target markets through shared interests
group
Improved customer service for access to
information about common and industrial
problems.

8.2 Knowledge-sharing Challenges
Success of the next generation of the
KM systems will depend upon integration of
not only data and processes across interenterprise supply chains and value chains,
but also integration of decision-making and
actions across inter-enterprise boundaries.
This integration is in fact the most critical
aspect of the entire system. Lack of proper
integration was one of the major reasons for
the failure of earlier KM systems. Effectiveness
of integrated information flows will depend
upon the accuracy of information that is
shared by diverse stakeholders across interenterprise boundaries.

consider KM to be primarily a business activity
in which the use and reuse of knowledge
creates business value in terms of profits,
improved returns on investment or some other
quantitative measure. Although librarians may
not choose to take on a new title such as
“Knowledge Managers”, there is considerable
opportunity for librarians to use their traditional
skills to assume a new function of managing
knowledge within the library, which would
complement the traditional library services.
Both Kim 18 , and DiMattia and Oder 19 have
stressed the importance of the KM role of
librarians. In a large multicampus university
library operations are as complex and distributed
as in many business enterprises. In this
context, KM can help transform the libraries
into more efficient, knowledge-sharing
organisations. To adapt a working definition
from industry, KM within libraries involves
organising and providing access to intangible
resources that help librarians and administrators
carry out their tasks effectively and efficiently20.
An example will help to illustrate the
application of KM within a library. In most
large public and academic libraries, a librarian
typically has a subject speciality, and is
highly skilled at using various indexes and
databases in that subject area to help users
find scholarly material. With the assistance
of librarian, the user can obtain information
on a particular subject and hopefully, transform
this information into knowledge that can be
applied to a specific problem. In providing
this classical library function, the librarian
uses a variety of approaches and tools including
commercial databases, formal guides, informal
finding aids, personal notes, and much information
that is typically found only in the librarian’s
mind. In an ideal KM framework, the librarian
would organise these aids, notes, and tacit
knowledge so that other librarians could benefit
from the knowledge. This type of KM function
can improve the productivity and efficiency
of a library by not having to depend totally
on one person’s specialised knowledge.

9. KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT
WITHIN LIBRARIES

9.1 Academic Libraries and
Knowledge Management

Knowledge management is not a phrase
that is routinely used within libraries. Many

Stoffle considered that KM should be
seen as primary function of academic libraries:

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

13

within the scholarly communication and
information delivery processes, libraries could
add value by organising knowledge created
and packaged outside the library. For Stoffle,
KM is an effective, project-based means of
organising and making available information
and knowledge to users of the academic
library rather than an attempt to change
corporate or organisational culture. Lucier 13
stated that the scholarly publishing aspect
of librarianship is a crucial element of KM,
arguing further that libraries have been developed
from the pre-occupation with knowledge use
through knowledge access, to knowledge
generation, in the wake of developments in
electronic publishing.
KM provides a means of adding value
for the university as a whole in terms of
being able to publish electronically knowledge
created at the institution; it is not desirable,
but vital, that the academic community should
see the library as a publisher, a knowledge
creator. Marshall described librarians as major
facilitators of the positive sharing of knowledge,
and someone who creates the culture and
maintains the necessary infrastructure for
the operation of KM. Creth too stressed the
need for librarians in universities to raise
their own profiles as an integral part of the
university teaching and research team21. They
should be seen to be adding value to the
process of education and knowledge creation.

9.2 Librarians as Knowledge
Managers
Librarians with their traditional knowledge
and skills can manage the explicit knowledge
quiet well. But the challenge is in developing
systems and procedures for managing the
tacit knowledge. Although LIS professionals
are not always prominently involved at the
outset of KM initiatives, many organisations
have brought them in at a later stage, when
ongoing management of content usually emerges
as a major technical issue.

KM developers: Librarians can work very
closely with the senior management team
for developing systems and procedures
for implementing an effective KM system
in their respective organisation
KM researchers: Librarians are in a better
position to apply the LIS principles to
create new KM systems. Their knowledge
in taxonomies, metadata, information
retrieval techniques, thesauri, etc. together
with the digital technologies can play
crucial role in a KM environment
KM integrators: A librarian can act as
one who connects the information sources,
services, and people in an organisation22
Knowledge brokers: Often known as
gatekeepers, they connect knowledge seekers
with knowledge providers23. Librarians normally
act as knowledge brokers in an organisation
since they know better than others where
someone can look for a particular information.
In the course of their work, they come to
understand a great deal about the various
knowledge needs and knowledge resources
of the organisation.

9.3 Information Management Skills
for KM Strategy
Traditional information management (IM)
skills of librarians can readily be applied in
a KM environment. Some of these skills
identified by Abell and Oxbrow24 are:
Identifying and acquiring internal sources
Structuring internal sources
Sourcing, acquiring and evaluating external
sources
Integrating internal and external sources
Enabling timely delivery of relevant and
usable information.

9.2.1 Role of LIS Professional in KM
Environment

9.4 Application of IM Skills for KM
Strategy

Librarians can find themselves in the
following role in KM environment:

Librarians can apply their IM skills in
the following KM areas:

14

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

Designing knowledge repositories (explicit
knowledge): Storing informal information such as
marketing materials, meeting minutes, price lists,
training packs, research reports, etc.
Designing knowledge maps (tacit and explicit
knowledge): Pointing to people, document
collections and datasets that can be consulted.
Designing knowledge networks and discussion
groups (tacit knowledge): Providing opportunities
for face-to-face contacts and electronic interactions,
for example establishing chat facilities/talk rooms,
etc.25

10. CONCLUSION
In the present fast changing knowledge
environment, organisations have seen a major
paradigm shift. In this perspective, knowledge
is considered a key resource, but there are
still a large number of libraries and their
information professionals who have to incline
towards KM. They still need to know how to
manage and disseminate knowledge to external
and internal environment.
To take advantage of KM, information
professionals need to fully understand the
concepts and benefits, the different approaches
and techniques being implemented, and the
new emerging roles in which information is
increasingly significant. People may develop
an idea that, in their point of view, may be
useful for a business organisation only, but
it still can be useful for other organisations
also. These techniques and approaches are
so vast that only a miniscule part of it has
been discussed in this paper.

REFERENCES
1. Hirshon, A. Libraries, consortia and change
management. J. Acad. Librarianship, 1999,
25(2), 124-26.
2. Drucker, P. Post-capitalist society.
Gutenberg, Germany, 1996.
3. Carayannis, E.G., et al. Leveraging
knowledge, learning and innovation in
forming strategic government-universityDESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

industry (GUI) R&D partnerships in the
US, Germany and France. Technovation,
2000, 20(9), 477-88.
4. Krogh, Geog Von & Grand, Simon.
Justification in knowledge creation: Dominant
logic in management discourses. In
Knowledge creation: A source of value,
edited by Krogh, Nonaka and Nishiguchi.
Macmillan Press Ltd, London, 2000.
5. Prahlad, C.K. & Hamel, G. The core
competency of the corporation. Harvard
Business Review, 1990, 68(3), 79-93.
6. Peters, Tom. Liberation Management. Pan
Books Ltd, London, 1993.
7. Chaudhary, H.C. Knolwedge management
for competitive advantage: Changing the
world through knowledge. Excel Books,
2005. 161p.
8. Nonaka, I. & Takeuchi, H. The knowledge
creating company: How Japanese companies
create the dynamic of innovation. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 1995.
9. Nonaka, I. A dynamic theory of organisational
knowledge creation. Organisation Science,
1994, 5(1), 14-37.
10. Bhatt, G. Organising knowledge in the
knowledge development cycle. J. Know.
Manage., 2000, 4(1), 15-26.
11. Shariq,S.Z. Knowledge management: An
emerging discipline. J. Know. Manage.,
1997, 1(1), 75-82.
12. Chase, R.L. The knowledge-based
organisation: An international survey. J
Know. Manage., 1997, 1(1), 38-49.
13. Lucier, R. Knowledge management: Refining
roles in scientific communication. In New
Technologies and New Directions:
Proceedings from the Symposium on
Scholarly Communication, edited by Boynton
G.R. and Creth, S. D. Meckler Publishing,
Westport, CT, 1993.
14. Webb, S.P. Knowledge management:
Linchpin of Change. Aslib, London, 1998.
15

15. Townley, C. T. Knowledge management
and academic libraries. College Res. Lib.,
2001, 62(1), 44-55.

environment. Available at www.ukoln.ac.uk/
services/papers/follett/creth/paper.html.

16. Sharma, P. Knowledge management. APH
Publishing Corporation, New Delhi, 2004.

22. Blair, D.C. Knowledge management: Hype,
hope or help? J. Ameri. Soc. Inform.
Sci. Technol., 2002, 53(12), 10-20.

17. Natarajan, G. & Shekhar, S. Knowledge
management: Enabling business growth.
Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Co Ltd, New
Delhi, 2000.
19. Di Mattia, S. & Oder, N. Knowledge
management: Hope, hype or harbinger?”
Library Journal, 1997, 122(15), 33-35.
18. Kim, S. The roles of knowledge professionals
for knowledge management. Inspel, 2000,
34(1), 1-8.
21. Creth, S.D. The electronic library: Slouching
toward the future or creating a new information

23. Davenport, T.H. & Prusak, L. Working
knowledge: How organisations manage
what they know. Harvard Business School
Press, Boston, 1998.
24. Abell, A. & Oxbrow, N. Competing with
knowledge: The information professional
in the knowledge management age. Library
Association Publishing, London, 2001.
25. Corall, S. Are we in the knowledge
management business? Available at
http://www.ariadne.ac.uk/issue18/

Contributor

Mr Shantanu Ganguly has done MSc in Ecology and Environment Science,
Master’s in Library and Information Science, Postgraduate Diploma in Management,
and Postgraduate Diploma in Computer Application. He has served several
reputed organisations such as Delhi University, VHAI, National Productivity
Council, TERI, and IILM. Currently he is working in the Indian Institute of Management,
Lucknow. He has 16 years of experience in the field of library and information
services. He has also served as Associate Editor for several reputed national
journals and newsletters.

16

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

