DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 27, No. 5, September 2007, pp. 17-26
© 2007, DESIDOC

Trends, Challenges and Future of Library and
Information Science Education in India
Ramesha and B. Ramesh Babu*
Department of Library and Information Science
Bangalore University, Jnana Bharathi, Bangalore-560 056
E-mail: bramesha@rediffmail.com
*Department of Information Science
University of Madras, Chennai-600 005
E-mail: beeraka_r@yahoo.co.uk

ABSTRACT
The technological revolution paved the challenges for the library and information
science (LIS) schools not only in India but also in the west. Responsibilities of LIS
departments and teachers are increasing to produce best LIS professionals to lead the
21st century librarianship. The major responsibility of the LIS departments in India is to
groom LIS students in the philosophy, knowledge, and professional values of librarianship,
as practiced in libraries and in other contexts, and as guided by the vision of the 21st
century librarianship. LIS education and training facilities in India are undergoing rapid
changes. During the past 10 years, the number of library schools/departments has
grown substantially, both for regular and distance education programmes. Reorientation
has been common in most LIS departments, and review and revision in curriculum has
also been noticed. The quality of LIS educators has also improved and research output
is experiencing new dimensions. Increase in the use and access to information and
communication technologies (ICT) for LIS education is now more evident. This paper
discusses the challenges LIS education faces in the 21st century and how to make LIS
education more relevant and effective.
Keywords: LIS education, LIS trends, LIS issues, LIS challenges, future of LIS education

1.

INTRODUCTION

Library and information science education
in India is largely a 20th century phenomenon.
It has a history of a century behind it and
has developed into a distinct discipline to
meet the growing dimensions of library service
and the changing needs of the society. Realising
the importance of professionally trained personnel
to manage libraries effectively and efficiently,
Received 3 November 2006, revised 27 June 2007

library training programmes were started at
several places even before independence.
The first formal course for librarianship training
in India was started sometime in 1911 in
Baroda1.
LIS education is linked with the growth
of libraries. The origin and growth of the
libraries depend on the educational and cultural
conditions of the society at any time2. Library
17

as a social organ has certain social obligations.
These obligations vary with the educational
and cultural needs.
The personnel working in libraries must
have proper library education then only they
can use and implement the library techniques
effectively to suit the requirements of the
users. The LIS professionals should take
responsibility to educate the users in accessing
required information and must keep them
update to cope up with the ever-changing
information requirements 3.

2.

LIS EDUCATION IN INDIA: AN
OVERVIEW

The origin of librarianship, the temporal
changes in its discourse and delivery provides
a metamorphosis of the influence of several
factors. For instance, the library education
commenced with training till a formal course
in library science was started in the US by
Melvil Dewey. Today, study of knowledge
management and knowledge organisation
inherently stands on the edifice built by
him.
Training and education in LIS in India
dates back to 1911 and has kept pace with
the developed countries of the world. It is
gradually evolving and has spread its roots
throughout the country. The credit for starting
a formal course in library education in India
goes to William Alonson Borden and Asa
Don Dickinson, both students of Melvil Dewey.
Alonson Borden started a training course in
1911 at the Central Library, Baroda, followed
by Dickinson in 1915 at the Punjab University,
Lahore (now in Pakistan). Thereafter, other
universities and library associations also
started setting up library schools.
Madras Library Association in 1928, and
Bengal Library Association in 1935 started
a certificate course for librarians. Among
the universities, Madras University under the
leadership of Dr S.R. Ranganathan, took
over the certificate course from Madras Library
Association in 1931, and later in 1937, converted
the course into a Postgraduate Diploma in
Library Science. It was the first diploma
18

course in library science in India. The Andhra
University in 1935, Banaras Hindu University
in 1941, and the University of Delhi in 1947
are some other universities which started
this course. The University of Delhi in 1948,
under the guidance of Dr Ranganathan, started
a Master’s degree course in library science
and also provided facilities for research leading
to PhD. It was the first university to start the
MPhil course in 1977.
Presently, library education is being provided
by a variety of institutions such as traditional
universities, open universities, deemed
universities, polytechnics, affiliated colleges,
professional associations, and documentation
centres, etc. Currently, there are about 120
universities, including correspondence and
open universities, in India offering LIS education
at Bachelor’s and Master’s levels, and 63
universities which offer doctoral degree in
library science. Besides, National Institute
of Science Communication and Information
Resources (NISCAIR), New Delhi, and
Documentation Research and Training Centre,
Bangalore, offer two-year Associateship in
Information Science 4.
The LIS education has expanded vertically,
but there are marked disparities in its profile,
curriculum, available infrastructure, and in
the levels of collaboration. The disparities
are due to political interference, non-availability
of resources and delayed adoption of technological
innovations on the part of planners and
administrators. The condition of LIS education
in many developing countries is also the
same5.

3. TRENDS IN LIS EDUCATION IN
INDIA
Common trends noted in the growth of
LIS schools around the world are review and
revision of curricula, increased use of ICT,
decrease or increase in the number of students,
amalgamation and reorientation6,7. These trends
noted in the context of Indian LIS programmes
are relocation of the academic administration
of LIS schools (Information Science at the
University of Madras, and NISCAIR in New
Delhi), and expansion of LIS departments.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

3.1 Levels of LIS Education
Changes that took place in India in the
field of LIS from the initial stages to the
present day can be identified as informal
training to formal training; certificate to diploma;
diploma to degree; and degree to research
programme.
Further, changes in the curriculum of
these courses have taken place in response
to the changing conditions and demands. At
Master’s level, special courses such as computer
applications, system analysis, industrial
information and medical information systems,
expert systems, knowledge management,
economics of information, marketing of
information, digital libraries, etc., have also
been introduced.

3.2 Nomenclature of LIS Schools

Department of Library and Information
Management
Department of Library Science and
Manuscriptology.

3.3 Pattern of Degrees Awarded by
Different Universities and Institutions
The education framework of LIS in India
at present is as given below9:
Certificate (CLISc) course: A six months
course sponsored by the State Library
Associations, state and central libraries,
and some other universities
Diploma in Library and Information Science
(DLISc): A one-year course offered by
many polytechnics

The nomenclature of the LIS schools in
India is not uniform. Most of the LIS schools
are known as Department of Library and
Information Science. However, certain LIS
schools are known with different names as
given below8:

Bachelor’s degree in Library and Information
Science (BLISc): A one-year course
sponsored by many universities

Department of Library Science and
Documentation

Master’s degree in Library and Information
Science (MLISc): Postgraduate programme
of two years after any Bachelor degree.
Some universities are still offering oneyear MLISc for the BLISc degree holders

College of Library and Information Science
School of Library and Information Science
Institute of Library and Information Science
Institute of Library Science
Department of Studies and Research in
Library and Information Science
Faculty of Library and Information Science
Department of Information Science
Library Science Training College
School of Studies in Library and Information
Science
School of Library Science
Library and Information Science Division
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

Master’s degree in Library and Information
Science (MLISc): Postgraduate programme
of one year after BLiS/BLISc

Master’s degree (MSc) in Information
Science of two years offered by Madras
University and Baba Saheb Bhimarao
Ambedkar Central University, Lucknow
Master’s degree in Library and Information
Science (MLISc): A five-year course. It
is an adventurous attempt by the Annamalai
University in the recent years
MPhil: Full-time/part-time course of one
year/two year duration
PhD: A full-time/part-time programme,
which leads to the award of Doctor of
Philosophy in LIS
Postgraduate Diploma in Library Automation
and Networking (PGDLAN).
19

3.4 LIS Education in Indian
Languages
The medium of instruction plays a vital
role in imparting education, particularly
professional education. Language is a vehicle
to transmit knowledge and the library professionals
exist to facilitate communication. It is an
unsolved debate whether to impart LIS education
in English or in regional languages.Though
many schools are teaching LIS in English,
but allowing students to write their examinations
in their mother tongue.
There are certain implications in imparting
LIS education in regional languages. These
are: availability of expertise, curriculum, and
course material; background of students seeking
LIS education; marketability of LIS graduates
and postgraduates who have studied in regional
languages; national integrity; trends in LIS
education at international level and global
village concept. Hence, LIS education in
India would be much more effective if imparted
in English only. Further, imparting LIS education
in regional languages may impede the very
philosophy of the subject. Still teaching at
Certificate and Bachelor’s levels in regional
languages is dominating in some Indian library
schools 10.

3.5 Emergence and Salient Features
of LIS Education
Proliferation of LIS schools offering various
levels of education has resulted in quantitative
expansion. The culture of utilising the parttime faculty in different ways has not improved
the mental abilities of the students of LIS
in comprehending the latest emerging trends11.
Inadequate infrastructure facilities in the
existing LIS schools in the universities and
mushrooming of distance education programmes
all over India have increased the productivity
without any organised planning of manpower
requirement. In addition, self-financing courses
and programmes of some private institutions
are only commercial ventures for profit making.
The truncated and the integrated courses,
both in semester and non-semester schemes,
lack uniformity with regards to curriculum,
marks allotment and practical exposure to
20

the latest technologies. At the same time,
some of the LIS schools have made appreciable
efforts in revising the course curriculum,
and revamping the total structure by introducing
choice-based credit system (CBCS). CBCS
is going to be a trendsetter in the LIS education
programme as it will equate the Indian degrees
with any international degree.
UGC Model Curriculum 20018,12 has given
a new impetus by way of modular structure
emphasising two-year integrated MLISc
programme. The Model Curriculum has given
enough freedom to the respective Board of
Studies to structure the curriculum as per
the local and regional requirements without
diluting the original frame. Curriculum also
has a clear emphasis to blend the tradition
with technology and to eliminate some routine
historical and traditional components. By
and large, this can be further examined by
a high power National Body consisting of
experts, teachers and practitioners, and focusing
more on converging cutting edge technologies.
The Model Curriculum can pave the way for
maintaining the uniformity and high standards
in LIS education.
To enhance the teaching skills, methods
and techniques including practical orientation
to the interdisciplinary cluster of subjects,
training programmes, workshops, refresher
and orientation programmes need restructuring
by adding required technological value in
the contemporary context. “The Library profession
do not attract the best talent in the country
for a variety of reasons; the quality of entrants
is very poor.” This is an upright statement
taken from the Ranganathan’s Report (1965).
Even after four decades of the Report, the
situation, however, remains to be the same,
may be because of better educational options
available for the students after 10+2. The
situation is not specific to library science
but is true for basic sciences also. Students
are opting for library science not by choice
but by chance or by accident.

4. DISTANCE EDUCATION IN LIS IN
INDIA
Distance education (DE) in India has its
roots in the early 1960s. It was mainly confined
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

to the courses in arts, social sciences and
humanities at graduate and postgraduate
levels. The first open university (Andhra Pradesh
Open University, now Dr B.R. Ambedkar
Open University) in India was established at
Hyderabad. This was followed by Indira Gandhi
National Open University (IGNOU) in 1985
on the lines of the British Open University.
The DE in LIS was started in the early 1980s
by Dr B.R. Ambedkar Open University (the
then Andhra Pradesh Open University) and
Annamalai University. Since then, there is
a phenomenal increase and growth of the
learners through DE. The number of DE
institutions has also increased considerably
due to economic viability and as a means
of additional resource generation for the parent
universities. A list of universities offering LIS
courses in India through DE is given in
Table 1.

4.1 Methods used for Imparting LIS
Courses through DE
The universities offering LIS education
adopted the following methods for imparting
LIS courses:
Supplying printed course materials
Conducting contact classes (the duration
and the number of days for classes varies
from institution to institution and course
to course)
Supplying feedback course or assignments
Supplying audio-visual materials; mostly
tapes, audios and videos
Radio and television broadcasts of some
lessons by the experts.
Over the years, the technology use has
remained relatively stable in India. Packets
of reading materials13 are being sent by post/
mail to the learners, and they also respond
to the tutors/instructors with feedback sheets
by post. It is like one-to-one interaction.
Some universities are conducting contact
classes in addition to the supply of reading
materials. But use of ICT and Education
Satellite (EDUSAT) hopefully will now bring
lot of potential changes in imparting DE in
India.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

5.

LIS EDUCATION IN INDIA:
ISSUES AND CHALLENGES

The policy makers of LIS education in
India including University Grants Commission,
Ministry of Human Resource Development,
National Assessment and Accreditation Council,
Experts Committee Members of LIS, teaching
community and management should take
into account the following issues/challenges
at the national level and a uniform policy for
all the academic institutions in the country
for the development of LIS profession towards
better recognition at par with any other discipline.

5.1 Technology-mediated LIS
Education
LIS education in India is being pushed
ahead of the actualities by implementing
computer applications and other areas of
information technology. The following barriers
are confronting the use of ICT in the training
and education of LIS in India:
Lack of infrastructure facilities available
at the disposal of LIS departments
Lack of ICT access to LIS learners and
teachers
Lack of financial resources to augment
and adopt the latest innovative means
Lack of proper perspective and policy
development by the top management of
LIS institutions
Lack of perception on the part of LIS
learners
Lack of facilities to set up virtual libraries
Lack of well-connected telecommunication
facilities to explore and exploit the latest
innovations in the information delivery
and consumption
Lack of interest on the part of faculty
(in most cases) due to obvious reasons14
The challenges of technology-mediated
education in LIS are formidable. These challenges
are greatly magnified, when viewed in the
light of the expansive goals of an institution.
21

Table 1. Universities in India offering LIS courses through DE

University

22

Courses Offered
CLIS

BLIS

MLIS

PGDLAN

MPhil

University of Madras, Chennai

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Annamalai University
Annamalai Nagar

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Madurai-Kamaraj University
Madurai

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Alagappa University
Karaikkudi

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

S.V. University, Tirupati

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Dr B.R. Ambedkar Open
University, Hyderabad

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

Andhra University
Visakhapatnam

No

No

Yes

No

No

Kakatiya University, Warangal

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Nagarjuna University, Guntur

No

Proposed

No

No

No

University of Hyderabad
Hyderabad

No

No

No

Yes

No

Karnataka State Open
University, Mysore

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

Kuvempu University, Shimoga

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

IGNOU, New Delhi

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Kashmir University, Srinagar

Yes

No

No

No

No

University of Rajasthan, Jaipur

Yes

No

No

No

No

Punjabi University, Patiala

Yes

No

No

No

No

Mohanlal Sukhadia University
Udaipur

Yes

No

No

No

No

G.G. University, Bilaspur

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

Dr H.S. Gaur University, Sagar

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

Kurukshetra University

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yashvantarao Chavan
Maharashtra Open University
Nasik

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

lamented that the current course contents
of LIS programmes show no relevance
to the present day information demands

The following challenges may be listed in
the context of Indian scenario:
Do we have sufficient, viable, and functional
infrastructure facilities to augment the
technology-based instructions?

Lack of training/internship programmes
during study period or absence of internship
modules in the courses

Do our finances permit to go for the
Internet-based resources delivery?

Use of traditional teaching methods
Ever changing employers needs and
demands

Are our learners capable of using virtual
environment or virtual laboratories or virtualfield courses?

Use of ICT in libraries

Whether the computer-mediated instructions
can ameliorate the potential decline in
education standards?

Changing curricula of UGC NET or SLET,
and examination pattern

Whether the learners are information
literate in the academic community?

Changing dimensions in subjects like
information management, preservation,
and bibliographic standards.

Whether the faculty is ready to take
challenges to welcome the technologybased instructions and whether it can
design and develop the modules on such
lines?

5.2 Restructuring of LIS Courses
Many changes have come about in the
curriculum of LIS courses in response to the
changing conditions, demands, and trends
in the information environment 15. The new
dimensions in LIS have been influencing the
curriculum of LIS courses. The following factors
have contributed towards the restructuring
of LIS courses:
Increasing volume and variety of information
sources and diversity of techniques used
to access these sources
System analysis and management
techniques being applied extensively in
the library and information centres
The emerging demand for the digital libraries
Increasing demand for the effective
bibliographical control of information and
creation of databases in various branches
of knowledge
Obsolete curriculum still in vogue in
many library schools; it has often been
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

Most of the LIS schools in India do not
impart education on modern courses and
hardly come up to the international standard.
Moreover, they do not reflect the latest changes
resulted by the ICT. Most of the courses
are theory-based. The need for restructuring
the LIS programmes has become imperative
because of fierce competition both at institutions
and within the profession 16.
In this context, it is pertinent to quote
Galvin: “Library science schools should achieve
and maintain an optimal balance between
tradition and innovation. It is useful to try to
identify more precisely those aspects of
librarianship that are likely to change in the
nearer or long term future….. effective professional
education must incorporate both veracity with
respect to the present and sensitivity with
respect to the future” 3 .

6.

FUTURE OF LIS EDUCATION IN
INDIA

A broad perspective of LIS education in
the developing and developed nations gives
an indication that LIS education in India
needs to enhance some of the vital aspects
such as large scale integration of the allied
subject fields. Harmonisation of teachinglearning programmes, collaboration and
exchange, use of the facilities offered by
international and global organisations and
23

induction of the equity components are absolutely
must to get recognition in the national and
international job market.
These days, the concept of assessment
and accreditation has taken roots in the
higher education system. Establishment of
few model schools of LIS education on the
pattern of Royal School of LIS, Denmark,
will encourage and enrich the quality of LIS
education to suit the multiple requirements
of employers in the job market. This may
also further the value of LIS education, which
can greatly contribute to the R&D, and
development of cultural and corporate sectors
including the service sector 17.
In view of this, it is desirable that the
library schools in India must adapt themselves
to the changing situations so that they can
turnout better professionals who can meet
the challenges posed by the changing
environment. Library schools that are not
able to adapt themselves may become irrelevant
and have to close down sooner or later in
the years to come. History has a lesson to
teach. In the USA, those library schools
which did not moved with the time, were
either closed or merged with other schools
dealing with information science/information
studies 18 .

7. CONCLUSION
Today, LIS education is no more an
education for the mangers of libraries only,
but has become an education for the consumers
of knowledge also. It is a change from managing
libraries by librarians to manage the flow of
information by one and all. Earlier, LIS students
after the education became librarians, now
professionals teach this science and learners
choose this profession to manage the
information.
The need of mere library schools is over
in the present context. Better schools having
adequate finance, physical and library facilities,
equipment, and qualified and experienced
faculty is the need of the hour. The LIS
schools should aim at educational excellence
24

and serve as pacesetters. Such schools
should try to produce a new breed of professionals
capable to successfully perform their role in
the fast changing information needs of the
society using new information technologies
such as word processors, dedicated special
purpose microcomputers, and telecommunication
technology. The library schools should assume
the role of leadership and responsibility to
produce competent manpower for the present
as well as future needs of different kinds of
information centres including university libraries.
To conclude in the words of Lancaster: “We
must shift the focus of our professional concern
away from the Library as an institution and
towards the skilled professionals who will
become a professional practitioner on par
with medical and legal practitioners.”
It is often said that the ‘future is uncertain’,
but the future of LIS professionals can be
visualised now itself unless and until necessary
measures are taken by the LIS teachers in
particular to train the forthcoming incumbents
with the most up-to-date curriculum emphasising
more on ICT skills so as to prepare the
information professionals for leadership role.
Mere blaming the librarians is not a solution
to the visibility of librarianship, but at the
same time, a unique accreditation or certification
system, quality of education and distance
education trend has to be monitored.

REFERENCES
1. Hundred years of library education and
its future. In Library Education Centenary
Seminar, edited by P.S.G. Kumar, Nagpur,
1987. pp. 10-12.
2. Gangadhara Rao, P. & Ramesh Babu,
B. Distance learning in library and information
science in Indian universities with reference
to Madras University. In Human Spirit:
An anthology of library system, edited
by S. R. Ijarie, et al. Dept of Library and
Information Science, Karnatak University,
Dharwad, 1988. pp. 56-66.
3. Galvin, Thomas J. Change in education
for librarianship. Library Journal, 1976,
5(2), 101-04.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

4. Gangadhara Rao, P. & Ramesh Babu,
B. Recent trends in library and information
science education in South India.
International Library Review, 1990, 22(3),
181-90.
5. Mangla, P.B. Library and information science
education in India for the 21st century:
Trends and issues. In Information and
Society (Prof. P. Gangadhara Rao Memorial
Volume), edited by L.S. Ramaiah, et al.
Ess Ess Publications, New Delhi, 1997.
pp. 100-11.
6. Minishi-Majanja, M. & Ocholla, D.N.
Auditing of Information and communication
technologies in library and information
science education in Africa. Education
for Information, 2004, 22(3/4), 187-206.
7. Ocholla, D.N. An overview of the information
and communication technologies in the
LIS schools of eastern and southern Africa.
Education for Information, 2003, 21(2/
3), 181-94.
8. University Grants Commission (India).
UGC Model Curriculum: Library and
Information Science. UGC, New Delhi,
2001(Chairman: C.R. Karisiddappa).
9. Ramesh Babu, B. & Ramesha. Use of
ICT in LIS education through distance
mode in India: A conceptual framework.
In National Seminar on Quality Assurance
and Accreditation of Library and Information
Science Education (QAALISE) through
Distance Learning, 29-30 December 2005.
10. Ramesh Babu, B. Fifty years of LIS
education in Tamilnadu: Trends and issues.
In Proceedings of the XV IATLIS National
Seminar on 50 years of Library and
Information Education in India, 27-29
November 1997, Mysore, edited by A.A.N.
Raju, N. Laxman Rao & S. Sudarshan
Rao. IATLIS, Hyderabad, 1997. pp. 40-48.
11. Raghavan, K.S. Education for information
professionals with particular reference

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

to India. In Information management: Trends
and Issues (Prof. S. Seetharama Festschrift),
edited by B. Ramesh Babu, et al. Researchco
Book Centre, New Delhi, 2004. pp. 12-17.
12. University Grants Commission (India).
Report of the Curriculum Development
Committee in Library and Information
Science. UGC, New Delhi, 1993 (Chairman:
P.N. Kaula).
13. Information technology and its impact
on LIS education and library management,
edited by A.A.N. Raju, et al. Delta Publishing
House, Hyderabad, 1997.
14. Ramesh Babu, B. Training and education
for LIS in India: Today and tomorrow. In
Proceedings of the 9th International
BOBCATSSS Symposium on Library and
Information Science, Vilnius University,
Lithuania, 29-31 January 2001. pp. 316-24.
15. Varalakshmi, R.S.R. Specialisation in
LIS education: Changing trends and current
perspectives. In Knowledge societies and
libraries (Papers in honour of Prof. A.A.N.
Raju), edited by N. Laxman Rao, et al.,
Ess Ess Publications, New Delhi, 2004.
pp. 469-84.
16. Satyanarayana, N.R. LIS education: Change
or status quo? In Information and society
(Prof. P. Gangadhara Rao Memorial Volume),
edited by L.S. Ramaiah, et al. Ess
Ess Publications, New Delhi, 1997.
pp. 112-20.
17. Guruswamy Naidu, N. Library science
education in developing countries. In Vistas
in library, information systems and networks
(Prof. S.M. Tripathi Festschrift), edited
by M.V. Venugopal, et al. Y.K. Publishers,
Agra, 1999. pp. 153-57.
18. Barron, D.D. Library school closing: Distance
education and the closing of the American
library school. The Lib. Quar., 1991,
61(3), 279.

25

Contributors

Dr Ramesha obtained BLISc and MLISc, both from Bangalore University, Bangalore,
and PhD from Karnatak University, Dharwad. He is working as Lecturer in the
Department of Information Science, University of Madras, Chennai. Earlier, he
worked as Librarian at the United Mission Degree College, Bangalore, and as
Assistant Librarian in the Karnatak University, Dharwad. He has published/presented
more than 40 research papers, both in national and international journals/conferences.
He is life member of many professional associations including IATLIS, ILA, IASLIC,
FIC, MALA, KALA, etc. His area of interest include marketing of information, research
methodology, information literacy programme, and design and development of
institutional repositories.

Dr B. Ramesh Babu is working as Professor in the Department of Information
Science at the University of Madras. He has been awarded Dr S.R. Ranganathan
Memorial Gold Medal by the University of Mysore for the first rank in MLISc;
C.D. Sharma Best Paper Award by the Indian Library Association in 1999; and
READIT 2001 Best Paper Award by the IIT Madras, Chennai. He was also awarded
Commonwealth Fellowship for postdoctoral research in 1999-2000 and worked
on Web OPACs in the UK academic library in the Department of Information Science,
Loughborough University, UK. Dr Babu has published more than 200 research
papers in national and international journals, Festschrift volumes, and has organised
many national and international seminars/workshops on various aspects of LIS.
He is Resource Person at various DE institutes and has served as UGC Visiting
Fellow at Sambalpur University; Dr B.R. Ambedkar Marathwada University (four
times); and Andhra University (two times). He is life member of ILA, IASLIC, IATLIS,
MALA, APLA, ALSD, FIC, MULISSA Net, and TLA.

26

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

