DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 27, No. 5, September 2007, pp. 35-39
© 2007, DESIDOC

Six Sigma Application for Library Services
Chitra Kaushik, Ashu Shokeen*, Prabhakar Kaushik**
and Dinesh Khanduja***
DAV (PG) College Library, Karnal-132 001
*Department of Library & Information Science
Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra-132 119
**Department of Mechanical Engineering
N.C. College of Engineering, Israna, Panipat-132 107
***Department of Mechanical Engineering
National Institute of Technology, Kurukshetra-136 119
E-mail: prabhakarkaushik@yahoo.com

ABSTRACT
Six sigma is now increasingly being applied to a wide range of processes ranging
from manufacturing to services and variegated transactional processes. A fundamental
objective of six sigma is to achieve customer satisfaction. Doing things right and keeping
them consistent are the ideas behind six sigma. Success of six sigma in manufacturing
is well published. But the same cannot be said about its implementation in services.
Applying six sigma to services is still limited. This paper provides a review and a pilot
study on six sigma application for library services with emphasis on necessary critical
success factors and key performance indicators for a project to be successful.
Keywords: Six sigma, service sector, CTQ, KPIs, CSFs, library services

1. INTRODUCTION
While quality management tools have existed
for a long time, their use is still not widely
implemented in services sector. The emergence
of six sigma has renewed interest in the scientific
management of service industries.
The basic elements of six sigma are really
not new. Statistical process control, histogram,
run chart, failure mode and effect analysis,
cause and effect diagram, and other tools have
Received 30 May 2007

been in use for some time. Six sigma offers a
framework that unites these basic quality tools
with high-level management support.
Since the introduction of six sigma in the
1980s, there have been many success stories
from companies like Motorola, General Electric,
and Allied Signal. The majority of these stories
are from the manufacturing sector. The service
sector, barring the healthcare and banking
industries, are lagging behind in applying and
reaping the benefits of six sigma.
35

2. WHAT IS SIX SIGMA?
Sigma (σ), a Greek alphabet, is used in
mathematics and statistics to define standard
deviation. The sigma scale of measurement is
perfectly correlated to such characteristics as
defects-per-unit, parts-per-million defects, and
the probability of a failure. Six is the number
of sigma measured in a process, when the variation
around the target is such that only 3.4 outputs
out of one million are defective. Coronado and
Antony1 has pointed that six sigma methodologies
have recently gained wide popularity because
six sigma has proved to be successful not only
at improving quality but also at large cost savings
along with these improvements. So, an organisation
needs to adopt smarter six sigma solutions that
are linked to bottom line benefits. Kumar2 stated
that six sigma is a statistical measurement,
which provides the opportunity and discipline
to eliminate mistakes, improve morale, and save
money. Doing things rightly and keeping them
consistent are the basic ideas behind six sigma.
A
fundamental objective of six sigma is to achieve
customer satisfaction and continuous improvement
in processes.
According to Harry3, CEO of Six Sigma
Academy, Phoenix, USA:
Six sigma is a well-structured, disciplined,
data-driven methodology for eliminating
defects, waste, or quality control problems
of all kinds in manufacturing, service delivery,
management, and other business activities
It is a business strategy that allows companies
to drastically improve their performance by
designing and monitoring everyday business
activities in ways that minimise waste and
resources while increasing customer
satisfaction.
According to O'Neill and Duvall4, six sigma
is a disciplined quality improvement methodology
that focuses on moving every process that touches
the customers’ every product and service towards
near-perfect quality. It is a measure of the company's
quality. Maleyeff and Krayenvenger5 noted that
six sigma implies three things: statistical
measurement, management strategy, and quality
culture. It is a measure of how well a process
is performing through statistical measuring of
36

quality level. It is a new management strategy
under leadership of the top management
responsible for quality innovation and total customer
satisfaction. It is also a quality culture. It provides
the way to do things right the first time and to
work smarter using data information. It also provides
an atmosphere to solve many critical-to-quality
(CTQ) problems through team efforts.

3. APPLICATION OF SIX SIGMA IN
SERVICES SECTOR
Just as for manufacturing, defects found
in service incur a cost to either scrap or to rework.
Examples include the need to re-contact a
customer to verify an order, providing an incorrect
service, providing a substandard service or even
over service or providing more than what is required.
Service organisations such as healthcare
and finance have been implementing six sigma
and are registering benefits. The breadth of
applications is now expanding to other services
including call centers and human resource and
product support services6.
Literature review shows that most applications
are limited to service industries in North America
and the European countries, but it is the financial
benefits of six sigma that have been publicised,
instead of discussing gain in terms of process
improvement. Also, important to note is that
the applications emphasised the proper
identification of critical success factors
(CSFs), CTQ characteristics, and key performance
indicators (KPIs). These factors have been
discussed here.

3.1 Critical Success Factors
Critical success factors are necessary for
the success of any six sigma effort. The literature
review shows that managements’ commitment;
education and training; culture change; and
financial benefits are the most important CSFs
for the successful application of six sigma in
services. Other CSFs include customer focus,
clear performance metrics, and organisational
understanding of work processes.

3.2 Critical-to-quality Characteristics
Critical-to-quality characteristics are the
key measurable indicators of a product or process
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

whose performance standards or specifications
limits must be met to satisfy the customer. In
simple term, CTQs are what customers expect
of a product or service. Irrespective of differences
among services, there exist some common CTQs
like time (service time, waiting time, and cycle
time), cost, employee behaviour, and information
(accurate and timely information).

4.2 Measure
To become familiar with the different library
processes, an audit was carried out. The audit
process included:
Selection of the processes to be audited
A critical examination of selected process
Developing the improved processes.

3.3 Key Performance Indicators
Key performance indicators show the success
or failure outcome of a process. The outcome
of six sigma projects is usually expressed in
financial terms. This leads to a direct measure
of achievement that is easy to understand7. Various
KPIs are financial benefits, efficiency, cost
reduction, time to deliver, the quality of the service,
customer satisfaction, and reduced variation.
For a six sigma project to be successful, the
proper identification of CTQs and KPIs is
necessary. A pilot study on six sigma application
for library services identified the CTQs and KPIs
specific to library services. Some of the CTQs
and KPIs are similar to those from other services.
This suggests and is intuitively so, that different
services have similarities in the process
characteristics.

4. LIBRARY SERVICES AND SIX
SIGMA APPLICATION
Library is a place where knowledge is
discovered. Driven by this philosophy, the present
study focused on using the DMAIC (define,
measure, analyse, improve, control) methodology
to improve the efficiency of a local library. The
following process improvement steps were taken
for this pilot study.

4.1 Define
Define the problem and what the user
requires8. The define phase sets the expectation
of the improvement of project and maintenance
of focus of six sigma strategy on user's requirement.
The objective here was to improve services offered
by the library in order to make these more efficient.
This required a review of the CTQs and KPIs
such as process costs, staffing level, and outcome
measures. The scope of this study included
technical service process, library automation,
and digital services. The tool used included writing
up the project charter.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

A critical examination of the library process
during the audit helped to identify the important
CTQs and KPIs (Table 1). These became the
basis to develop improved processes.
Table 1. Important library CTQs and KPIs
determined from the pilot study

CTQs

KPIs

Time
Staff level
Cost of process
Volume of output
Staff development
Timely and quality service
Accessibility
Image and reputation
Positive customer
experience

A brief explanation of the CTQs determined
from the study have been given below:
(i)

Time: This involves the time to process user's
requests through telephone,e-mail or in
person, and time spent on checking, updating
and shelving the library resource such as
books, journals, microfilms, etc.

(ii) Staffing level: This refer to the library staff
involved in the technical services, loans,
and user services, and library automation
and digital services
(iii) Cost of process: This refers to the cost
involved in technical services, loans, and
user services, and library automation and
digital services
(iv) Volume of output: This includes over-thecounter transactions and also transactions
using the self-service machines.
The KPIs of the study have been discussed
below:
37

(i)

Staff development: Involves developing the
skills of the staff through education and
training

(ii) Timely and quality service: Needs to be
value-added and proactive
(iii) Accessibility: To make the books and digital
library services available as quickly and
as efficiently as possible
(iv) Image and reputation: This is the status
of the library as seen from a customer's
point to view
(v) Positive customer experience: To improve
the physical ambience of the library premises
and to add features such as laptop charging
areas etc., to make the library users feel
comfortable.
The tools used for this phase included
interviewing the library in-charges of the various
processes being used by the library.

4.3 Analysis
Using process mapping, and causes and
effects diagramming, the present status of the
library processes was identified. The following
shortcomings were identified:
Short time frame for processing requests
sent to technical services
Lack of verification of the claims submitted
by vendors
Manual inputting and processing of the claims
by vendors was laborious
While physically processing the items, there
was some degree of work duplication in
the receiving and cataloguing sections.

(ii) Reduction in the cost incurred due to claim.
An evaluation system can be created
(iii) Initiation of a process of automated inputs
as well as designing the workflow based
on the total process, i.e., receiving and
cataloguing.
The above improvement may also help in
enhancing the accessibility of library resources,
which would in turn improve the image and
reputation of the library.

4.5 Control
Controlling the process, to make sure that
defects do not recur, removes the root cause
of the problem. All possible related problems
of a specific problem identified in the analysis
phase can be tackled in the control phase. Control
mainly defines plans specifying process monitoring
and corrective action; provides systematic reallocation of resources to ensure the process
continues in a new path of optimisation; and
ensures that conditions of the new process are
documented and monitored. This would involve
training the library staff on the improved processes
and also through monitoring the system such
as by data collection.

5. CONCLUSION
The planned framework and focus on process
improvement are the major strengths of six sigma.
Service industries can utilise this framework,
and can benefit by identifying important parameters
like CTQs and KPIs. The similarities among
these parameters across different services provide
an initial basis for service providers to apply
six sigma. The pilot study identified a number
of important CTQs and KPIs unique to libraries,
and that it is entirely possible to tailor a range
of six sigma tools fors various library services.

4.4 Solutions

REFERENCES

A complete analysis of the library provided
answers on how the above shortcomings could
be eliminated. The solutions suggested to
overcome the deficiencies were:

1. Coronado, R. & Antony, J. Critical success
factors for the implementation of six sigma
projects in organisation. The TQM Mag.,
2002, 14(2), 92-99.

(i) Change in time frame to process requests
from daily basis to monthly basis

2. Kumar, P. Six sigma in manufacturing.
Production Journal, 2002, 43(2), 196-202.

38

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

3. Harry, M.J. Talk about six sigma. Green
Belt Training Report. General Electric
Company, India, 2001.
4. O'Neill, M. & Duvall, C. A six sigma quality
approach to workplace evaluation. J. Facil.
Manag., 2004, 3(2), 240-53.
5. Maleyeff, J. & Krayenvenger, D.E. Goal setting
with six sigma mean shift determination.
Air Engg. Aero. Tech., 2004, 76(2),
577-83.

6. Bott, C.; Keim, E.; Kim, S. & Palser, L.
Service quality six sigma case studies. In
ASQ's 54th Annual Quality Congress.
pp. 225-31.
7. Goh, T.N. A strategic assessment of six
sigma. Quality Reliability Engineering, 2002,
18(1), 403-10.
8. Henderson, K.M. & Evans, J.R. Successful
implementation of six sigma: Benchmarking.
Int. J. Benchmarking, 2002, 7(4), 260-82.

Contributors

Ms Chitra Kaushik received her Bachelor’s and Master’s degrees in Library
& Information Science from Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra and MPhil from
Madurai Kamaraj University, Madurai. Her areas of interest include IT application
in libraries, digital libraries, library software, and library management, TQM, and
six sigma application in libraries. Presently, she is working in DAV (PG) College,
Karnal, Haryana.

Prof. Ashu Shokeen obtained her Master’s in Library Science from Punjab
University and PhD from Jiwaji University, Gwalior. Her areas of interest include
library management, TQM application in library, user study, user education,
digital library, and library software. At present, she is working as Professor
in the Department of LIS, Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra.

Dr Dinesh Khanduja is working as Assistant Professor at National Institute
of Technology, Kurukshetra. He obtained his Bachelor ’s and Master ’s degrees
in Mechanical Engineering and PhD on Productivity and Operations Management
from the National Institute of Engineering & Technology, Kurukshetra. He has
over 35 publications to his credit. His areas of interests include productivity
engineering, entrepreneurship, operations management, energy management
and six sigma application.

Mr Prabhakar Kaushik is working as Assistant Professor at the NC College
of Engineering, Israna (Panipat), Haryana. He obtained degree in Mechanical
Engineering from the National Institute of Engineering & Technology, Kurukshetra
and MTech in Production Engineering from the Guru Nanak Dev Engineering
College, Ludhiana. His areas of interest include six sigma programme, quality
management and production engineering.

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(5)

39

