DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 27, No. 6, November 2007, pp. 3-11
© 2007, DESIDOC

Mechanisms for Protection of
Agricultural Innovations in India
R. Kalpana Sastry
National Academy of Agricultural Research Management
Rajendranagar, Hyderabad-560 030
E-mail:kalpana@naarm.ernet.in

ABSTRACT
The paper discusses various conventions/treaties/agreements affecting agriculture
innovation systems, and the legal mechanisms existing in India for such innovations. It
raises concerns on how the policy environment and governance is affecting the
agriculture at large, and agri-based products in particular. It also discusses the role of
various agencies including public, private and NGOs in India in protecting vast biodiversity
and the measures they need to take to meet the challenges related to issue of IP protection
related to agriculture in the country.
Keywords: Agriculture innovation, CBD, CITES, IPPC, TRIPS, UPOV, ITPGRFA

1.

INTRODUCTION

Distinct paradigm shifts in agricultural
systems are progressively reorienting
mechanisms and mode of agricultural research
and innovation systems all over the world
including India. Encouraging results and broad
commercial prospects are catalysing forces 1
for new players including private sector to
be part of this. However, the entry of new
players and opening of markets in global
arena has also brought new equations on
owning of intellectual property (IP) and resultant
difficulties in accessing inputs for research.
The role of intellectual property rights (IPRs)
in international trade, the global economy
and international relation has grown considerably,
especially since 1970s2. IPR-protected products,
technologies and services are major exports
and rights manifesting in form of licenses

to use the patented processes, products,
designs, trademarks or copyrights. All these
developments necessitated legal protection
mechanisms to be in place 3 .
Over the last few decades, several
agreements at various international fora have
been negotiated and adopted in order to
enhance and better the livelihood, and to
help the nations achieve the targets set in
the millennium development goals. Some of
these are of direct relevance to sustainable
agriculture, enhanced trade and ensuring better
environment. The agreements include Convention
of Biological Diversity (CBD), 1992; Convention
on Trade in Endangered Species (CITES),
1973; International Plant Protection Convention
(IPPC), 1997; International Union for the Protection
of Plant Varieties (UPOV), 1978 and 1991;
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, 2000; Trade
3

Related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS),
1994; and the International Treaty on Plant
Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture
(ITPGRFA), 2001. These international
conventions/treaties/agreements
have
comprehensive provisions for conservation
and sustainable use of, and access to genetic
resources and for sharing of benefits derived
from their use 4. Concurrently, new emerging
regimes in protection mechanisms for innovations
at the global levels are impacting the access,
transfer, and use of biological/genetical resources
for furthering the research and developmental
activities in all fields of agriculture (Table 1).

researches are often supplemented by the
contribution of farmers or grassroot innovators.
Thus, the primary inputs for the agricultural
systems are from the very biodiversity of
which agrobiodiversity is a part 6 . This part
feeds, nurtures people and includes genetic
resources (GR) for food and agriculture, livestock,
fish and non-domesticated resources for all
ecosystem7. GRs have traditionally been made
available on unrestricted basis and have
contributed immensely in many fields of plant
protection like biological control, microbial
pesticides, and in engineering of resistant
plants.

All these agreements have thus led several
national governments, including India, to put
in place the commensurate and compliant
mechanisms and instruments. Some of the
legal instruments passed by the Indian Parliament
as part of compliance to the TRIPS include:
The Patents Act, 1970 (No. 39 of 1970);

However, the developments towards providing
a better platform for international trading
including agriculture have led to private property
rights and have necessitated the need to relook at the present framework for the issues
like ownership of these resources. Apprehensions
on marked dichotomy between use of unrestricted
biological resources and property rights regimes
are becoming conscientious issues leading
to questionable access to control on and
ownership of agrobiodiversity 8 especially in
the developing countries including India.
Monopolies on new technologies have resulted
in problems of excess ownership rights and
mandatory gains 9 .

The Patents (Amendment) Act, 1999
(No. 17 of 1999); Patents (Amendment)
Act, 2002 (No. 38 of 2002); The Patents
(Amendment) Act, 2005 (No. 15 of 2005);
The Geographical Indications of Goods
(Registration and Protection) Act, 1999; and
The Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers
Rights Act, 2001 [PPV and FR Act) (No. 53
of 2001)]. Apart from these, the Government
of India also enacted an umbrella legislation
called the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 (No.18
of 2003). Consequently, the operational
mechanisms and setting up of the regulatory
bodies is now in process. That the mechanisms
are in place indicate towards creating an
enabling environment of actualising and ensuring
complementation for positive synergies towards
building strong IPs in products or processes
(Table 2).
It is important to recognise that a productive
and sustainable agriculture sector is critical
to achieve economic growth and poverty
reduction. Farmers and professional scientists
continuously use the native biological sources,
often recombine them as inputs to create
new varieties or new processes based on
traditional knowledge to combat biotic agents
in order to sustain productivity as economic
and environmental conditions change5. These
4

2.

AGRICULTURAL INNOVATIONS
SYSTEMS

2.1 Legal Mechanisms in India
India has made significant progress in
its domestic legal framework in the last ten
years. The objectives and obligations of the
signatories of each legal entity have been
tabulated in Table 2. After a prolonged debate
on the Sui Generis option under Article 27.3
(b) of the TRIPs Agreement, India’s response
to its obligations was finally promulgated as
the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’
Rights Act, 2001. This is perhaps the most
progressive act in plant variety protection
(PVP) adopted by a developing country. The
will to provide equal rights to breeders and
farmers is considered farsighted insofar as
it indicates a clear understanding that shaping
the new regime requires assignment of property
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

Table 1. Various international treaties/conventions affecting agriculture innovation systems

Treaty/Agreements/
Convention

Objectives

Convention on International
Trade in Endangered Species
of Wild Fauna & Flora, 1975

Ensures international trade in specimens of wild animals and plants under strict
regulation and to ensure their further survival

International Convention for
the Protection of New Varieties
of Plants, 1978; 1991

Grants and protects breeders’ rights

Convention on Biological
Diversity, 1992

 Conservation of biological diversity
 Sustainable use of its components (biological resources)
 Fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of utilisation of genetic resources

FAO-CGIAR Agreement, 1994

Designated germplasm held in trust in CG centres

Agreement on Trade-related
Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights, 1995

 To promote effective and adequate protection of IPR

Global Plan of Action (GPA),
1996

 Developed State of World’s PGFRA

Cartagena Protocol, 2000

Safe transfer, handling and use of living modified organisms (LMOs) resulting from
modern biotechnology that may have adverse effects on conservation and
sustainable use of biological diversity taking also into account the risks to human
health, and specifically focusing on transboundary movements

International Treaty on Plant
Genetic Resources for Food &
Agriculture of FAO, 2001

 Conservation and sustainable use of plant genetic resources for food and

 To ensure IPR themselves do not become barriers to legitimate trade

 20 priority areas under four groups

agriculture (PGRFA)
 Fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of their use in harmony with

CBD for sustainable agriculture and food security
Agreements on Sanitary and
Phyto-sanitary measures

 Provides basic rights namely sovereign right, scientifically justifiable to protect

the health and safety of their citizens, animals, plants and the environment in
which they live as defined to the member countries
 Allows justified discrimination in contrary to non-discrimination of other
agreements. These measures in any case would constitute a disguised
restriction on international trade
 Provides harmonisation of the members to have standards based on
international guidelines where ever they exist in compliance to Codex
Alimentarius (CODEX), International Office of Epizootics (OIE) and International
Plant Protection Convention (IPPC) which should be subjected to periodic
review

rights to all concerned players where appropriation
takes place 10. With operationalisation of the
Act with effect from October 2005, the onus
now rests with the authorities to implement
it in its true element.
The CBD had its origins in environmental
concerns and recognises the members’ sovereign
rights over their natural biological resources.
The IP issues form only a part of the concerns
of CBD and address directly the origin, value,
rights and benefits associated with the natural
resources and the development of traditional
knowledge. In order to address the challenges
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

to India for asserting its rights over natural
resources, the Biological Diversity Act 2002
(No.18 of 2003) aims to provide conservation
of biological diversity, sustainable use of its
components, and fair and equitable sharing
of the benefits arising out of the use of
biological resources and knowledge. It strives
to put limits on access to the biological
resources or related knowledge including
prior intimation to the National Biodiversity
Authority (NBA) and State Biodiversity Boards
(SBB). On issues of IPRs too, prior consent
from the concerned authority is now required
thus enforcing a certain amount of discipline
5

Table 2. Various legal mechanisms in India for agricultural innovative systems

Act
The Biological
Diversity Act, 2002

Objectives




Promotion of conservation
and sustainable utilisation
Securing benefits for local
people
Regulation of access to
biological resources of
India

Major Obligations









The Protection of
Plant Variety &
Farmer’s Rights
(PPV&FR) Act,
2001





To establish an effective
system for protection of
plant varieties, the rights
of farmers and plant
breeders
To encourage the development of new varieties
of plants










Indian Forest Act,
1927; Wild life
Protection Act,1972;
Environment
Protection Act, 1986;
Coastal Regulation
Zone Rules, 1991,
Andaman &
Nicobar Islands

Diverse
biodiversity-trade
ranges from live animals/
plants to products

Biosafety Clearing
House Mechanism–
MoEF

National node for adhering to
stipulations in CP



Indian Patent Act,
1970; 1999; 2002 &
2005

Novel, inventive and useful
innovations
















6

Mandatory approval from National Biological Authority for
access and use of biological resource occurring in India
(Sec.3)
Regulation by the Boards at national (Sec. 4) and at state
levels (Sec. 7), for access, transfer or exchange of biological
resources including use of genetic resource inventions and
traditional knowledge (TK) (Sec.19)
Committed to oppose grant of IPRs in any country outside
India on any Indian Biological resource [Sec. 18 (4)]
Application for any IPR resulting from invention based on
research or information on biological resource obtained from
India not to made without approval of National Biodiversity
Authority (Sec.6, 19,20)
Ensure equitable benefit sharing on benefits arising out of use
of accessed biological resources, their byproducts,
innovations and practices, knowledge in accordance with
mutually agreed terms (Sec. 21)
To establish an authority (PPVF&FR Authority) (Sec. 3) to
provide for registration of extant varieties, developing
characterisation and documentation of varieties registered,
farmers’ varieties and compulsory cataloguing facilities of all
varieties (Sec. 8)
Establish Plant Varieties Registry (Sec. 12)
Maintain national register of plant varieties (Sec. 13)
Process for registration of plant varieties found confirming to
criteria laid for eligible applicants (Sec. 14 to 22)
Ensure farmers rights (Sec. 39) and Rights of Communities
(Sec. 41)
MoEF–Reg. Deputy
Directors (Wildlife Preservation)–Issue permits for trade
CMFRI
All others for protection of flora/fauna in India

AIA; Biosafety clearing house
Documentation of risks to environment
Law of land
Disclosure of source of origin
Written disclosure on origin and source of genetic resources
Deposit of biological materials in international
depository authority (IDA)
No grant for TK
No patents for plants
Sui Generis system for plants

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

to the IPR system. It also entitles the authorities
to oppose grant of IPRs outside India on any
biological resources obtained from India. Benefit
sharing concept has also been integrated
into the Act thus addressing rights of holders
of local knowledge and helping towards facilitating
better living standards to benefit claimers
(BD Act, 2002). The present tools for
implementation are material transfer agreements
(MTAs), prior informed consent (PIC), and
applications for import/export of materials
between countries. Since India is a party to
the Convention and as a consequence of
enactment of BD Act, 2002, the Government
of India notified the Biological Diversity Rules,
2004. The essence is now on guidance and
compliance by the stakeholders. This Act
fulfils the Indian obligations under CBD-TRIPS
regime with the main aim to protect biological
diversity for sustainable use and to uphold
the sovereignty over the biological resources
of the country.
The WTO-TRIPS Agreement of 1995, which
is binding on all member countries, provides
minimum norms and standards in respect of
protection of IPRs in several categories: patents,
copyrights, trademarks, geographical indications,
industrial designs, layout designs of integrated
circuits, and trade secrets. TRIPS incorporates
provisions from many existing international
IP agreements like the Paris and Berne
Conventions. It also provided a transition
period of five years (till 1 January 2000) to
give effect to the provisions of the agreement.
In the case of product patents in some areas
of technology, this period was extended up
to 1 January 2005. India had amended its
various laws and acts (copyright law, patent
act, trademark act, geographical indication
of goods act, designs act, and semiconductor
integrated circuits layout design act) to be
in line with the minimum requirements specified
by the Agreement. It may be recalled that
prior to this Agreement innovations in living
organisms (plants, animals) or the biological
processes that produce them were not protectable
as IP.
The patent law also excludes from
patentability all inventions arising out of the
use of traditional knowledge (Patent Act,
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

1970). The legal position on patents on plant
parts, cells, cell lines, genes and mitochondria,
all of which are already patentable in developed
countries, is still in development stage, and
initial case laws on this would clarify the
thinking.
Based on the available options through
the legal mechanisms in the present day
innovation systems in India for agriculture,
the possible IPs may be:


Patents that can be used to protect and
get benefits from their IP (with regard to
their traditional-based innovations or
inventions) or can be used to defend
their traditional knowledge (in instances
where the existence of traditional knowledge
as prior art is revealed during the examination
of a patent application, thereby providing
grounds for refusal).



Geographical indications and trademarks,
which could be used to protect plant
protection products derived from traditional
knowledge in rural sector and can offer
a strong element of cultural identification.



Trade secrets, which could protect traditional
agri-based knowledge, especially where
such knowledge is held exclusively by
a particular group within a community
towards crop protection.



Designs, which can protect the delivery
mechanisms used in agriculture like pest
control, fertiliser applications.



Agreements and contracts based on
principles of prior informed consent (PIC),
mutually agreed terms (MAT), which can
pave for amicable modus operandi in
the highly complex and dynamic environment
of high-end agricultural research leading
to development of technological innovations
and products derived from the use of
various biological resources. It is necessary
to realise that a great care must be
taken to ensure that the rights provided
are neither insufficient nor excessive in
terms of enhancing social and economic
welfare. They can perhaps lead to reducing
rate of innovation, which may be a roadblock
7

in the race to keep pace with global
developments. However, the present
attempts in India are to balance and
adopt a wait and watch approach as the
statutory system evolves.
Even as the emerging framework gets
evolved, it is unclear whether farming community
can exercise its right to oppose grant of
patent or IP. It is also unclear what kind of
evidence is needed to prove priority and how
these three legislations would ensure access
and benefit sharing (ABS). The grants of
patent rights on wound healing properties of
turmeric (US Patent 5,40,1,504), fungitoxic
properties of neem extract (EP No. 43,6257)
or on basmati rice (US Patent 5,66,3,484) 11
and several other cases indicate the dangers
that patents or IPs can create in biopiracy
rather than bioprospecting 12,13. There is a
need for digital databases of aforesaid registration,
to link local information to global, and from
one agency to another and a need to constantly
search Indian and global databases of IPR
application claims. This electronic vigilance
will help NBA and other agencies to locate
any claims infringing on prior local knowledge,
so as to oppose the grant of IPR protection.

3.

DOCUMENTATION OF
BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY

Yet another way for promoting sustainable
use and equitable benefit sharing while conserving
the biological diversity is the Peoples Biodiversity
Register. Several agencies have independently
initiated registration of biodiversity knowledge
and management priorities of various social
sectors to foster sustainable development
and to protect the local interests against
the global interests through conciliatory rather
than conflicting approach 14 . Table 3 gives a
tabulation of some efforts of documentation
of biological resources and associated traditional
knowledge in the country.
From the foregoing, it is evident that
IPRs, especially patents, can stimulate industrial
interest in natural products. India is a potential
area for several players to enter and take
advantage of its rich bio-heritage. While it
is essential that an enabling environment is
8

needed to attract more capital for such ventures,
it is necessary to ensure within this IPR
regime, that the objectives of the CBD are
attained and governance climate helps conserve
through sustainable use of the biodiversity
and provide rights to the providers 15 . The
analysis of Kani-Jeevani, the first case of
benefit sharing model in India, reveals the
positive attitude of the patent holder (Tropical
Botanic Garden and Research Institute) to
share the license fee and royalty generated
on drug, ‘Jeevani’ with the tribe, Kani 16. The
tribe was acknowledged as holders of the
knowledge of properties of extract called
‘Jeevani’ from the plant Trichopus Zeylanicus.
But the major obstacle was the slow and
tortuous process in the government to formulate
the process of transfer of the benefits 17. The
other hurdle was the claim of the Forest
Department for the share in the royalty benefits
in view of the fact that the land where the
plant was growing belonged to the Forest
Department. But, it is illegal picking by the
outsiders, which is damaging the plant population.
Hence, while this is a successful model of
benefit sharing and recognition of contributions
of traditional knowledge holders, equitable
benefit sharing and sustainable use of biodiversity
cannot easily be achieved unless the sovereign
governments recognise the basic rights of
the people and help through an ‘enabling
environment’.

4.

CONCLUSION

It is evident that the policy environment
and governance affecting agriculture at large
and agri-based products in particular is
undergoing a significant change during the
past decade. All stakeholders of agricultural
research in India need to be aware of the
statutory requirements as they develop new
products and processes. The system needs
to be able to support knowledge holders in
rural communities who often lack the knowhow
and financial resources to take advantage of
the IP system, either in its present or in any
further evolved form. For this, it is essential
to develop next generation manpower in IP
management as related to agri-based activities.
Public organisations would need to provide
the technological backstopping to knowledge
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

Table 3. Documentation of biological resources and associated TK in India

Activity/Year launched

Agency

Type of Agency

Description of activity
undertaken

National Biodiversity
and Strategy Action
Plan, 1999

Ministry of Environment and
Forests, UNDP; Kalpavriksh;
Biotech Consortium, India

Public-Private

Assessment and stock-taking
of biodiversity-related
information at national and
state levels

National Innovation
Foundation, 2000

Dept. of Science & Tech.
Indian Institute of
Management (IIM)

Public

Register and support grass
root innovations

Biodiversity Plan

Govt of Karnataka

Public

State laws on biodiversity

Mission Mode Project on
collection, documentation
and validation of indigenous technical knowledge,
2002- 03

Indian Council of Agricultural
Research

Public

Documentation and registration of TK

TK Digital Library (TKDL),
2006

Council of Scientific &
Industrial Research

Public

Int. Library on Traditional
Knowledge

People’s Biodiversity
Registers, 1995

Foundation for Revitalisation
of Local Health Traditions

NGO

Records the status, uses and
management of living
resources

Community Biodiversity
Register, 1995

Indian Institute of Science

Public

Provides spaces for the rights
to communities about their
biological and cultural heritage

Conservation Movement

Research Foundation for
Science, Technology and
Ecology

NGO

Agro-biological conservation of
indigenous
varieties;
32
community seed banks

Movement for Securing
Benefits for Local
Communities

Gene Campaign

NGO

Collection, characterisation
traditional varieties and
practices

Movement for Securing
Benefits for Local
Communities

Several other NGO’s,
peoples movementformal/informal

Private

Recognition of TK/practices,
conservation, identifying
holders of knowledge

Honey Bee Network, 1996
National Biodiversity and
Strategy Action Plan, 1999

Sristi

NGO

Document innovative
practices of farmers/
artisans

Database

MS Swaminathan Research
Foundation

Private

Document contributions of
tribal groups for securing
benefits

Village Registry, 1997

Pattuvam Village, Kerala

Public

Produced a registry of genetic
resources (GR)

Registration of Plant
Germplasm, 1996

NBPGR, ICAR

Public

Provides recognition to those
associated with the development and identification of
improved or unique germplasm
and genetic stocks and is
considered as defensive or soft
protection option

Source: Collected and compiled from various sources by the author.

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

9

IPR regime serve the needs of contemporary
and traditional knowledge experts and
communities in third world? In Strategic
Issues of Industrial Property Management
in a Globalising Economy, edited by
Thomas Cottier, et al. Hart Publishing,
1999, pp.119-129.

tribe: Model experimented by Tropical
Botanic Garden and Research Institute.
Paper presented at International Conference
on Medicinal Plants, 16-19 February 1998.
National Institute of Advanced Studies,
Bangalore.

16. Pushpangadan, P.; Rajasekhran, S. &
George, V. Benefit sharing with Kani

17. Bagla, P. Bioprospecting: Model Indian
deal generates payments. Science, 1999,
283(5408), 1614-15.

Contributor

Dr R. Kalpana Sastry obtained her MSc (Mycology and Plant Pathology) from the Indian
Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi. Later, she completed her PhD in the same
subject and joined the Indian Council of Agriculture Research, New Delhi, in 1984. Till 1996,
she worked as Plant Pathologist researching in disease management areas in oilseeds
and plantation crops. Her work was part of the Govt of India’s Technology Mission
Programme on Oilseeds. In 1996, she joined National Academy of Agricultural Research
Management, Hyderabad, where she is working in Agricultural Research Systems
Management Policy Division as the Principal Scientist. She was a FAO Fellow, Asian Institute
of Technology, Bangkok in Educational Technology (May-August 2000). A holder of PG
Diploma in Patent Law from the National Academy of Legal Studies and Research (NALSAR),
she is actively involved in research centering policy issues in thfor the National Agricultural
Research System in India. In addition, she is part of the team for facilitating IP portfolios
for stakeholders like farmers, and traders’ organisations. Patent facility services from her
team have been rendered to several scientists and farmers in National Agricultural Research
System of India. She is a recognised faculty on IP and WTO issues in agriculture at national
and international fora. Her areas of interest include agricultural innovation and intellectual
property systems.

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

11

