DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 27, No. 6, November 2007, pp. 13-18
© 2007, DESIDOC

Geographical Indication and Knowledge
Capital in Evidence-Based Society
H.S. Siddamallaiah
National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Science
Hosur Road, Bangalore-560 029
E-mail: sidda@nimhans.kar.nic.in
ABSTRACT
It is high time when the IPR has to be considered in a proactive approach and in
consonance with the global development, particularly with business world. The
geographical indication is not just an inventory and evidence creation, it is an intellectual
capital that calls for promotion and creation of a new culture in the business world.
India is very slow and ignorant about many of the aspect of IPR and related legal issues.
This paper discusses some of these issues.
Keywords: Geographical indication, IPR, TRIPS, IP, traditional knowledge

1.

INTRODUCTION

It is possible that the problems or
opportunities in a society exists before one
thinks of a solution or take advantage of it.
The indications or symptoms are there to
foresee the problems or advantages; often
we are aware of symptoms rather than the
actual problem. Albert Einstein stated that
“Today’s problems can not be solved with
the level of thinking that created them”, and
Francis Bacon stated that “A man must
make his opportunity as often as he finds
it”. In context of geographical indication (GI),
it is the way one has to think in building
creative, innovative and effective knowledge
capital in any country. Every human being
search for a solution which is available in
some form or the other, but some acts
immediately and some slowly. If these thoughts
and actions are recorded and are put to use
then they will be helpful for reuse. Also, it

is noticed that simple things works better
than complicated, where use and reuse makes
it a good product or practice. The visualisation
of these ideas require thinking and rethinking,
creating a mental picture around the idea,
recording appropriately with explanation,
opportunities, benefits and perspective. Sharing
of these ideas with proper community of
minds adds more ideas or alternatives. Many
of the products, ideas, practices or services
become important by chance; where refinement
began with the criticism and credence which
leads to analysis in a proper setting, boundaries
and the focus.
In India, many comments are very common;
India has very rich heritage, culture, nature
and practices, but is poor in converting them
into commercial or knowledge capital. India
is rich, but Indian administration is poor;
Indians are crazy of the word foreign and
foreign goods; Internet is a rich technology,
13

but Indian information poor are some of the
other common phrases we almost hear daily.
All these provide clue and a direction as to
where we are lacking. In context of the GI
even the common comments have value as
far as knowledge development is concerned.
However, it is essential that one needs to
understand GI in context of business competition.

2.

GEOGRAPHIC INDICATION
IN BUSINESS SOCIETY

The GI as defined in Wikipedia 1 “is a
name or sign used on certain products which
corresponds to a specific geographical location
or origin (e.g. a town, region, or country)”.
The use of a GI may act as a certification
that the product possess certain qualities or
enjoys a certain reputation because of its
geographical origin. Also, Wikipedia states
that in many countries the protection accorded
to GI by law is similar to the protection
accorded to trademarks, and in particular
certification marks. GI laws restrict the use
of the GI for the purpose of identifying a
particular type of product, unless the product
or its constitute materials originate from a
particular area and/or meet certain standards.
TRIPS 2 Part II—standards concerning
the availability, scope and use of IPRs, Sections
1 and 2 , Article 22, 23, and 24—attributes
to the GI. Article 22 identifies a good
originating in the territory of a member, where
a given quality, reputation or other characteristic
of the good are essentially attributable to its
geographical origin. It specifies that the members
shall provide the legal means to prevent the
use, by any means, in the designation or
presentation of a good that originates (the
true place of origin) in a manner which misleads
the public as to the geographical origin of
the good. It also prevents any use which
constitutes an act of unfair competition, like
registration of a trademark which contains
or consists of a GI, with respect to goods
not originating in that territory.

or accompanied by expressions such as
‘kind’, ‘type’, ‘style’, and ‘imitation’. It also
prevents registration at the request of an
interested party. In the case of homonymous
GI, the Article has provisions where negotiations
shall be undertaken in the Council for TRIPS
concerning the establishment of a multilateral
system of notification and registration eligible
for protection in member countries and needs
that each member shall determine the practical
conditions under which the homonymous
indications in question will be differentiated
from each other, taking into account the
need to ensure equitable treatment of the
producers concerned and that consumers
are not misled.
Article 24, International Negotiations,
Para 4, requires a member to prevent continued
and similar use of a particular GI of another
member in connection with goods or services
by any of its nationals or domiciliary who
have used that GI in a continuous manner
with regard to the same or related goods or
services in the territory of that member either
(i) for at least 10 years preceding 15 April
1994 or (ii) in good faith preceding that date.
In Para 5, where a trademark has been
applied for or registered in good faith or
where rights for a trademark have been acquired
through use in good faith either before the
date of application of these provisions as
defined in Part VI or before the GI has been
protected in the country of its origin, measures
adopted to implement this section shall not
prejudice eligibility for or the validity of the
registration of a trademark or the right to
use a trademark on the basis that such a
trademark is identical with or similar to a GI.
The implication of GI is mainly around
the factors like true origin of the goods,
quality, reputation or other characteristics
of the goods, good faith, not to mislead the
consumers, and not as a act of unfair
competition.

3.
Article 23 in context to additional protection
to GI, e.g., wines and spirits, prevents use
even where the true origin of the good of GI
is indicated or the GI is used in translation
14

POPULARITY IN EVIDENCEBASED SOCIETY

In context of evidence-based society,
Petrosin 3 stated that the challenges reside
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

not only in the dilemma faced by the policy
makers but also in the quality of the evaluation
evidence. Some of these problems are most
effectively addressed by rigorous syntheses
of the literature known as systematic reviews.
The range of quality in systematic reviews
and their general failure, need to be updated
in light of new evidence disseminated beyond
the research community.
In context of GI, there are many factors
like similarities of products or practice, which
originates from different places or from naturebased products. Many of the products first
gain popularity or became favourite locally.
Later they drew attention of the commercial
competition and became familiar internationally
regardless of the usage. Some of the products
got developed and became popular due to
the encouragement or support given by the
foreign companies. These developments are
becoming common due to the global access
and success, sometimes even to inspire
others to produce their own products based
on the popularity without even acknowledging
the original products or practices. Hence, it
has become a compulsion or demand for
each government to initiate protectionist
measures at home and abroad to preserve
markets and to put on record the traditional
knowledge and to bring together trade, cultural,
and environmental aspects.
In context of GI practice, it is becoming
essential to make sure the origin of the
product or practice; if it is a crop, when was
it a cash crop, who planted, harvested, and
processed, and their derivatives including
the social and commercial relationship between
the products and the plantation owners. The
information about the products/practices should
be comprehensive with details like quantity
of the production per year; packaging for
reuses, types of local process and market,
export capability and demand around the
world, number of small producers, development
of new varieties, availability of similar products
elsewhere, and anthropological view about
types of consumers and consumption pattern.
Many of the traditional knowledge emanated
or is associated with the lower strata of
people in the society until it acquired the
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

commercial value. Many of the products or
practices were marketed as fun, till they
become familiar at local level and then
international level, thereby attracting the identity.
Hence, there is a need to identify, document
and promote traditional knowledge and GI
for products and practices in India by integrating
these with social functions and facilitating
exports through technical consultation. The
export programmes of such items, where
international recognition associates with the
lifestyle need to be encouraged.
However, one has to have clarity that
there are many homogenous goods and
processes available in various countries, which
do not impose GI outside or imitation in
manufacturing in other parts of the world.
To tackle such factors, countries need to
have sound policies and laws, and should
protect their industry by imposing several
regulatory measures. To achieve this, countries
need to adopt and create awareness about
the clarity of practice and clear definition
under the TRIPS Agreement. It would be
helpful if the government documents each
product with its specifications and submits
it to the WTO and the World Customs
Organisation to obtain international protection
for exports and to retain classification on
tariff schedules.
The commercial competition is compelling
each country too vigorously to promote
consumption abroad with hope to gain greater
access to niche market through these legal
protections. In some of the cases, bilateral
agreements or the common markets with
other countries on various products and services
are playing a major role.

4.

SUSTAINABILITY MEASURE AND
CONFLICT

The trade measures concerning goods,
services, government procurement, and
investment, policies of sustainable development,
and other processes of integration are required
to attain protection for GI. The dispute settlements
are done by filing complaints through the
WTO, before the Common Market Groups.
Decisions are binding on both conflicting parties.
15

The GI needs to have proper discourse
and status in the agreements with proper
forum and scope, preferably multilateral for
legal standing. It is also important that the
countries should declare national trademarks
for the largest and most important products
and exports for their international protection
and for successful international marketing
and export campaigns, and not just for market
share alone. Obstacles in the international
market may concern classification—products
status of the country in context of trade
agreements—to increase its international
recognition and earnings by highlighting
uniqueness. At the same time, there are
many aspects to face survival amidst global
liberalisation like competition against similar
products, protocol that places a quota on
the import, agreement between nations, constant
development and modernisation of the industry
including certain tax-related issues, environmental
impacts, and issues related to process and
culture. Also, trade/product identification
needs to be associated with proper economic
data, impact of trade restrictions, and potential
exporters and importers.
It would be helpful if economic and political
interests; luxury of goods at the time and
encouragement for production; the knowledge;
experience; and technology is explored to
achieve better exports control over the international
market and the commodity’s price. Proper
documentation helps to predict the line of
control or overproduction, both domestically
and abroad. The country like India needs to
consider about the less-efficient producers,
where subsidies are being provided for
encouraging production as an alternative
source to achieve better export. But the
productivity with quality and environmentfriendly measures and use of good technology
need to maintain for global competition.

5.

PROMOTION OF RURAL/HILL
PRODUCTS

As far as the cultural aspects of GI are
concerned, society is moving from evidence
approach to unique aspect of GI origin and
its ubiquitous presence in society. At the
same time, small farmers and cultivators
16

are bothered about their livelihoods and are
vulnerable to competition because of small
size holdings, migration, land abandonment,
and decrease in importance of their skills.
Hence, it becomes responsibility of the
government and intellectual society to develop
proper documentation and research to enhance
quality, productivity and marketing of rural
products and hill products including varieties,
techniques, extension, marketing issues, postharvest storage, product information, differentiation
and supply chain management including
the specification of products, its offer and
uses.
There are many voluntary and commercial
companies promoting the products for higher
commercial gain with lower incentives to the
producers. The organised effort is an urgent
need to get control over the traditional product
or practice through GI, where it needs to
involve organisations, assistance to producers,
sorting and packaging, the role of the government,
identification problem, financial support, and
quality control/tractability.
While keeping the control, it is essential
to have the details on type of supply chain,
actors, organisation of supply chain and type
of coordination, market evolution, marketing
control, volume of product, product market,
periods, conditioning, supply demand, market
regulation, problems in marketing, and regulatory
framework, details of other similar products
like status of qualification efforts and producers’
experience with organic certification, controlling
body, the expected impacts like economic,
social and environmental impacts.

6.

INSTITUTIONALISATION OF
EFFORTS

There needs a debate on various platform,
in terms of innovations and practices of indigenous
communities, which includes folklore, tangible
or intangible forms of traditional culture, attraction
of international business or as Sui Generis
laws. The institutionalisation and protection
of this knowledge depends on the recognition
of the values of local people, their cultural
heritage, respect for cultural integrity, their
needs, empowerment to exercise their rights,
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

support to customary cultural practices and
better cooperation among the community.
Having the rich culture heritage is not enough,
it is essential to safeguard traditions, culture,
community invention and creativity, legitimate
trading activities, transparency, and mutual
confidence.
There are various aspects of traditional
knowledge like agricultural practices, rituals,
community laws, plant species, herbal medicines,
animal breeds and other community practices
like riddles, names, symbols, dances, drawings,
designs, handicrafts, carvings, textiles,
costumes, and musical instruments which
need to be documented, and which can be
identified with the origin of the country. The
documentation not only helps to solve the
legal issues in context of IP issues, but
also provides opportunity to appropriately
balance between protection and promotion
attributed to a particular geographical origin
and for proper planning for perpetual protection.
This documentation process should become
the input material for community awareness
with proper codes, origin, significance, product
development, and its commercial activities.
The identity of the good for GI should meet
certain conditions and standards or collective
marks used by members of TRIPS Agreement.
The institutionalisation needs to be undertaken
with integrated fabric of the societal activities
that help to cover GI, particularly for the
registration with source-identifiers. Quality
guarantee and business interests of such
goods, in line with the trademark system—
as trademarks, certification marks, or collective
marks for ownership, validity, and right to
use in any country also need to be
institutionalised. The registration may also
have to include materials used, quality, methods
of manufacturing, and accuracy, and a collective
mark to indicate commercial origin of goods
or services in members of a group rather
than origin in one party.

7.

CONCLUSION

India, even now is not much serious in
looking at traditional knowledge as a good
that should conform to quality, grade and
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

other requirements pursuant to standards.
The databases of GI products being created
are not having distributed approach, it has
isolated approach. Some of these databases
are not comprehensive, and have to include
the details of standard practice to meet the
hygiene, appearance, methods, and standards
set by the government of the country, and
specifications established by the certifier.
Hence, imitations by the others would affect
adversely the market price and reputation of
the genuine products, particularly traditional
techniques and patterns. Usually the traditional
producers use cheap materials assembled
poorly. The local products including the
expressions of folklore need to be consolidated
(to protect or to challenge undue IP protection)
by registering the designs like their shape,
motif, design or decoration as a collective
right or otherwise as trademark protection,
collective mark or certification mark.
There are many products under lifestyle
products such as traditional costumes of
Indian women which comprise many pattern,
reflects traditional culture as well as traditional
themes, legends and culture. The protection
of collective rights of indigenous products,
cultural identity, and traditional knowledge
has to be carefully implemented through
law.
Many a time it is observed that multinational
product-line have used many words appropriated
from Indian languages, imagery and folklore
in their logo/website. Also, the title held by
main heroes and the names of the famous
title or languages have been used by changing
the spellings and character, which may hurt
the inhabitants and spiritual healers. Hence,
it is essential that effort should be made to
build a record of culture, projection, different
perception and images. There are many
architecture of the buildings and landscapes
significant for promoting culture including
Fine Arts Gallery showcasing graphic images
in National Gallery catalogue. It is important
to find the potential costumers who may use
these. For doing so, it is necessary to find
out accurate information in every respect
including proper permission of the artist and
the community so that every contributor and
17

practitioners get their share of credits in
society. It is equally important that the customary
laws need to be careful about the foreign
misappropriation products/art like patterns
in textiles, carpets, photographs, and popular
work not in written records or registered.
This disrespect and spiritual offences, which
the artists would have considered imagery,
also need to bring under the laws.
The GI should be considered as a culture
in public education and training. The GI practices
and products can be protected under a variety
of laws like trademark, copyright and industrial
designs. The industrial designs or designs
are concerned with the ornamental or aesthetic
aspect of products like handicrafts, technical
and medical devices, jewellery and other
luxury items. The industrial design do not
protect any technical features of the item.
Some of these are also protected under

copyright law in some of the countries. It is
very difficult to apply IP rights for culture
and cultural products. However documentation,
consolidation as database and registration/
certification is possible for different aspects
of culture, and different type of protection
where knowledge capital plays a role.

REFERENCE
1. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geographical_
indication (Accessed on 4 July 2007).
2. http://www.wto.org/English/docs_e/legal_e/
27-trips_04b_e.htm (Accessed on 2 July
2007).
3. Petrosino, A. Meeting the challenges of
evidence-based policy: The Campbell
collaboration. The ANNALS of the American
Academy of Political and Social Science,
2001, 578(1), 14-34.

Contributor

Dr H.S. Siddamallaiah is currently working as Principal Library and Information
Officer at the National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences (NIMHANS),
Bangalore. He obtained his PhD for his thesis on Design of Integrated Consumer
Health Information Service. Prior to joining NIMHANS, he worked at IIM, Tata Consulting
Engineers, and M.S. Ramaih Medical College all at Bangalore. Dr Siddamallaiah has
number of papers and invited lectures to his credit. He has been professionally
associated as the President, Karnataka State Library Association (2000-2005), and
as an Executive Member of the Society for Science Information. He has also been
academically associated with various universities like Mysore University (Member
of the Board of Studies); Kuvempu University, Shimoga (Expert Member to the
Curriculum development for Choice-based Credit System); Mahasarakham University,
Thailand (Special Invitee for the Curriculum development); and Kanchanaburi Rajbhat
University, Thailand (Consultant). Dr Siddamallaiah has organised both national and
international events. He was Vice President of the Sixth International Congress
in Medical Librarianship held in New Delhi; Conference Director of the Annual
Conference of Medical Library Association of India at National Institute of Virology,
Pune in 2003. He also organised 48th Annual Conference of Indian Library Association
at NIMHANS, Bangalore and Silver Jubilee Conference of MLAI on Standards for
Medical Libraries in India.

18

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

