DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 27, No. 6, November 2007, pp. 19-30
© 2007, DESIDOC

Copyright Issues
J.P. Singh
Directorate of Planning and Coordination
Defence Research & Development Organisation
Ministry of Defence, New Delhi-110 011

ABSTRACT
Libraries and information centres while providing information and document delivery
services need to know about the boundary line of rights granted to the copyright holders
as well as users of the copyrighted material. The paper discusses ownership issues
of copyright, duration of protection, issues related to fair use, and copyright facilitators.
The paper also discusses digital technologies and copyright as well as copyright
protection technologies. Some of the solutions for various copyright problems have also
been proposed.
Keywords: Fair use, DMCA, copyright facilitators, CCC, APS, CLA, CANCOPY, BLDSC, CISTI,
ISI, digital signature, watermarking

1.

INTRODUCTION

No society can progress without innovation
and creativity because social and economic
development depends upon the creativity.
Creators acquire their intellectual properties
after spending a lot of money, time, efforts
and energy. To ensure certain minimum
safeguards of their rights over their creations,
and to provide protection and reward for
their creativity, copyright laws were enacted.
Thus, the basic objective of enactment of
copyright laws is to encourage artists, authors,
musicians, database creators, etc. to create
original works by rewarding them with the
exclusive right for a definite period of time
so that they can exploit their work for financial
gains. Protection provided to the creators
under the copyright laws creates atmosphere
conducive to the creativity, which induces

creators to create more intellectual properties
and also motivates others to put their ideas
into tangible form for the further use of the
society and the generations to come.
In the absence of copyright laws in a
country or weak protection of copyrights,
reputed authors of that country might prefer
to publish their manuscripts with those publishers
in foreign countries where copyright protection
is strong. This may ultimately hinder the
growth of the indigenous intellectual products
of that country. Authors lack infrastructure
and are unable to disseminate their work to
the public for current and potential use. This
breaks the chain between them and the end
users. To provide an outward flow of intellectual
output to society, there is a need to have an
intermediary (publisher), with supportive
infrastructure, who can make the intellectual
19

work in appropriate tangible form for further
dissemination. Generally, publishers have
adequate infrastructure for mass production
and excellent network for distribution. Thus,
the authors grant licensing right of their
work to a publisher for further distribution.
Therefore, most of the creations are a joint
effort of the originator and the distributor.
Copyright law makes a balance to provide
monetary and social benefits derived from
the widespread use of the creative work to
both the parties. To promote the progress of
science and useful art, an exclusive right is
given to the owner of original work to ensure
that others do not unlawfully exploit his work.
A creation is protected under copyright
laws immediately after it is put in any tangible
form, provided that it satisfies the criteria of
‘originality’ and ‘creativity’. It is not necessary
that the work should be novel. The criteria
of novelty are applicable for protection under
the patent laws, whereas, copyright law is
applicable to the original and creative work.
In case two different authors have created
original but identical works without copying
their works in existing forms, both are qualified
for the copyright protection provided their
works have substantial creativity.
A work can be original without being
novel or unique. Thus, to qualify for the
protection under the copyright laws, a work
must be fixed in a tangible medium of expression,
should be original, and a result of at least
some creative efforts.
The term ‘originality’ has not been defined
in copyright laws and has been interpreted
differently in the court of law on case to
case basis. Originality requires a creator to
contribute something more than a ‘merely
trivial’ variation which is recognisably ‘his
own’. A work will be considered ‘original’ if
it owes its origin to the author and was not
copied from some preexisting work. A work
is “fixed” when it is made “sufficiently permanent
or stable to permit it to be perceived, reproduced,
or otherwise communicated for a period of
more than transitory duration”. Copyright only
protects the expression of an idea, not the
idea as such.
20

2.

OWNERSHIP ISSUES

The owner may be an author, an artist,
a painter, a composer, a photographer, a
producer, an engraver or architect, a computer
scientist or a programmer. In case a person,
if delivers any lecture/address/speech in
public, then he or she shall be the first
owner of that lecture/address/speech. In case
a person has delivered/addressed speech
on behalf of another person, such person
shall be the first owner of the copyright
irrespective of who has delivered or addressed
his speech on his behalf. In case of a government
work, the government shall be the owner of
copyright. The owner may also be the performer,
which includes an actor, musician, singer,
choreographer, juggler, acrobat, snake
charmer, etc.
There is a strong debate on the ownership
of copyright in which owner invests money
and energy to make knowledge in tangible
form. The owner makes knowledge costlier,
which adversely affects the progress of the
society. Since prime objective of copyright
is both to reward the creator and development
of the society, technology may be helpful in
closing the wide gap between haves and
have-nots, particularly in India.
The conflict between the copyright owners
and the users is continuously growing as
the cost of storage and processing devices
is decreasing and the availability of digital
technologies within the reach of common
man is increasing. Legislature and judiciary
need to retool copyright laws to make balance
between the rights of the owners and the
interest of the users. Copyright owners are
concerned about losing control over their
work in digitised form and also fear that
their monetary gain would be minimised. At
the same time users are afraid that they
have to take permission for each and every
digitised work before using it.
If an employee of an organisation creates
the work within the scope of his employment
as a part of his official duties, the copyright
vests with the employer. It may be argued
by the employee that the work was created
after the office hours of employment; therefore
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

he is the rightful owner of the copyright. A
dishonest employee may be able to blackmail
the employer. There are methods whereby
such malicious claims of employees can be
avoided. For instance, it should be provided
in an agreement with the employee that if
he creates work other than in the course of
his employment, a written intimation of the
same must be given by him to the employer
within a stipulated period. If he fails to do
so it shall be deemed that such a work was
done by the employee during the course of
his employment with the employer. The following
is a sample clause which could be used as
guidance in the employment contract, so as
to protect the copyright ownership of the
employer and to obviate malicious and false
claims of an employee to the effect that he
has done the work outside the course of
employment:
“If during the period of your employment,
you initiate or make any endeavour to create
any intellectual property after office hours or
outside the scope of your employment, you
shall intimate this fact in writing to the employer
company within three days of such initiation
or endeavour. Similarly on the creation of
any intellectual property, you shall give a
written intimation of this fact to the company
within three days of such completion. On
intimation, the company shall consider your
claim and would intimate you in writing as
to its opinion regarding the same. If the
company is of the opinion that your claim
is justified it shall accept the same and put
it on record. In the event of any dispute
between your claim and the company, it
shall be resolved through arbitration by the
arbitrator, namely (name of the arbitrator).
The arbitrator shall decide the issue/dispute
in accordance with the law. In the event of
your not sending intimation within the stipulated
time frame in terms of the instant clause to
the company, this shall be an evidence and
an admission on after your part that no
intellectual property has been generated or
developed by you after office hours or outside
the employment of the company and the
intellectual property, in dispute, shall be
treated as the ownership of the company”.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

If the work has been created by more
than one person and any of them happens
to be the employee of a company or organization,
the copyright will be jointly with the company
and other contributors.
A researcher, after completing his research
work submits his thesis to his University for
the award of degree. On the basis of evaluation
of thesis and some other requirements, the
researcher is awarded degree. Now the question
comes that who is the first owner of the
copyright, researcher or the university? Copyright
laws do not provide any clear-cut guidelines
in this regard. In case researcher desires to
publish his thesis or gives it to the University
of Microfilm International (UMI) for further
dissemination, the safe way for him will be
to seek permission from the university with
whom he is registered to avoid any legal
problems in future.

3.

DURATION OF PROTECTION

Any work in public domain and the work
for which the copyright has expired, can be
copied by any person freely and without the
permission of the owner. In India literary,
artistic, dramatic and musical work of a
single author is protected during the lifetime
of the author and sixty years after his/her
death. In case of joint authorship, it is protected
during the lifetime of both authors and up to
fifty years after the death of the last surviving
author.
According to the US copyright laws 1 , if
a work was produced prior to 1 January
1978, it is generally unprotected unless it
bears a copyright symbol ©. A copyright
notice/statement is not required for the work
published after 1 March 1988, though the
owners put it as a precautionary measure
for protection against infringement. The work
created before but not published before 1978
has especial rules. For the work created
and first published between 1950 and 1978
the copyright lasts for 95 years after publication.
For the works created and first published
before 1950, the copyright lasts for 28 years
but can be renewed for another 67 years.

21

For works created on or after 1 January
1978, copyright protection is valid from the
moment of its creation until the death of the
author plus 70 years. In case of a “work for
hire”, the protection is valid for a period of
120 years from the date of its creation or
95 years from the date of first publication,
whichever expires first. Most often, the work
for hire is created in the context of an employment
situation, where the employer also qualifies
as the author of the work created by an
employee within the scope of his or her
employment. Since the terms of protection
of copyright varies with the amendment of
copyright, which frequently takes place, it
is better to seek the help of the US Copyright
Office to check the exact status of the copyright
of the works created by the US authors
after 1920.

4.

ISSUES RELATED TO FAIR USE

Fair use has been traditionally defined
as a privilege to those other than the owner
of the copyright to use the copyrighted material
in a reasonable manner without the consent
of the owner. It is associated with the nature
of work, quantity, proportion of the work to
be copied, purpose, intention and motive of
the use as well as economic impact on the
owner’s work.
Librarians and information professionals,
while providing the services to the users,
sometimes infringe the copyrights. They generally
provide photocopies of documents to the
users. Sometimes, this requires permission
from the copyright holder. It may not always
be possible to approach the owner due to
various reasons. Even the intentions of libraries
are not to make profit out of it, but they have
no physical control over the user who has
taken the copy.
Fair use provisions have been made in
the Indian Copyright Act 2 1957 Chapter XI
Clause 52. In its original text, not much
emphasis was given to digitally stored information
because there was not much usage of electronic
technology at that time. However, after
amendments, Section 65 A included provisions
of anti-circumvention measures. Many developed
countries have amended their Copyright Acts
22

to suit current requirements to accommodate
latest technological developments and their
impact on copyright. The US government
passed Digital Millennium Copyright Act 3
(DMCA) in October 1998 (effective from October
2000). Chapter 12 of DMCA deals with copyright
protection and management issues. Its Clause
1201 subclause (a) deals with violations regarding
circumvention of technological measures;
subclause (f) on reverse engineering; and
subclause (g) on encryption research and
permissible activities. However, Clause 1201
subclause (d) grants exemption for nonprofit
libraries, archives, and educational institutions.
It states:
“A nonprofit library, archive or educational
institution, which gains access to a commercially
exploited copyrighted work solely in order to
make a good faith determination of whether
to acquire a copy of that work for the sole
purpose of engaging in conduct permitted
under this title shall not be in violation of
Section 1201 (a) (1) (A)”.
The exemption made available through
the Clause 1201 subclause (d) shall only
apply with respect to a work when an identical
copy of that work is not reasonably available
in another form. In case a nonprofit library,
archive or educational institution that willfully
for the purpose of commercial advantage or
financial gain violates above paragraph, then
it shall, for the first offense, be subject to
the civil remedies and shall for repeated or
subsequent offenses, in addition to the civil
remedies, forfeit the exemption provided above.
This exemption can not be used for defence
purposes.
This Clause does not permits a nonprofit
library, archive or educational institution to
manufacture, import, offer to the public, provide
or otherwise traffic in any technology, product,
service, component or part thereof, which
circumvents a technological measure. In order
to qualify for the exemption under this Clause,
the collections of that library or archive need
to be open to the public or available not only
to researchers affiliated with the library or
archive or with the institution of which it is
a part, but also to other persons doing research
in specialised fields.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

The European Union (EU) Directive 4 on
the Legal Protection of Databases was adopted
on 11 March 1996. Austria, Belgium, Denmark,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland,
Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal,
Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom are
the signatories to this Directive. There are
two basic objectives of the Directive:


To harmonise copyright laws applicable
to the structure of the databases, and



To create a new Sui Generis right which
protects the database makers against
the unauthorised extraction and/or
reutilisation of the whole or a substantial
part of their databases?

Under the Article 5 of the EU Directive,
the author of the database has been given
the following exclusive rights to carry out or
to authorise:


Temporary or permanent reproduction.



Transmission, adaptation, arrangement,
and any other alteration.



Distribution to the pubic.



Communication, display or performance
to the public.



Reproduction, distribution, communication,
display or performance to the public,
translation, adaptation, arrangement or
other alteration.

Article 7 of the EU Directive creates a
new proprietary right for database, namely,
the sui generis right in which the database
makers will have the right to prevent acts of
extraction and/or reutilisation of the whole
or a substantial part of the database. Under
the Directive the database maker has been
defined as the person who takes the initiative
and the risk of investing in the creation of
the database.
The European Union Directive on Copyright
and Related Rights in the Information Society
was approved in May 2001. It entered into
force on 22 June 2001. The provision was
made to prohibit the making of copyrighted
work available on Internet unless authorised
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

by the right holder. It has also made provision
that the member states shall protect against
circumvention of and using devices to circumvent
technology measures that ensure rights, except
in the case of libraries, educational institutions,
teaching and research organisations, disabled
persons, and public security. The main objective
of the directive was to harmonise the law
throughout the member states. Article 6.2 of
the Directive does not only prohibits the
personal act of circumventing the technological
measures, but also the preparatory activities.
Similarly Article 6.3 of the Directive states
that:
“Any technology, device or component
that, in the normal course of its operation,
is designed to prevent or restrict acts, in
respect of work or other subject matter, which
are not authorised by the right holder of any
copyright or any right related to copyright
as provided for by law or the Sui Generis
right provided in the Directive 96/9/EC”.
The Australian Copyright Act 5 1968 was
amended in the year 2000 and is known as
Australian Copyright Amendment (Digital Agenda)
Act 2000. It came into effect on 4 March
2001. According to the Amended Act: A device
or product, or a component incorporated
into a process, that is designed, in the ordinary
course of its operation, to prevent or inhibit
the infringement of copyright in a work or
other subject matter by either or both of the
following means:


By ensuring that access to the work or
other subject matter is available solely
by use of an access code or process
(including decryption, unscrambling or
other transformation of the work or other
subject matter) with the authority of the
owner or licensee of the copyright.



Through a copy control mechanism.

This Law does not prohibits the act of
circumvention itself, but only the preparatory
acts, distinguishing between devices and
services. The following actions are prohibited:


Making the devices, selling, letting for
hire. Offering or exposing for sale or
23

hire, promoting advertising or marketing
the device.


Distributing the device for the purpose
of trade, or for any other purpose that
will prejudicially affect the copyright owner.



Exhibiting the device in public by way
of trade.



Importing the device for certain commercial
purposes.



Making the device available online to an
extent that will prejudicially affect the
copyright owner.

5.

COPYRIGHT FACILITATORS

To overcome the problems of granting
licenses to the users or documents suppliers,
to collect copyright fees from the end users
and to distribute royalties to the actual owners
of the copyright, etc. there is a need to
establish copyright facilitating agencies in
each country. These agencies can work as
switching system among users, documents
suppliers and copyright owners. Some of
the western countries have already established
copyright licensing agencies in this regard.
The functions of these agencies are to negotiate
fees with the copyright holders, i.e., publishers,
authors, etc. and charge the copyright fees
from the users either directly or through
clearing houses. The following are some of
the major licensing agencies worldwide:

to copyright. It functions as intermediary
between the rights of the holders and the
users. It also facilitates and empowers academic
and professional institutions to lawfully use
the copyright protected information. It has
distributed millions of dollar as royalties to
authors of books and contributors to professional
journals. The CCC charges a nominal service
fee for each work. The copyright holders are
required to fill in a Rights Holder Authorisation
Agreement with CCC. The CCC offers the
following four types of services to its users.


Academic Permissions Service (APS):
On behalf of the copyrights holders, CCC
grants permission to academic institutions,
academicians and bookshops for
photocopying of copyrighted materials
for their use in the courses or classroom
handouts. The royalty as set by the
rights holders, is collected from the users.



Electronic Course Content Service (ECCS):
Permission is granted by the CCC to
the users for the digital use of copyrighted
material for storage in electronic form,
course material in electronic form through
a protected password. This password is
issued for a limited period of time.



Transactional Reporting Service (TRS):
The CCC grants instant permission to
libraries, information centres, document
delivery centres, document suppliers,
photocopying shops, information providers,
individuals or organisations involved in
information dissemination and document
supply activities. It collects royalty fees
as set by the copyrights holders.



Foreign Authorisation Service (FAS):
Royalties collected for the photocopying
of the US work in foreign countries is
distributed by the CCC under this service.

5.1 Copyright Licensing Agencies
5.1.1 Copyright Clearance Centre, USA
To use and share the published content
with ease and confidence, at the suggestion
of the US Congress, a not-for-profit organisation
namely, Copyright Clearance Centre6 (CCC)
was founded in 1978. It is a member of the
International Federation of Reproduction Right
Organisation (IFRRO). It helps in creating
global system for licensed content use through
agreements with other Reproduction Right
Organisations. The CCC is playing vital role
in knowledge economy through encouragement
of free flow of knowledge with due respect
24

5.1.2 Copyright Licensing Agency, UK
The Copyright Licensing Agency 7 (CLA)
grants licenses on behalf of the copyright
owners and offers a range of licenses to
copy onto and from paper and also electronic
copying. It does not store and deliver documents
to the end users. It provides means for the
owners to earn a living by creating their
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

works in tangible form. The CLA play significant
role in maintaining the value of their work
and its benefits to the society. It grants
licenses to all organisations including
businesses, charities, public bodies, academic
and professional bodies, government
departments, etc. It issues licenses to institutions
for low volume document delivery (limited to
100 copies per month), transactional document
delivery (unlimited), and press cutting agency
license. It also acts as an agent of the CCC.
5.1.3 Canadian Copyright Licensing Agency
(CANCOPY), Canada
The Canadian Copyright Licensing Agency8
(CANCOPY) is a nonprofit organisation
established by the publishers and writers.
Basic objective of the CANCOPY is to make
safeguard for the reproduction right and the
copyright. It authorises and issues the licenses
to use copyrighted material, collects royalties
and distributes to the owners of copyright.
It also receives royalties from the government
of Canada for the copies made within the
Canadian government.
The CANCOPY distributes royalties to
the ‘Copyright Collective in the Province of
Quebec’ (COPIBEC) or CCC or other agencies,
which further pay the royalties to the right
holders. The CANCOPY represents more
than 3000 Canadian copyright holders including
writers, publishers as well as other foreign
authors and publishers. It is also a member
of the International Federation of Reproduction
Rights Organisation (FRRO) and has made
agreements with other similar organisations.
Its functions are almost similar to the functions
of the CCC.

5.2 Copyright Clearing Houses/
Documents Suppliers
The publishers and licensing agencies
mutually establish the royalty fees distribution
to the right holders by the clearing houses
or documents suppliers. There are a large
number of document suppliers and clearing
houses all over the world. Individuals, libraries
and information centres are getting documents
through these sources. Some of the major
centres are mentioned below.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

5.2.1 The British Library Document Supply
Centre
The British Library Document Supply
Centre9 (BLDSC), an organ of British Library,
subscribes approximately 45,000 titles of
journals with total collection of over 2,50,000
titles. The BLDSC has direct agreement with
the rights holders and also with the CLA. It
holds license from the CLA, which allows it
to make copies beyond the limit of the provisions
for libraries in return for the payment of
royalties set by the copyright owners. The
BLDSC makes payment to the right holders
and also to the CLA on quarterly basis.
5.2.2 Canada Institute for Scientific and
Technical Information (CISTI)
The CISTI 10 has direct agreement with
the publishers. The Canadian clientele indirectly
pay royalty fees through taxation, whereas,
citizen of other countries are charged
fees as established by the CCC. It has different
rates for pre-1996 articles, 1997 articles,
1998 and current articles.
5.2.3 Institute for Scientific Information (ISI)
Document Solution
The ISI 11 either directly pays royalties
to the publishers or through the CCC. The
amount of the royalties varies from publisher
to publisher and is paid on quarterly basis.
It charges, in general, the actual fees charged
by the copyright owners and 20 per cent as
processing fee for each item excluding mailing
and extra expenses.
5.2.4 UMI Info Store
The UMI directly negotiates and licenses
with the publishers about the royalties. Out
of its 20,000 titles, most of the items are
supplied against standard royalty fee per
item. The royalty is distributed to the publishers
on half-yearly basis. However, smaller publishers
are paid on annually basis. While most of
the publishers are paid directly by the UMI,
a few are paid through CCC.
5.2.5 Uncover
It maintains database of journal articles,
which can be searched by the users directly.
25

Article-specific royalty is charged by the
users and paid to the owners of the copyright.
There is no uniform charges from the users
for the articles published by different publishers.

6.

DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES AND
COPYRIGHT

Digital technologies are coming up very
fast. It may be difficult to forecast about the
digital technology that will come up in the
future. It would be appropriate if the copyright
law is modified to address the issues of
protection of exclusive rights of the creators
as soon as new technology is emerged.
Remedial measures in the law with interpretation
in a positive manner should provide protection
by broad statement, which would cover all
aspects of copyright. While making the draft
during the amendment in the Act, expert
opinion of the specialists in the respective
areas should be considered to accommodate
implications of emerging technologies on
the Act.
Digital technology has created very serious
problems to the copyrighted material on one
hand and provided many opportunities for its
exploitation on the other. Creators are under
the grip of fear that digital world would end
the protection of their exclusive rights because
every body will copy every thing freely and
there would be no more creative work. Every
time digital technology comes up with methods
of better reproduction, the copyists make
efforts to free-ride on the labour of others.
Policy makers need to come up with solutions
to curb this practice by providing stricter
measures to curb copyright infringement and
protect the rights of the creators.
Rapid development of digital technology
has led to the new dimensions in storage,
retrieval and dissemination of knowledge. It
has also opened new avenues and opportunities
for the content creators for dissemination of
their work as well as to users who utilise
these works through a variety of modes of
communication. While on one side, these
technologies are available to the users roundthe-clock, which they can access within a
very short duration of time and in a very
convenient way, on the other side, these
26

posed challenges to the copyright protectors,
i.e., lawmakers like, parliamentarians, legislature
and judiciaries; law enforcement agencies
like police, etc. These problems are the
outcome of the followings:


Duplication of copyrighted work is quite
easy and comparatively less expensive.



Quality of copies of copyrighted work is
almost similar to the original and difficult
to differentiate from the originals.



Distribution of the copyrighted works
can be made to a number of users
simultaneously and instantly, irrespective
of their geographical locations.

The following factors have affected the
copyright in digitised environment:


Simplification of reproducibility.



Advancement in technology for compression
and storage of digital content.



Easy extraction of digital contents from
storage media.



Reduction in cost of reproduction.



Easy substitutability of digitised copies.



Easy communication of digital content
over Internet.



Inexpensive dissemination of digitised
products.

Due to emergence of the consumer
electronic devices, computers, satellite
communication systems, optical fibre
communication and global networks, the process
of protection of copyrights has become more
complicated. As the cost of reproduction
and distribution of creative work in digital
form continue to fall, copyrighted material
can be made available to the users at a very
low marginal cost. In the western countries,
the law makers, content creators, manufacturers
of consumer electronics including software
and hardware, have already faced these
challenges. On various forums, they had
discussed the implications of these technologies
on copyright issues and amended their national
laws to suite the present scenario, because
they found out that neither legal protection
nor technological measures could alone provide
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

perfect remedial solutions for these problems.
Only cooperation and compromise among
the content creators, manufacturers of consumer
electronics and other related technologies
will help in effective implementation of the
copyright protection.
Certain things like words, names, titles
and slogans, ideas, procedures, processes,
systems, principles, discoveries, regardless
in the form they have been described, explained,
or illustrated are not subject to copyright,
but the particular manner in which they are
expressed or described may be protected
under the copyright law.

7.

COPYRIGHT PROTECTION
TECHNOLOGIES

Besides protecting the rights of the owners
of copyrighted material in electronic environment,
it is also important that the information concerning
the copy protection status of a particular
piece of content be conveyed accurately
and securely. Information should qualify two
basic requirements: authentication—information
sent by the issuer is accurate and reliable,
and integrity—it has not been modified or
altered during the transfer. As a result, the
following approaches for conveying copy
protection information have been developed:

7.1 Secure Digital Transmission Copy
Protection
In this system, if someone attempts to
manipulate the copy protection information,
the keys for the content will be altered, and
the content itself will become inaccessible.
This system has the following advantages:


The information is secured from any outside
interference if someone attempts to modify it.



The information is reliable at the
receiving end.



The information is convenient because
it is the part of the security system itself.

The copy protection information has been
categorised into the following two categories:

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

7.1.1 Digital Signature
In literary terms, signature is defined as
the action of signing one’s name, initials or
distinctive mark to authenticate the genuineness
of a document. In legal terms, signature is
a piece of writing by which a person identifies
itself in an act and by which the person
expresses its approval of the content of the
document. In other words, it is a kind of any
sign bound to a contract allowing identification
and authentication of the document’s signatory
and showing the intent to agree to the document’s
content. Thus, the role of a signature can
be summarised as: expressing intention to
be bound to a contract, to identify the parties,
and to authenticate the document. Traditional
signature can be easily produced and recognised
but difficult to forge. It becomes physical
component of the document and hence it is
difficult to remove without trace.
Fast growing digital technology and Internet,
has necessitated the need of digital signatures12
(also known as electronic signature or esignature) in place of conventional signatures.
Digital signature offers secure and trustworthy
solutions, authentication and integrity of the
document as well as identity of the sender.
It is an electronic data attached to or logically
associated with other electronic data, and
serves as a method of authentication. In
present context, prints of unique body parts
(fingerprints, eyes, ears, etc.) are used to
recognise individual’s identity to access
information or money transaction from banks.
It is used to study the resemblances between
living things and statistical methods, and is
also known as biometry, i.e., application of
mathematics to biology. Digital signature is
currently the most appropriate form to fulfil
the requirements for technological protection
of copyrighted material in electronic environment.
Digital signature can be described by
the process of encryption and decryption
technology known as cryptography. In this
process, information (plain text) is passed
through an encryption process to produce
an encrypted copy (cipher text) that is further
decrypted and restored to the original plain

27

text through the application of the cipher
key. The concept behind this is to make the
data illegible for everyone else except those
specified. In this mechanism information is
transformed from one place to the other that
only sender and recipient can see. The system
is based on application of mathematical keys
in symmetric and asymmetric algorithms,
known as conventional/symmetric cryptography
and asymmetric cryptography 13 . The keys
are delivered to the authorised users and/
or authorised equipment. Symmetric
cryptography requires that the same secret
key is shared to encrypt and decrypt the
electronic copyrighted material.
Encryption/decryption is a popular means
of protecting communication transmitted through
a potentially hostile environment such as
computer network. Encryption protects the
content until it is decrypted at which point
it can be copied on to other media. If a
person needs to send an electronic copyrighted
material to another person, both need to
know the secret key in advance. After the
receipt of the material, the receiver has to
decrypt it using symmetric algorithms to
access the original material.
One of the major disadvantages in this
system is that if several recipients exist,
the sharing of same secret key may violate
the principle of secrecy. Therefore, asymmetric
cryptography is more suitable in case of
open network environment. In this system,
two different, interdependent keys, public
and private key, are used. Private key is
kept at a secure place by the sender, whereas,
public key can be distributed to the receivers.
In this process, if a person wants to send
an electronic copyrighted material to the
user, the sender encrypts the original material
using asymmetric algorithms. User receives
the public key from the sender and decrypts
the material to obtain the original material.
The material that has been signed, using
the private key, can only be verified by the
use of the public key and vice versa. This
ensures the integrity and authentication of
the original material. The copyrighted material
is transmitted in an encrypted form in a
software envelope which is further decrypted
28

at the user’s end. For databases, the software
envelope permits user to search indexes
and display text. For video information, the
software envelope permits display of the video.
For textual information software envelope
allows user to display text and open pages.
These are some of the ways how software
envelope can control the copyrighted materials.
7.1.2 Watermarking Technology
Watermarking is a technique for impressing
a design onto the fibre of the paper during
its manufacturing process. It has been well
known since the manufacturing of paper was
started. In this technique, high pressure is
put on wet fibre, through some defined pattern,
to expel the moisture and to leave an imprint
on the paper. It is known as watermark and
can be viewed under transmitted light. It is
a part of “Steganography”, which literally
means “cover writing”. “Stega” is a Greek
word which means “to cover”. Now, the word
“watermarking” 14 , has been replaced with
“digital watermarking”, because it can be
applied to other forms of digital data like
text, images, and even sound also. The versatility
of digital watermarking technology has attracted
intellectual property owners to apply it on
their products to secure digital transmission.
Digital watermarking differs from the printed
watermarking because it uses naturally occurring
variations of text and images, and thus can
not be seen by the user unless special
techniques are employed. In case of an image,
watermark can be embedded into an electronic
image by slightly changing the brightness of
some of its pixels in a regular or even random
patterns. It can also be done in the text by
making variations through creating spaces
between lines and characters.
Similarly, watermarking software can
disperse messages throughout the audio file
that can be read by a computer only and not
by the human ears. The “data hiding” and
“information hiding” are also other relevant
terms often used for the digital watermarking.
Digital watermarking is one of a triad of
technologies (the other two being encryption
and digital signatures), that together offer a
reasonable level of copyright protection.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

Digital watermarking has a number of
advantages including copyright protection of
electronic copyrighted material on Internet,
finding out unauthorised reproduction of images,
dissuasion of potential pirates, etc. Though,
it does not prevent unauthorised copying,
but unauthorised distribution of copyrighted
material can be traced or detected. One of
the major application of the digital watermarking
is to convey the ‘ownership information’.
There may be person who may try to fiddle
with the copyrighted material by removing
the ownership information. The watermark
may either identify the originator of the
copyrighted material, or it may identify the
recipient, i.e., the end-user to whom the
material was delivered. The watermark may
be visible or invisible. The invisible watermarks
are embedded in the material together with
associated information, e.g., its name, its
author, its date, its point of contact, etc.
Several inventors have proposed using
ownership watermarks to authenticate the
material. Most invisible watermarks are designed
to be robust; the watermark robustly survives
alterations of the watermarked data.
Recently, with the advent of digital movies
on satellite broadcasts and DVD media, the
movie studios have become very interested
in watermarking. The application here is to
record an invisible, robust, “never copy”,
“copy once”, or “no more copy” watermarks
in each movie. Every recording device will
be required to detect them, and refuse to
record any movie whose mark prohibits copying.
In return, the studios would indemnify the
recording device manufacturers against
contributory copyright infringement suits. The
largest advantage of this watermarking application
is the independence from the technology,
protocol, or format of the distribution. Some
of the watermarking technologies have been
described here:
Visible Image Watermarks: It is available with
IBM Digital Library. It embeds a visible mark
onto a gray or color photographic image. This
watermark has several features that distinguish
it from other visible watermarking techniques.
One constrains the watermarking process to
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

change only the brightness, and not the colour,
of the image to be marked this is intended to
make the watermark less obtrusive.
Reversible Visible Watermarks: It is developed
at the IBM Tokyo Research Laboratory for
applications such as online content distribution.
Here, the image is marked with a Reversible
Visible Watermark before distribution or posting
on the Internet, and the watermarked image
content serves as a “teaser” that users may
view or obtain for free. Then, the watermark can
be removed to recreate the unmarked image by
using a “vaccine” program.
Fragile Image Watermarks: IBM is investigating
multiple techniques for fragile image
watermarking that would determine whether an
image has been altered since the time when it
was watermarked. The targeted applications for
this “image authentication” include detection of
altered (or replaced) image content within a
digital library, and the “secure digital camera.”
Robust Image Watermarks: IBM is also
investigating multiple techniques for robust
image watermarking that would apply
watermarks that could later help in identifying
the owner or recipient of an image. This
technique requires an image-specific watermark
key to extract the watermark from the
watermarked image. This makes it more difficult
for a malicious party to detect or estimate the
watermark (which could lead to it being removed
to delete evidence of ownership).

8.

CONCLUSION

Law can not keep pace with technology.
All efforts need to be made to amend copyright
laws to cover technological impact on the
associated legal issues. Law makers, judiciary,
law enforcement agencies, scientists,
technologists, technology forecasters, users,
etc. should join hands together to include
latest provision for the protection of copyright
and make safeguard for the interest of the users.
There is a need to establish an agency
in India on the same way as in the USA, the
UK and Canada. On the pattern of licensing
agencies like CCC, CLA and CANCOPY,
India should also have a mechanism of licensing
agency for granting licenses of copyright.
29

Similarly, we should also establish a national
centre/clearing house for supply of documents
to the end users.

2. The Copyright Act, 1957 (with amendments).
Universal Law Publishing Co., New
Delhi. 83p.

An Act should be passed to establish a
Copyright Clearing Agency in India with latest
information and communication technologies
and skilled and professional manpower to
facilitate users of copyrighted material. The
government should work as a facilitator between
users and copyrights holders. The government
should collect fees from the users and distribute
royalties to the owners after charging a nominal
service charge. Some efforts have already
been made to constitute a Copyright Clearing
Agency of India (CCAI), which will grant license
to the users on behalf of the rights holders.
This can help in minimising the problem of
infringement of copyrights up to some extent.

3. Digital Millennium Copyright Act. 1998.
USA.

Sometimes individuals are not familiar
with copyright laws and the kinds of activities
which do not come under the fair use doctrine.
Users can be made aware of the rights of
the users and rights of the owner to avoid
any legal conflict between these two.

11. http://www.isinet.com/isi

4. Gasser, Urs & Ernst, Silke. Best practice
guide: Implementing the EU copyright
directive in digital age. 2006, 27 p.
5. http://www.comlaw.gov.au
6. http://www.copyright.com/ccc
7. http://www.cla.co.uk
8. http://www.cancopy.com
9. http://www.bl.uk
10. http://www.cisti-icist.nrc-cnrc.gc.ca

12. Menezes, Alfred, et al. In Digital Signature
Handbook of Applied Cryptography, Ch.
11.CRC Press, 1996, 816 p.

REFERENCES

13. Menezes, Alfred, et al. In Handbook of
Applied Cryptography, Ch 8. CRC Press,
1996, 816 p.

1. Copyright law of the United States of
America, Article 301-305, Circular 92.
Duration of Copyright, Ch. 3. 2003, 11021.

14. Young, M.M. Digital watermarking.
Communication of ACM, 1998, 41(7),
30-33.

Contributor

Dr J.P. Singh obtained his BSc (H), MSc and MLiSc from the University of Delhi.
He received his Doctorate degree for his thesis on Development of a Model Information
Retrieval System for Laser Technology in 1994 also from the University of Delhi.
He worked in Defence Scientific Information & Documentation Centre (DESIDOC)
from 1985 to 2004. Presently, he is working as Additional Director in Defence
Research & Development HQrs.

“We should respect the rights of others the
same way we want our rights respected”
30

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

