DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 27, No. 6, November 2007, pp. 41-53
© 2007, DESIDOC

Awareness of Cyber Laws in Young Singaporeans
Tan Kar Peng and Chennupati K. Ramaiah*
American Casualty Express Insurande Asia Pacific, Singapore
E-mail: kar_peng_tan@yahoo.com.sg
*Muffakham Jah College of Engineering & Technology
Road No. 3, Banjara Hills, Hyderabad-500 034
E-mail: chennupati_kramaiah@yahoo.com

ABSTRACT
Security threats over Internet have necessitated information security awareness
among the users. Concern about information security is also on because of financial
risks associated with it. Importance of safe computing practices being advocated by
several governments, professional organisations, and individuals has impelled the need
for secured commercial computer and application systems. Many countries have
formulated cyber laws to protect their business, security, and user’s rights and privacy
and for educating people about their own and other countries cyber laws so that they
do not have any problems relating to information security over Internet. The paper
presents the result of a survey conducted to find out the general awareness of cyber
laws and computer security among Singaporeans, covering a cross section of the
computer users in the country. The paper shows that most of the participants of the
survey were not able to actively keep themselves updated with the latest information
related to computer security and this fact seems consistent across the different
professions. Also, all the participants of the survey agreed on the need for ethics in
the pervasive use of the Internet where problems in security, privacy enforcement and
threats of viruses are obvious and cannot be avoided.
Keywords: Information security, Singapore cyber laws, users awareness studies, Internet
security

1. INTRODUCTION
Internet was developed to provide a network
to share, exchange and communicate information
among researchers. Later, it evolved as a
medium to publish and deliver information
for all types of users including the government
and academicians. Today Internet has become
essential platform for all kinds of transactions
such as information publishing, delivering

and searches, e-commerce, education, research,
etc. But evolution of information technology
has also created problems and risks to computers
in context of security of information available
on the Internet and computer networks.
Computers, networks and software are now
potentially more vulnerable because of improper
protection measures, viruses, hackers, and
several other loopholes present in the computer
communication and network technologies.
41

Intentional attacks or accidental mistakes
can easily destroy or compromise a computer's
ability to perform its original intended functions.
Therefore, security is the basic necessity
for all types of computer-related systems
especially where leakage of information could
affect the business or work. The security
industry is enabling people to communicate,
do online purchases and commerce, using
technology products and services that provide
the necessary protections 1. One common
misconception among the users is that
technology provides 100 per cent protection
in all types of activities/tasks. This is a fact
that a combination of products or factors
works hand-in-hand in constant harmony to
ensure absolute security on the Internet,
and this is also the guiding principle of Microsoft's
new slogan "Secure by design, secure by
default, secure in deployment".
Securing computers, information systems
and cyberspace requires continuous efforts
ranging from the individuals, corporations
and governments. In other words, the whole
society in general plays equally an important
role in protecting the security of information
and information systems. Users today are
increasingly interconnected and these
connections typically cut across boundaries
of towns, cities, states, and countries. Critical
infrastructure like transportation, energy and
finances of developed countries are now being
managed on the Internet, which shows its
growing importance. This is coupled with
the increasing number of wireless devices
and private networks, which in turn have
increased the volume of protected information
being exchanged between people. With the
advancement of technology, the need for
users' privacy has also increased significantly;
because of the ease at which personal information
of a user can be collected, stored and
disseminated. Authentication, integrity, nonrepudiation, confidentiality and availability
are the other components of online/computer
security.
The
information,
media
and
telecommunication industry in Singapore have
evolved rapidly over the past 10 years, and

42

the Information Development Authority (IDA)
of Singapore, a statutory board of the government
under Ministry of Information, Communications
and Arts is responsible for the promotion of
cyber laws in the country.
This study mainly explores the current
awareness of knowledge about cyber laws
in Singapore. Majority of the people surveyed
were Internet user for various purposes such
as e-commerce, money transactions,
communication, education, governance, etc.
in their day-to-day life. At the same time,
the study also identified the difficulties
encountered by the individuals; and the preferred
mode of communication between the state
and individuals. The objectives of the study
were: (i) to investigate Singapore's initiatives
and progress in cyber laws; (ii) to highlight
the barriers to comprehending cyber laws in
Singapore; (iii) to identify the level of awareness
of cyber laws among Singaporeans; (iv) to
find out the impact of cyber laws in Singapore;
and (v) to identify the user's preferred mode
of communication and information delivery.

2. BACKGROUND
The elements of any security infrastructure
include information technology (IT), procedures,
practices, laws and regulations, and people
and organisations2. Management support and
the organisation are the keys to the success
of any security infrastructure 3. Some of the
challenges faced while enforcing cyber laws
in the international front include: harmonisation
of country's criminal laws, locating and identifying
perpetrators across borders, and securing
electronic evidence of their crimes 4 so that
they may be brought to the notice of the
court of law. The existing major cyber laws
in the world include the Computer and Fraud
Act of the United States and the Computer
Misuse Act of the United Kingdom and some
other Acts across Asia. According to Ang 5 ,
key policies and legal issues related to
cyber laws can be grouped into six categories:
(i) intellectual property rights, (ii) issues
related to e-commerce, (iii) security, (iv) privacy,
(v) content regulation, and (vi) access and
service provision.

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

3. RELATED RESEARCH
Information security has become an
important part of every business's integrated
strategy in risk management. Electronic data
and its transmission are vulnerable because
of unauthorised interference from criminals
and persons having vested interests. Ensuring
security of data through legal and technical
means has become a matter of concern.
Personal information privacy is arguably the
most important issue facing the growth and
prosperity of the Internet, especially e-commerce.
A recent survey result shows that security
on Internet is growing and this feeling is
lingering with majority of the people of the
online community (www.harrisinteractive.com,
www.nfoi.com).
Cyber laws encompass the legal, statutory
and constitutional provisions that affect
computers and computers’ networks to
individuals, corporate bodies and institutions
which (a) mainly work in cyber space, (b)
provide access to cyber space, (c) produce
hardware and software that enable users to
access cyber space, and computer users
who work in cyber space. Laws, norms,
market, and the code are the four moral
values that regulate our behaviour6. Governments
around the world has a responsibility to pass
legislation and educate the general public to
combat with high-tech crimes and high-tech
criminals 7. In this regard US has taken an
initiative and established a 'Awareness Outreach
Task Force' to coordinate and promote awareness
about cyber laws. This task force has formulated
US National Cyber Security in collaboration
with TechNet, US Chamber of Commerce,
Business Software Alliance, and other professional
bodies. Similarly, Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) has
prepared Guidelines for the Security of Information
Systems and Networks: Towards a Culture
of Security for the sake of cyber laws awareness
among public. Following these lines, Singapore
also made an effort to raise the awareness
of security issues including cyber laws by
conducting a 10 days course on 'Internet
Security and Cyber Laws in Singapore' for
local professionals in September 2004. Business
Software Alliance (BSA) conducted a survey
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

to know about cyber laws awareness and
found that awareness of information security
has increased significantly among the users8.
The study found that private sector leaders
believe that government should take leading
role in cyber security by enforcing strict
laws particular for cyber security, pass a
federal data breech notification bill, and take
other necessary steps to safe guard from
the cyber threats.

4. METHODOLOGY
The survey used the questionnaire tool
to know the awareness of cyber laws among
the Singaporeans. The method was costeffective and helped in collecting different
types of information related to the users'
attitudes from a cross-section of occupations
in a limited time frame. The questionnaire
contained 34 questions, both open and closedended, organised in six sections: personal
profile, computer/web usage, awareness about
cyber laws, overall satisfaction/rating, user's
preferences/requirements, and barriers/problems
faced. Before deploying the actual survey,
the questionnaire was piloted with five people.
Based on their feedback, the contents and
the structure of the questionnaire were improved
for the final survey. The questionnaire was
sent to 150 professionals (i.e. students,
engineers, lecturers, finance-related
professionals, etc.). Of the 150 professionals,
72 (48 per cent) responded, but only 66
questionnaires were taken as valid. The remaining
were rejected because of illegible writing
and incompleteness of answers. All these
valid questionnaires were subsequently analysed.

5. RESULTS
5.1 Users’ Profile
The respondent's personal details were
tabulated (Table 1) according to the gender,
age group, basic qualification, profession,
ownership of computer, Internet usage, and
purpose of Internet use. Of the total, the
percentage of males (56 per cent) was slightly
more than females (44 per cent). The majority
of the respondents (82.9 per cent) belonged
to the age group of 21-40 years and almost
43

Table 1. Demographic profile of respondents
Particulars

Categories

Gender

Age groups (years)

Qualification

Profession

Ownership of computers

Internet usage per week

Purpose of Internet use

Number

Percentage

Male

37

56.0

Female

29

44.0

Less than 20

2

3.0

21 to 30

32

46.5

31 to 40

24

36.4

More than 40

8

12.1

‘O’ Levels

3

4.5

‘A’ Levels

1

1.5

ITE

0

0.0

Diploma

6

9.1

Degree & above

54

81.8

Others

2

3.0

IT related

16

24.2

Engineering related

10

15.2

Finance related

14

21.2

Academic/Teaching

7

10.6

Students

10

15.2

Others

9

13.6

PC

61

92.4

Macintosh

1

1.5

Notebook

18

27.3

PDA

10

15.2

Less than 10 hr

29

44.0

10-30 hr

25

37.9

31-50 hr

8

12.1

51-70 hr

4

6.0

More than 70 hr

0

0.0

Information gathering

54

81.8

E-mail

31

47.0

Gaming

2

3.0

E-commerce

12

18.2

Work

19

28.8

Chatting

6

9.1

Forums

3

4.5

the same percentage (81.8 per cent) had
minimum an undergraduate degree or above
as basic qualification(s). The sample covered
all professions including IT related (24.2 per
cent), engineering related (15.2 per cent),
finance related (21.2 per cent), academicians
and teachers (10.6 per cent), and students
44

(15.2 per cent). Remaining belonged to other
professions. Ninety-two per cent of them owned
a PC and more than a quarter (27.3 per cent)
were also having a notebook computer. A
person also had a personal digital assistant
(PDA). Macintosh computer was found the
least popular among Singaporeans as only
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

1.5 per cent of the respondents owned the
Macnitosh.
The majority of these respondents (81.9
per cent) were using Internet for 30 hr or
less per week and the remaining for 31-70
hr per week. Information gathering (81.8 per
cent) was the most popular task. Less than
half of them (47 per cent) were using Internet
for e-mails, and more than a quarter (28.8
per cent) were using Internet for their dayto-day office work. A small percentage (18.2
per cent) of them were also using it for ecommerce. A few were using it for games,
chatting, and participating in forums. Overall,
the participants of the survey sample were
highly IT literates, therefore computer ownership
and using Internet either at home or office
was also high.

similar when it was compared to another
national survey conducted across the UK
where 57 per cent indicated that they had
inadequate awareness about computer security
laws 9. For those who kept themselves updated
with computer security related news, the
print media such as magazines, journals
and newspapers were the most popular sources
of information. Similar results were also found
in another similar study in which printed
materials were the most preferred form of
information source to the majority of the
students 10 . In that study, a quarter (24 per
cent) of the respondents felt that keeping
up-to-date on the computer-security news is
mandatory to IT and related professions without
which they cannot progress in their work or
career.
5.2.2 Virus attacks and Software Vulnerabilities

5.2 Awareness of Cyber Laws in Singapore
5.2.1 Keeping up-to-date with Computer
Security News
Figure 1 shows that more than threequarters (76 per cent) of the respondents do
not keep in touch with the latest computersecurity related news. A small percentage
(3 per cent) felt that they considered themselves
as "fully aware" and another 14 per cent
"somewhat aware" about cyber laws in Singapore.
The percentage of persons who are aware
about cyber laws in Singapore is almost

The majority of the respondents were
aware about the repercussions of various
virus attacks (Table 2). This could be the
result of a computer-literate society as well
as the fact that the majority of the participants
of the survey hold at least a degree as their
basic qualification. Almost half of them
agreed that viruses will certainly affect PCs
or Notebooks that are being used at their
homes (66.7 per cent) and offices (60.6 per
cent). However, software vulnerability and
disclosure may not be encouraged at least
from the management's point of view11 .

Figure 1. Level of awareness.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

45

5.2.3 Computer Misuse Act
The majority (64 per cent) of the respondents
were aware of the Computer Misuse Act of
Singapore, but 91 per cent were not aware
or keeping up-to-date about the recent
amendments to the same Act. However, most
of them (90 per cent) agreed that ethics are
needed for the Internet users. This was expected
because of high literacy level of the respondents
willing to assume more responsibility at an
individual level.
Similarly, another survey conducted with
the US-based small medium enterprises (SME),
found that even though IT has become an
integral part of the US SMEs, there was
lack of awareness on basic ethical issues 12 .
Similarly, another study found that anonymity,
common among Internet users is due to the
lack of cyber ethics 13 .
5.2.4 Copyright Law
Eighty-six per cent of the participants
surveyed were aware of the Copyright Laws
and about 82 per cent also understood its
application in the Internet environment. This
matched with the 81 per cent of the respondents
who had degree and above basic education
qualifications indicating that the people having
tertiary education are keeping up-to-date with
the local cyber laws.
5.2.5 Importance of the Privacy
All respondents felt that privacy is an
important, if not very important, issue in the
online environment. Of the total, slightly less
than three-fourth (71 per cent) respondents
mentioned that it was very important in their

day-to-day life and more than half (56; 85
per cent) felt that the law should protect
every one's privacy. This shows that all these
respondents prefer their privacy and regard
as an important issue for their work/transactions,
perhaps due to Westerners influence on
Singaporeans. This finding is similar with
another study of consumers in the Federal
Republic of Germany where consumers have
very strong views about protecting their privacy14.
5.2.6 Level of understanding of Cyber Laws in
Singapore
Sixty-nine and 89.4 per cent of respondents
were aware about both the Computer Misuse
Act and the Copyright Act of Singapore,
respectively. The majority (71 per cent) of
the respondents felt that they have "somewhat
understood" the above mentioned Acts. This
is not surprising because most of the participants
in this survey were using Internet frequently,
but not keeping up-to-date with relevant laws.
Table 3 gives a snapshot of the level of
awareness among the respondents about
the available cyber laws in the world. It is
surprising that respondents were not familiar
with the cyber laws in neighbouring countries
(Malaysia, Philippines, etc.). However, almost
a fifth of them are familiar with the cyber
laws of the USA and the UK. This could be
because these people may be working in
multinationals companies. Overall, the majority
of the respondents were familiar with the
Singapore cyber laws, but the same were
not that much familiar with the Broadcasting
Act (36.4 per cent) and the Electronic
Transactions Act (28.8 per cent) though they
are regular users of e-commerce applications
in their day-to-day life.

Table 2. Effects of viruses
Worms/Viruses/Trojans

46

No. of respondents

% of respondents

It will affect the PCs or notebook I used at home

44

66.7

It will affect the PCs or notebook used in the office

40

60.6

Heard of it, but I believe I am well protected

17

25.8

Not at all a problem

1

1.5

Never heard/Don’t know

0

0

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

Table 3. Comparison of level of awareness of cyber laws
Various Cyber Laws

No. of respondents

% of respondents

Computer Misuse Act (Singapore)

46

69.7

The Copyright Act (Singapore)

59

89.4

Singapore Broadcasting Act (Singapore)

24

36.4

Electronic Transactions Act (Singapore)

19

28.8

Patriot Act (USA)

3

4.5

Computer Fraud and Abuse Act 1986 (USA)

12

18.2

Computer Abuse Amendments Act 1994 (USA)

12

18.2

Electronic Communications Protection Act (USA)

4

6.1

Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA, USA)

2

3.0

Computer Misuse Act 1990 (United Kingdom)

15

22.7

Data Protection Act 1998 (United Kingdom)

9

13.6

Computer Crime Act 1997 (Malaysia)

0

0

Electronic Commerce Act 2000 (Philippines)

0

0

5.3 Overall Satisfaction Rating of Existing
Cyber Laws
5.3.1 Security Updates/Patches/Advisories
More than half (54 per cent) of respondents
were fully aware that the virus scanner updates
automatically through downloading at regular
intervals (Table 4) whereas about a third
(34.8 per cent) of them were ‘not sure’ about
how software security updates taking place
on their system. One possible explanation
for this could be that the software updates
may not be done that frequently, hence the
respondents were not fully aware about this
aspect. It is interesting to note that majority
of them were cautious about updating antivirus
software (57.6 per cent) by setting in an
auto updating mode but in reality only about
half (27.3 per cent) of these were doing
software security updates.

The percentage of people downloading
these patches/updates was double (24.2 per
cent) then people downloading software security
virus scanners (12.1 per cent). To avoid unforeseen
problems due to virus and other security
threats, all the end-users got to need basic
education or training so that they scan their
systems on their own at regular intervals.
5.3.2 Satisfaction of Commercial Computer and
Application Software
Close to half (48 per cent) of the respondents
expressed their 'mediocre' happiness with
the current security provisions with the existing
commercial computer system/software. More
than half (68 per cent) of the people were
'somewhat happy' or `happy' and less than
a third (32 per cent) were not happy with the
existing practices. However, it would always
be better if the software vendors provide

Table 4. Virus scanner and software security updates
Virus scanner updates

Software security updates

No. of
respondents

% of
respondents

No. of
respondents

% of
respondents

Download automatically

38

57.6

18

27.3

Tested before implementation

5

7.6

8

12.1

Downloaded in reaction to an event

8

12.1

16

24.2

Not sure

19

28.8

23

34.8

No formal plan

0

0

5

7.6

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

47

enough training/information to the users
and make them understand the importance
of their system's security.
5.3.3 Cyber Safety Levels in Singapore
Half of the respondents were somewhat
comfortable about the existing computerrelated laws in Singapore. So, there is a
good bit of room for improvement with regard
to the cyber laws in Singapore. Although,
Singapore has fairly established computerrelated laws, about half (49 per cent) of the
respondents thought that Singapore still might
not be a safer place for computer-related
activities showing the concerns of the participants
about the high level of uncertainty among
those who use Internet extensively for their
day-to-day activities. In this context, both
the Singapore government and computer industry
should come together and work towards the
removal of the fear from the minds of the
people so that Internet usage improve further
in the country.
5.4. User's Preferences/Requirements about
the Cyber Laws
5.4.1 Security Responsibility on the Internet
Almost every respondent felt that every
individual should take the responsibility for
the safety on the Internet, which is similar
to a study conducted for the implementation
of the OECD guidelines for the security of
Information Systems and Networks 15. For
this reason only, Microsoft, the number one
IT Company in the world is sending monthly

updates as patches for protection from all
kinds of vulnerabilities. But government and
IT companies should also gain the trust of
the people to use their products16. According
to respondents, different types of agencies
such as government, private corporations,
MNCs, individuals, etc. should also participate
and take responsibility of the security on
the Internet (Fig. 2).
5.4.2 User's Privacy
Privacy was considered as an important
factor, if not very important by all the respondents.
More than a third felt that privacy (35 per
cent) and security (33 per cent) were the
major concerns while surfing the Internet.
The other factors including authentication
and integrity may be a bit difficult to comprehend
hence less than a third (31 per cent) of them
only indicated.
5.4.3 Who should Understand Cyber Laws in
Singapore?
Almost 98.5 per cent of the respondents
agreed that 'every individual' should understand
cyber laws in Singapore. Over half of them
(56 per cent) also thought that the government
should take lead role in propagating them.
Similarly, 25.8 per cent of them thought that
this responsibility should be given to the
non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and
over a third (37.9 per cent) also felt that
professional societies/corporate offices should
be given the responsibility to educate local
people about cyber laws. At the same time,
the majority of them felt that all the organisations

Figure 2. Agency responsible for cyber laws.
48

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

including government, NGOs, individuals should
take equal responsibility in understanding
and implementing the cyber laws in Singapore.
5.4.4 Medium of Communication
Overwhelmingly respondents preferred
newspapers and magazines (90.9 per cent),
followed by TV and Radio (60.6 per cent) as
the best medium for providing cyber lawsrelated information to public (Fig. 3). Though
Internet usage rate is very high in Singapore,
authorities still preferred print media to publish
the required news on cyber laws. In a study
it was found that undergraduate students of
computer engineering faculty at NTU still
prefer traditional print media for information
dissemination. Slightly over a quarter (27.2
per cent) preferred internal broadcasts at
their workplace through their Intranet or portal
and another (27.3 per cent) also felt that
providing information through their local websites
may be more appropriate. In general, the
rate of reading newspapers and magazines
is very high in Singapore.
5.5 Barriers and Problems Faced by the
Users
5.5.1 Problems while Using the Internet
Given the recent avalanche of news on
new permutation strains of viruses, security

breaches with banks and the advent of spyware,
it was inevitable that security breaches, lack
of privacy from spying, etc. and threats of
viruses were the top three problems envisaged
by the respondents in the promotion of usage
of the Internet.
Similarly in a recent global survey, it
was found that viruses threat is considered
important in the problems rank list of the
Internet users. Table 5 lists the problems
faced by the Singaporeans while using Internet.
Nowadays spam and pornography mails are
flooding everywhere and causing a lot of
problems to users while using mailing system
and Internet.
5.5.2 Safer Computers!
Besides better more robust software,
mindset, ethics and user education were
some of the reasons mentioned by the
respondents to make computers safer from
external threats. Apart form having good hardware
and software, human participation is also
important if not a critical component in overall
security landscape.
These results (Table 6) are quite contrast
to what Warren found in his survey of Australian
companies that do not take enough security
and users awareness training seriously.

Figure 3. Preferred medium for gaining awareness about cyber laws.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

49

Table 5. Problems encountered by Internet
users of Singapore

(i)

Media of communication: It includes
the preferred mode by which the users
are more interested to be informed
about security news or developments.
This is important for the success of
any communication strategy introduced
for advocating the importance of the
security awareness campaign.

(ii)

Target group: It is easier to convince
the educated users having basic
qualification(s) such as degree and
above. This group can be first targeted
with an objective and purpose that they
can continue to share their experiences
and knowledge along with their peers
at the workplace.

(iii)

Laws: Laws should be clearly communicated and explained through various
avenues at the workplace, through print
and electronic media or public events,
road shows, etc.

(iv)

Psychological comfort: All the individuals
should be addressed so as to ensure
a complete understanding, compliance,
and cooperation which may be able to
share and work towards achieving a
common objective.

5.5.3 Remedies/Suggestions

(v)

Based on the results of the study, the
following general guidelines have been prepared
to implement an effective security awareness
framework:

Ethics: Should be adhered by the
individuals and organisations on the
Internet.

(vi)

Privacy: Privacy issues are of interest
to Singaporean and may be openly

Problems encountered

No. of
% of
respondents respondents

Security breaches

29

43.9

Privacy, include spying

27

40.9

Virus threats

25

37.9

Information
overload/quality

14

21.2

Access speed

13

19.7

Cyber fraud

13

19.7

Spam

11

16.7

Pornography

7

10.6

Piracy

6

9.1

Unbalanced
view/Internet abuse

3

4.5

Price of Internet surfing

2

3.0

Coverage/accessibility

2

3.0

Less human interaction

2

3.0

Over commercialisation
in the net

1

Inadequate policies/laws

1

1.5
1.5

Table 6. Users response to make safer computers
How to make safer computers?

50

No. of
respondents

% of
respondents

Better and robust software

19

28.8

User education including mindset and ethics

18

27.3

Better virus protection e.g. auto updates

12

18.2

Enforcement of existing cyber laws

9

13.6

Firewalls

7

10.6

User authentication

3

4.5

Better security policies from ISP

2

3.0

More responsibility from software vendors

1

1.5

Better cooperation/responsibility from all users

1

1.5

More open source programs

1

1.5

Anti hacking tools

1

1.5

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

discussed about how policies should,
in the light of overall security consideration,
be practiced.
(vii)

Problems: Including privacy, security
and viruses that are related to software
should be taken care by the companies
that are producing and due action should
be taken or communicated to the users.

(viii) Best practices: Software or security
updates should be sent regularly and
their information may be communicated
through the preferred medium like
newspapers, workplaces and other avenues
available including the government
websites on the Internet.

6. CONCLUSION
Today general security is already an
international problem that all countries are
trying their level best to address at international
level. The increasing popularity of the Internet
as a medium and its borderless, interconnected
nature seeks to exacerbate the security situation
which cannot be assumed and taken for
granted because many countries had very
bad experiences related to critical security
problems and some had really painful memories.
Cyber laws that seek to protect the sovereignty
and property are being constantly monitored,
revised and updated to keep up with the
changes. It is clear that the awareness of
cyber laws and any of their revisions should
be further explained and communicated regularly
to every individual so that all of them take
responsibility to maintain security of individual(s)
on Internet.
All the participants in the survey are
highly computer literates, owned a computer,
and Internet connection either at home or
office. Information gathering, communication
and collaborative purposes in forum discussion
are the common tasks for which computers
being used by the participants. Keeping up
with computer security-related news was
not a common habit among the majority of
the participants (56 per cent) and print media
such as newspapers, journals and magazines
are the most popular form of communication
channels opted to publish about cyber laws
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

and other related news by these participants.
Since the level of awareness on the possible
effects of computer worms, viruses and Trojan
horses was comparatively high (66 per cent),
hence, it is proposed that software producers
should produce reliable software and timely
communicate about remedial products available
with them. The Computer Misuse Act and
the Copyright Laws of Singapore were the
most commonly heard of among the list of
cyber laws provided to them. However, most
of them were not aware of the recent revision
to the Computer Misuse Act indicating either
a possible disinterest or a case of inadequate
and insufficient coverage in the media.
Ethics were considered as most necessary
by the Singaporeans in the cyber or Internet
because the participants were highly literate
and aware of their rights and hence concerned
about their privacy and suggested to protect
cyber security by providing adequate cyber
laws. All the people are fully aware about
virus scanner updates in schools or companies
environment where the automatic download
function was available to protect from unexpected
attacks.
The general comfort level of the existing
computer related laws is satisfactory (50
per cent only) in Singapore so government
need to educate the public about existing
cyber laws and also introduce new laws
from time to time to protect from the cyber
threats. There is a general consensus that
everyone has a role to play in the usage of
the Internet with a view that the privacy and
security factors are important. The lack of
security, privacy and the ongoing threats of
virus to computer systems were the three
pressing problems while using the Internet.
Better and more robust software, more user
education and better virus protection were
deemed as important in an effort to make
computers safer to use.
The results of this study provided some
useful insights about the cyber laws awareness
among Singaporeans which will be useful to
the government to take necessary corrective
steps that ultimately will remove the fear/
phobia among Singaporeans about information
security over Internet.
51

REFERENCES
1. Kearns, Laura. Inside the minds: Security
matters. (Electronic version). Aspatore
Books, Boston, MA, 2004.
2. Denning, Dorothy. Bombs and bandwidth:
The emerging relationship between IT
and security, edited by Robert Latham.
The New Press, New York, 2003, pp. 2548.
3. Andress, Amanda. Surviving Security:
How to integrate people, process, and
technology. CRC Press, Boca Raton,
Florida, 2004.
4. Marcella, J. Albert & Greenfield, S Robert.
Cyber Forensics: A field manual for collecting,
examining, and preserving evidence of
computer crimes. Auerbach Publications,
New York, 2002.
5. Ang, Peng Hwa.Information highwayspolicy and regulation: The Singapore
experience. Information Highways: Policy
and Regulation in the Construction of
Global Infrastructure in ASEAN, edited
by Anura Goonesekera and Ang Peng
Hwa. Asian Media Information and
Communication Centre, Singapore, 1999,
pp. 317-29.
6. Spinello, A. Richard. Cyber ethics: Morality
and law in cyberspace (2nd Ed). Jones
and Bartlett Publishers. Sudbury, MA,
2003.
7. Hinde, Stephen. The law, cyber crime,
risk assessment and cyber protection.
Computer and Security, 2003, 22(2),
90-95.
8. Forrester consulting survey for the Business
Software Alliance on information security

52

in companies (Available at bsa.org/usa/
policy/upload/2006-Security-Survey.pdf)
9. Warren, M.J. Security practice: Survey
evidence from three countries. Logistics
Information Management, 2002, 15(5),
347-51.
10. Majid, Shaheen & Tan, A.T. Usage of
information resources by computer
engineering students: A case study of
Nanyang technological university, Singapore.
Online Information Review, 2002, 26(5),
318-25.
11. Rescorla, Eric. Vulnerabilities: Is disclosure
the best policy? Network magazine,
2004, 19(5), 98.
12. Phukan, S. & Dhillion, G. Ethics and
information technology use: A survey of
US based SMEs. Information Management
& Computer Security, 2000, 8(5),
239-43.
13. Fiallo, E.H. The lack of ethics in cyber
space: A case for cyber ethics. In 11th
International Conference on Computer
Communications and Networks, 14-16
October 2002. Miami, FL, USA.
14. Singh, Tanuja & Hill, M.E. Consumer
privacy and the Internet in Europe: A
view from Germany. Journal of Consumer
Marketing, 2003, 20(7), 634-51.
15. Carblanc, Anne. OECD guidelines for the
security of information systems and
networks: Towards a culture of society
(Available at http://webdomino1.oecd.org/
COMNET/STI/IccpSecu.nsf?OpenDatabase).
16. Richardson, Robert. The future of Microsoft
security. Computer Security Journal, 2002,
18(3-4), 53-60.

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

Contributors

Mr Kar Peng is currently the Data Security Officer in ACE Insurance for
Asia Pacific. He started his IT career as an Oracle analyst programmer and
subsequently spent six years as Microsoft Certified Partner. He is crosstrained in the various areas of IT which include professional certifications
from Microsoft, Cisco, Disaster Recovery Institute International, Project Management
Leadership Group, Institute of Systems Science, Office of the Government
Commerce, International Information Systems Security Certification Consortium
and finally from the Information Systems Audit and Control Association and
Foundation. His formal education includes Master of Science in Information
Studies from the Nanyang Technological University and Bachelor of Science
from National University of Singapore. Kar Peng can be reached at
kar_peng_tan@yahoo.com.sg.

Dr Chennupati K. Ramaiah is working as Professor and Head at
Central Library, Muffakham Jah College of Engineering & Technology
(MJCET), Hyderabad. Before joining MJCET, Dr Ramaiah worked as Assistant
Professor at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore for six years.
He had also been Deputy Director at Defence Scientific Information &
Documentation Centre (DESIDOC). He was a Commonwealth Scholar for
PhD in Information Science in 1989. His formal education includes Master’s
degrees in Chemistry and in Library and Information Science, and PhD
in Information Science from the UK. He is member of many international
professional bodies/societies such as the Institute of Information Scientists,
LA, ASIST, and ACM. His research interests include multimedia and
hypertext technologies, human-computer interaction, user interfaces,
e-books and E-publishing, archival informatics, and bibliometrics.

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

53

