DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 27, No. 6, November 2007, pp. 65-73
© 2007, DESIDOC

Leveraging Knowledge Management:
Challenges for the Information Professional
Jayanta Kumar Tripathy, Nihar Kanta Patra* and Manas Ranjan Pani**
Institute of Science & Management,Ranchi-834 004
E-mail: jayantz@gmail.com
*XLRI,Jamshedpur-831 001
**Seemanta Engineering College, Mayurbhanj, Orissa-757 086

ABSTRACT
Knowledge management (KM) is a very rapidly developing area in which the library
and information professionals have a critical role. Significant changes are required in
their role, skills, education and training so that they can confidently face the challenges
of KM in the changing digital environment. The paper describes the process and various
information and communication technology tools involved in KM and discusses the
transformation of information management to KM. The paper also highlights the role,
skills and challenges library and information professionals need for managing knowledge.
Keywords: Information management, librarian, knowledge management, information and
communication technology, information professional

1.

INTRODUCTION

In the current era of knowledge-driven
society, knowledge is a critical resource,
which needs to be leveraged and utilised
optimally. Information and communication
technology (ICT) has been the key in the
KM process. A technology-driven organisation
needs to leverage KM process efficiently to
be effective and competitive. Such organisations
tend to capture tacit knowledge using various
IT-based technologies like data mining and
make this knowledge explicit and available
in public domain for intellectual consumption.
Information repositories like knowledge centres
or libraries have begun to appreciate the
Received on 14 June 2007

power of the KM systems and are investing
their critical resources in terms of manpower
and technologies to make them technologydriven. The functions of information professionals
are undergoing drastic changes in terms of
moving beyond cataloguing and sorting to
include providing customised information to
individual requirements. Therefore, information
professionals, today, need to be intellectually
equipped to leverage KM systems to provide
required customised services efficiently.

2.

WHAT IS KM ?

Knowledge is information in our mind
and tested in practice. It is contextual and
65

can be categorised as explicit (knowledge
that can be codified), and tacit (knowledge
that remains in ones mind and can not be
codified). Examples of explicit knowledge
are databases, data warehouses, data marts,
documents, software codes, etc. Examples
of tacit knowledge include techniques and
insights gained from personal experiences
and interactions 1 . Wisdom is integrated
knowledge. It is the ability to use one’s
knowledge and experience for making good
decisions and judgments.
Various practitioners and research scholars
have defined KM in different ways. But the
main emphasis remains on the sharing of
information assets of organisational knowledge.
Gartner Group 2 defined KM as a “discipline
that promotes an integrated approach to
identifying, managing and sharing all of an
enterprise’s information assets. These information
assets may include databases, documents,
policies and procedures as well as previously
unarticulated expertise and experiences resident
in individual workers. KM issues include
developing, implementing and maintaining
the appropriate technical and organisational
infrastructures to enable knowledge sharing...”
According to Liebowitz and Beckman 3
“KM covers identifying what knowledge assets
an organisation possesses, analysing how
the knowledge can add value, specifying
what actions are necessary to achieve better
usability and added value, and reviewing the
use of the knowledge to ensure added value.”
Thus, KM is a strategy to provide the right
knowledge to the right people at the right
time and to help people share and utilise
this knowledge so that organisational performance
can be improved. KM facilitates creation,
access and reuse of the knowledge. It involves,
finding out what an organisation knows; where
the knowledge resides in the organisation;
how to locate people with specific knowledge,
expertise and experience; and how to share
and utilise the accumulated knowledge.

3.

PROCESSES OF KM

KM processes are the activities put in
place to enable and facilitate the creation,
66

sharing and use of knowledge for the benefit
of the organisation. The main processes are
knowledge generation, knowledge storage,
and knowledge utilisation. These are carried
out in a spiral way (Fig. 1). After knowledge
is created/acquired, stored, shared and utilised,
it goes to next phase of enhancing/refining
of existing knowledge, and identifying and
acquiring new knowledge. Though KM processes
involve many steps, knowledge creation and
sharing are the primary concerns of a KM
programme. The various processes and subprocesses of KM programme have been
discussed below.

3.1 Knowledge Generation
It comprises knowledge identification,
acquisition, capturing, and synthesis. Knowledge
identification is essential to know what knowledge
the organisation and its people require in
order to meet their goals and objectives.
This can be done by surveys, interviews and
group discussions. Knowledge acquisition
involves bringing knowledge into the organisation
from external sources. It deals with acquiring
knowledge skills, theories and experience
needed to create core competencies and
knowledge domains. Use of ICT can expedite
knowledge acquisition at a low cost. Knowledge
capturing requires capturing by tacit knowledge
of the organisation gained and built through
years of experience. This knowledge has to
be captured by proper documentation, through
mentoring, training and surveys.
Knowledge synthesis is analysis of existing
knowledge and discussion with various experts
on a specific subject or issue. The knowledge
synthesised is more accurate, complete and
enhanced. Synthesis of knowledge can be
a useful tool for the preparation of new research
projects, solving various problems, and for
creating a more comprehensive, overall
perspective on a specific subject.

3.2 Knowledge Storage
The acquired knowledge should be codified
and stored in the databases and knowledge
warehouses, where it can be easily accessed
and utilised by the organisation. Knowledge
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

Knowledge Storage

Knowledge map

Knowledge base

Knowledge
dissemination

Knowledge typology
Knowledge sharing
Knowledge Generation

Knowledge capture

Knowledge acquisition

Knowledge Utilisation
and
Reutilisation

Knowledge identification
Figure 1. Knowledge management processes.

needs to be organised for storage and retrieval.
It entails knowledge typology, knowledge
bases and knowledge maps. Knowledge typology
can be classified into tacit and explicit knowledge.
Tacit knowledge is experimental and localised
in people’s mind, where as explicit knowledge
is available in documented forms. Knowledge
base is the transformation of databases to
knowledge bases through information bases.
It stores both structured and unstructured
contents like electronic documents. Knowledge
base facilitates the storage and sharing of
explicit knowledge. Knowledge map is a
directory that relates people who need knowledge
to the places where it can be found. It discovers
the knowledge resources within the organisation
and guides people by providing location
information for the most relevant knowledge
resources. This involves the discovery of
tacit knowledge for sharing.

3.3 Knowledge Utilisation
Knowledge utilisation can be achieved
through knowledge dissemination, sharing
and application. Knowledge dissemination
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

is the process of dissemination of knowledge
to others. Intranet, knowledge bases and
expert databases can be used to facilitate
dissemination of explicit knowledge. This
can be through point-to-point dissemination,
knowledge broadcast or through enabling
search to knowledge bases.
Knowledge sharing means retrieving
knowledge from the knowledge repositories
and making it available and accessible to
users. Tacit knowledge is shared through
interaction among people working together
in an organisation while explicit knowledge
can be shared through databases, expert
systems, knowledge bases, knowledge
warehouses, etc. Knowledge can be shared
with all on need basis using the above means.
Knowledge application involves using the
retrieved knowledge for solving problems,
performing tasks, making decisions, researching
ideas and learning. There are many technologies,
which are integrated with the aspects of
acquiring, generating, storing, organising,
sharing and disseminating knowledge that
67

affects individual and organisational performance.
Artificial intelligence, expert systems, information
retrieval technology, electronic publishing
technology, computer-supported collaborative
work, groupware, decision support systems,
database technologies, help-desk technology,
brainstorming applications, performance-support
systems, simulation softwares, document
management, web mapping tools are few
technologies which are connected to KM.
The various ICT tools, which are used in the
various steps in KM process, are given in
Table 1.

4.

FROM IM TO KM

KM encompasses both the management
of information and the people. Knowledge
cannot be managed directly–only the information
about the knowledge possessed by people
in organisations can be managed5. The statement
indicates that strong IM principles and practices
form a solid foundation on which successful
KM strategies can be developed. IM is the
application of principles of management to
the acquisition, organisation, control,
dissemination and use of information in the

Table 1. ICT tools for KM process

KM processes

ICT tools





Brainstorming applications
Electronic support systems
Video conferencing
Discussion boards






Electronic publishing technology
Document management
Web search engines
Help-desk technologies






Expert systems
Database technologies
Web-mapping tools
Electronic publishing technology

Tacit to tacit





Bulletin boards
Video conferencing
Brainstorming applications

Tacit to explicit

 Database technologies
 Data warehousing
 Data mining

Knowledge generation

Knowledge organisation

Knowledge storage

Knowledge transfer

Source: Adopted and modified from Dutta 4
68

 Document management systems
Technol.,
2007, 27(6) systems
 Group
decision-support
Explicit to explicitDESIDOC Bull. Inf.
 Groupware/computer-supported system
Explicit to tacit

Knowledge utilisation






Database technologies
Data warehousing
Web search engines
Data mining




Decision-support systems
Simulation software

libraries and information centres. IM deals
with the information present in the documented
form. Knowledge is considered a resource
now. KM is about managing knowledge of
its people and their expertise, experience,
skills, competencies, ideas, intuitions,
commitments, and motivations in a documented
form. KM practices bring out the tacit knowledge
of the people and their experiences and
sharing, and utilisation of that knowledge
for the benefit of the organisation. Table 2
shows the transformation of IM to KM.

5.

MANAGING KNOWLEDGE

5.1 Role of Information Professionals
The conventional role of library and
information professionals was to collect, process,
disseminate, store and utilise information
to provide multi-disciplinary services to the
personal and professional needs of the library
users. They were also involved in a continuous
search for excellence and codifying information
sources. But now their role is not restricted
to information management only. They play
major role in KM programmes and in identifying,
acquiring, developing, resolving, storing and
sharing of knowledge.
In addition, to satisfy the information
needs of the users, they have to understand
the knowledge needs of the organisation
and its people also. They have to create an
approach to transform and share tacit and
explicit knowledge and enable utilisation of
knowledge.

The information professional now needs
to develop knowledge about the nature of
the knowledge required by the organisation
and knowledge behaviour of the people and
how people acquire knowledge, i.e., how
people share, disseminate and utilise knowledge.
They should know about the needs, role
and value of the knowledge in the organisation.
Kim 6 stated that “Library and information
professionals should shape the knowledge
policies, structures, processes and systems
that will nurture organisational learning. They
should be able to extract, filter and disseminate
vital external knowledge”.
Shanhong 7 opined that “KM in libraries
should be focused on effective research and
development of knowledge, creation of knowledge
bases, exchange and sharing of knowledge
between library staff and users, training of
library staff, speeding up explicit processing
of the implicit knowledge, and realising need
of its sharing”.
Library and information professionals have
to manage relationships with external providers
of information and knowledge and should
negotiate with them. They should design,
implement, and oversee library’s knowledge
infrastructure, computer knowledge networks,
and content management of the organisation’s
Intranet. They have to provide critical input
to the process of knowledge creation and
its use and should continuously evaluate
its relevance to the organisation8. They have
to design information systems, which will
ensure ongoing knowledge flow from external

Table 2. Transformation of IM to KM

Past and present practices in IM

Future directions for KM

Identification of information needs of
organisation and individual, and
collection of required information by
acquiring books, journals and other
printed materials

 Mapping kowledge requirements

Information organisation through
classification, cataloguing, indexing

Knowledge organisation through metadata, knowledge mapping, use of
artificial intelligence, expert systems

Concentration on information and data
present in books, journals either in
printed or digitised form

Focus on tacit knowledge of people, expert’s knowledge, organisationa’s past
experiences

Acquisition, storage, processing and
retrieval of information

Sharing knowledge, transfer of experience

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

 Creation and utilisation of knowledge for organisational benefits
 Collection of expertise, skills, and capturing of other form of tacit
knowledge

69

and internal sources. They have to identify
barriers and priorities changes, which will
enhance the spontaneous flow of knowledge
throughout the organisation. They should
work side by side with users in collecting
and analysing strategic intelligence, and should
act as trainers and consultants who transfer
knowledge gathering and research skills
throughout the organisation.

facilitating access, packaging, and presenting
knowledge12. ICT tools support these processes,
and library and information professionals have
developed their skills for the management of
both printed and electronic sources. Users
need seamless access to knowledge repositories
whether those repositories are in the print,
electronic, or in the form of other people or
communities.

Abell and Oxbro 9 stated that “Library
and information professionals have to identify,
acquire and evaluate internal and external
sources of knowledge and integrate, organise
and make relevant knowledge available to
the right person at the right time”. Educating
people the advantage of sharing knowledge,
experience and expertise is an important
task that library and information professionals
have to perform. Staff should be trained to
use a wide range of retrieval and analysis
tools. Guns 10 has laid down following role
and responsibilities for the library and information
professionals in KM programme:

Facilitating knowledge flow requires
information professionals to have membership
of network associated with a knowledge
community. They have to act as a network
hub or a virtual community manager, build
and maintain expert databases, and encourage
and manage contributions to knowledge
repositories. In general, facilitating knowledge
flow requires both technological and social
aspects, and ensures both availability of the
tools and user training so that users find
these tools easy to use.



Warehouse and track information and
maintain a knowledge inventory.



Ensure the right kind of technology is
in place such as Internet, Intranet,
databases, and library softwares, OPAC,
etc.



Identify valued skills, knowledge and
expertise in the organisation.

Carrillo 11 proposed three main roles for
the knowledge professionals: Managing
knowledge repositories; facilitating knowledge
flow and communication; and leveraging value
generation capacity. All KM strategies are
likely to embrace elements of all three of
these approaches. Not one of these can be
achieved without some attention to the others.
There will be no knowledge repositories to
manage unless knowledge creators and owners
can be persuaded to communicate and contribute
to knowledge repositories. Similarly, leveraging
value generation capacity requires good access
to shared knowledge about the organisation,
its value generating processes, and environment.
Managing knowledge repositories involves
evaluation, filtering, signposting, structuring,
70

For leveraging value generation capacity,
informational professionals have to take an
active role in helping others to develop behaviour,
actions and culture that optimises value
generation. This is associated with a realistic
vision of the organisation and its resources
and processes.
Overall, informational professionals have
to perform the following roles to leverage
KM programmes:


Management of contents from licensed
online resources like e-books, e-journals,
databases, etc.



Analysis of documents, organisation,
classification and sorting, and their archiving
for easy retrieval and faster dissemination.



Creating new knowledge through filtering,
consolidating, and repackaging information.



Understanding users need, helping them
to locate and retrieve information of their own.



Training of users to maximise use of
the knowledge repository.



Communication in the hierarchical structure
of management to keep track of the
process of workflow in the organisation.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)



Digitisations of various in-house documents
like project and research reports by students
and faculty.



Development/deployment of tools for
information customisation.



Imparting information literacy instruction
to the users.

are also very much essential for KM
programme.

5.3 Challenges for Informational
Professionals
Following challenges faced by the information
professionals retard KM programme:


Management of tacit knowledge is not
so easy. It is hard to know what is in
human mind. It is also difficult to capture
knowledge and manage it within a large
academic library.



People hesitate to share their knowledge
because of insecurity and fear of passing
their tacit knowledge to colleagues and
loose their importance. Overcoming this
fear and motivating such people is the
biggest challenge of KM.



The ever changing pattern of information
generates huge amount of information in
short span of time. Thus, information
gets obsolete as soon as it is generated.
Because of this, it is difficult to provide
nascent information quickly to the user.



If obsolete information is not removed it
leads to information overload, which creates
problem in identification of useful information.



Rapid change in ICT handicaps the librarians
to communicate knowledge to the users.
Since ICT is an important tool for KM,
information professionals need a high
level of technical skills in ICT.



Financial constraints are there for knowledge
sharing incentives. KM should show overall
economy.



There are so many KM needs, it is hard
to know where to start.



Lack of up-to-date knowledge as to what
is happening in ICT and KM.

6.

CONCLUSION

5.2 Skills of Information Professionals
Information professionals should possess
excellent communication skills, and abilities
to offer specialist skills such as expertise
in electronic systems and resources or
experience of planning and delivering training.
They should have skills in persuasion and
reasoned argument in a changing and complex
organisational environment. The various skills
needed by library and information professionals
in KM programme are:


Interpersonal communication skills for
transferring tacit knowledge to explicit
knowledge. It also encourages people
to identify and share relevant ideas,
knowledge and information.



General management skills such as
leadership, human resources management,
change management, project management,
etc. are seen as a vital part of KM programme
that library and information professionals
should have.







Information management skills like
classification and cataloguing, indexing
and abstracting, information consolidation
and repackaging, content management,
storage and retrieval, construction of
controlled vocabulary and thesaurus.
Information technology skills like webpage
development, database design and
management, web publishing, Internet
publishing, designing and application of
search engines, networking to gather,
share and disseminate knowledge.
Other skills such as, strategic thinking,
writing, teaching and learning skills,
presentation skills, skills to convert
information into knowledge, and skills
to understand KM principles and processes

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

In the recent past KM has emerged as
a powerful strategy for enhancing the productivity
as well as creating a sustainable competitive
advantage for the organisation in the global
market. Library and information professionals
71

can play an important role while managing
the explicit knowledge. To achieve this, they
need to be equipped with certain additional
skills along with the conventional skills. The
new role of information professionals is full
of challenges and they need to strive hard
to be relevant in anticipaton of resurgence
of the new areas of KM.

REFERENCES
1. Kharade, Kalpana & Thomas, Sybil.
Knowledge management and teacher
education in and for new times. University
News, 2004, 42(26), 16.
2. Gartner Group. Building knowledge
powerhouse. Dataquest, 1999.
3. Liebowitz, Jay & Beckman, Tom. Knowledge
organisations. St. Luice Press, Boca
Raton, 1998, 57 p.
4. Dutta, D. Managing knowledge within
the firm: The enabling role of information
& communications technologies. In Second
International Conference on Business &
Management, 2000, Nirma Institute of
Management.
5. Streatfield , D. & Wilson, T. Deconstructing
Knowledge Management. Aslib Proceedings,
1999, 51(3), 70.
6. Kim, Seonghee. The roles of knowledge
professionals for knowledge management.

In 65th IFLA Council and General Conference,
20-28 August 1999, Bangkok, Thailand.
(Available at http://www.ifla.org/IV/ifla65/
papers/042-115e.htm)
7. Shanhong, Tang. Knowledge management
in libraries in the 21st century. In 66th
IFLA Council and General Conference,
13-18 August 2000, Jerusalem, Israel.
(Available at http://www.ifla.org/IV/ifla66/
papers/057-110e.htm)
8. Davenport, Thomas H. & Prusak, Laurence.
Working knowledge: How organisations
manage what they know. Harvard Business
School Press, Boston, 1998, pp. 114-15.
9. Abell, Angela & Oxbro, Nigel. Competing
with knowledge: The information professionals
in the knowledge management age. Library
Association Publishing, London, 2001.
10. Guns, Bob. The chief knowledge officer’s
role: Challenges and competencies. Journal
of Knowledge Management, 1998, 1(4), 316.
11. Carrillo, F.J. Capital systems: Implications
for a global knowledge agenda. Journal
of Knowledge Management, 2002, 6(4),
379-99.
12. Rowley, Jennifer. Knowledge management–
the new librarianship: From custodians
of history to gatekeepers to the future.
Library Management, 2003, 24(8/9),
433-40.

Contributors

Mr Jayant Kumar Tripathy is working as Librarian at Institute of Science & management,
Ranchi. He is having nine years of experience in developing and managing modern
library. His areas of interest are digital library, knowledge management, and information
literacy.
Mr Nihar Kumar Patra is working as Assistant Librarian at XLRI, Jamshedpur. His
areas of interest are digital library, web-based information service, and content management.

Mr Manas Ranjan Pani is working as Lecturer at Seemanta Engineering College, Orissa.

72

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(6)

