DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 27, No. 4, July 2007, pp. 5-14
© 2007, DESIDOC

Security-related Provisions
in IPR Laws in India
V.K. Gupta
National Institute of Science, Technology and Developmental Studies
Pusa Gate, KG Krishnan Marg, New Delhi-110 012
E-mail: vkgdwarka@gmail.com, vkgupta@nistads.res.in
ABSTRACT
The paper highlights the security-related provisions in IPR laws in India. There are
no specific provisions related to national security in the laws on copyright, trademark,
and geographical indication. It describes the provisions in the laws relating to patents,
designs, integrated circuits, and plant varieties. The components of the Competition Act
and the Information Technology Act relevant to the application of the acts keeping in
mind the security of the country have also been included. The paper also points out
the importance of other issues in the management of IPRs in defence like protection of
confidential information, use of patent information in R&D, and sharing of IPRs during
collaboration and the joint ventures in the development of technology.
Keywords: Copyright, IPR, WIPO, UCC, WPTT, neighbouring rights, TRIP

1. INTRODUCTION
National security in the modern context
is impacted by several initiatives, particularly
those related to scientific research and
technology development including development
of conventional and modern weapon systems
involving nuclear and space capabilities, and
critical military technologies. There are worldwide
efforts in developing scientific and technological
capabilities for critical military technologies
covering a whole range of technological domains
relating to armaments; aeronautics; energetic
materials; biological, biomedical, and chemical
technologies; electronics; information systems;
security, and signature control; manufacturing
and fabrication; marine systems; sensors;
ground combat; and energy systems 1. Even

the basic approach to the development of
new technologies is changing with the "dual
use" in mind, i.e., military and civil, creating
newer forms of alliances to develop defence
or security systems, determined by a mix of
security and commercial considerations2. National
security also impinges on a host of issues
related to internal security or terrorism wherein
appropriate technological systems are required
to be developed 2.
The importance of indigenous research
and development (R&D) for defence and
intellectual property rights (IPRs) are thus
evident. If research and development is performed
in-house, resulting innovations needs protection
from exploitation, using IPR. The principal
benefit of IPR for defence may not be the
money, which it might bring, but the strategic
5

pitfalls that it might avoid; to prevent others
from claiming its innovations as their own or
to infringe the third party rights. In India, the
Defence Research and Development Organisation
(DRDO) has set its vision to make India selfsufficient by establishing world class science
and technology base and to provide an edge
to the defence services by equipping them
with the state-of-the-art internationally competitive
systems and solutions 3. DRDO is actively
collaborating with other R&D institutions,
universities, national laboratories, and the
private commercial enterprises in technology
development for defence. It is also promoting
participation of private industries and the
commercialisation of defence-related research
and technological developments. One of the
key concerns, from the viewpoint of safeguarding
the national security interests, is to secure
the legal protection of results of research
produced within domestic R&D system.
The present paper highlights the securityrelated provisions in the IPR laws in India
as well as some of the related issues prevalent
for the protection of intellectual property.

2. WHAT IS INTELLECTUAL
PROPERTY?
Loosely defined, intellectual property is
a "product of the mind". It is similar to the
property consisting of movable or immovable
things like a house or a car, wherein the
proprietor or owner may use his property as
he wishes and nobody else can lawfully use
his property without his permission. The
Convention establishing the World Intellectual
Property Organisation4 (one of the specialised
agencies of the United Nations System) in
1967 provided that "intellectual property" shall
include rights relating to
Literary, artistic, and scientific works
Performance of performing artists,
phonograms and broadcasts
Inventions in all the fields of human
endeavour
Scientific discoveries, industrial designs
6

Trademarks, service marks and commercial
names and designations
Protection against unfair competition,
and
All other rights resulting from intellectual
activity in the industrial, scientific, literary
or artistic fields.

3. PROTECTION OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
The intellectual property is protected
and governed by appropriate national legislations
relating to patents, copyright, trademarks,
designs, geographical indications, integrated
circuits, plant varieties, and confidential
information and know how. India became the
member of the World Trade Organisation
(WTO) on January 1, 1995, and brought its
laws in compliance with the commitments
under the agreement on trade-related aspects
of the intellectual property rights (TRIPS).
The national legislations on IPR in India
include the following
The Indian Patents Act, 1970 with
amendments till 2005
The Copyright Act, 1957 with amendments
till 1999
The Trademarks Act, 1999
The Designs Act, 2000
The Geographical Indications of Goods
(Registration and Protection) Act,
1999
The Semiconductor Integrated Circuits
Layout Design Act, 2000, and
The Protection of Plant Varieties and
Farmer’s Rights Act, 2001.
In addition, there are other acts like the
Competition Act, 2002, and Information
Technology Act of India, 2000, which also
impact the governance of IPRs in the country.
Of these, there are no specific provisions
related to the national security in the laws
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

on copyright 5, trademark 6, and geographical
indication 7. The relevant security-related
provisions in the case of other IPRs laws are
described below.

3.1 Patents
A patent is a government granted and
secured legal right to prevent others from
`practicing', i.e., making, using, selling or
importing the inventions covered by the patent.
A patent is a personal property that can be
licensed or sold like any other property. An
invention is patentable if it is new, involves
an ‘inventive step’ (i.e., it is not obvious)
and is industrially applicable 8. The ‘inventive
step’ means a feature of an invention that
involves technical advance as compared to
the existing knowledge or having economic
significance or both, and that makes the
invention not obvious to a person skilled in
the art. The ‘new invention’ means any invention
or technology, which has not been anticipated
by publication in any document or used in
the country or elsewhere in the world before
the date of filing of patent application with
complete specifications, i.e., the subject
matter has not fallen in public domain or
that it does not form part of the state-of-theart.
The Indian Patents Act describes the
inventions, which are excluded from protection8.
No patents are granted in respect of an
invention relating to atomic energy falling
within Subsection (1) of Section (20) of the
Atomic Energy Act, 1962. Chapter VII (Sections
35 to 42) of the act particularly relate to the
provisions for secrecy of certain inventions 8.
Some of the important Sections are:
3.1.1 Section 35
The Section 35 stipulates secrecy directions
relating to inventions relevant for defence
purposes. Some of the important subsections
of Section 35 are:
(i)

Where, in respect of an application made
before or after the commencement of
this act for a patent, it appears to the
Controller that the invention is one of a
class notified to him by the Central

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

Government (CG) as relevant for defence
purposes, or, where otherwise the invention
appears to him to be so relevant, he
may give directions for prohibiting or
restricting the publication of information
with respect to the invention or the
communication of such information.
(ii) Where the Controller gives any such
directions as are referred to in subsection
(i), he shall give notice of the application
and of the directions to the CG, and the
CG shall, upon receipt of such notice,
consider whether the publication of the
invention would be prejudicial to the defence
of India, and if upon such consideration,
it appears to it that the publication of
the invention would not so prejudice,
give notice to the Controller to that effect,
who shall thereupon revoke the directions
and notify the applicant accordingly.
(iii) Without prejudice to the provisions
contained in subsection (i) where the
CG is of the opinion that an invention
in respect of which the Controller has
not given any directions under subsection
(i), is relevant for defence purposes, it
may at any time before grant of patent
notify the Controller to that effect, and
thereupon, the provisions of that subsection
shall apply as if the invention were one
of the classes notified by the CG, and
accordingly, the Controller shall give notice
to the CG of the directions issued by
him.
3.1.2 Section 36
The Section 36 states that the secrecy
directions are to be periodically reviewed.
Some of the important subsections of Section
36 are:
(i) The question, whether an invention in
respect of which directions have been
given under Section 35 continues to be
relevant for defence purposes, shall be
reconsidered by the CG at six month
interval or on a request made by the
applicant, which is found to be reasonable
by the Controller, and if on such
reconsideration it appears to the CG
7

that the publication of the invention would
no longer be prejudicial to the defence
of India, or in case of an application
filed by a foreign applicant, it is found
that the invention is published outside
India, it shall forthwith give notice to the
Controller accordingly and the Controller
shall thereupon revoke the directions
previously given by him.
(ii) The result of each reconsideration under
subsection (i), shall be communicated
to the applicant within such time and in
such manner as may be prescribed.

suffered hardship by reason of the
continuance in force of the directions,
the CG may make to him such payment
(if any) by way of solatium as appears
to the CG to be reasonable having regard
to the novelty and utility of the invention
and the purpose for which it is designed,
and to any other relevant circumstances.
(iii) Where a patent is granted in pursuance
of an application in respect of which
directions have been given under Section
35, no renewal fee shall be payable in
respect of any period during which those
directions were in force.

3.1.3 Section 37
3.1.4 Section 38
The Section 37 of the act relates to the
consequences of secrecy directions. Some
of the important subsections of Section 37
are:
(i) So long as any direction under Section
35 are in force in respect of an application,
the Controller shall not pass an order
refusing to grant the same; and
notwithstanding anything contained in
this act, no appeal shall lie from any
order of the Controller passed in respect
thereof "Provided that the application
may, subject to the directions, proceed
up to the stage of grant of the patent,
but the application and the specification
found to be in order for grant of the
patent shall not be published, and no
patent shall be granted in pursuance of
that application."
(ii) Where a complete specification filed in
pursuance of an application for a patent
or for an invention in respect of which
directions have been given under Section
35 is found to be in order for grant of
the patent during the continuance in
force of the directions, then if, during
the continuance in force of the directions,
any use of the invention is made by or
on behalf of, or to the order of the
Government, the provisions of Sections
100, 101, and 103 of the Indian Patents
Act shall apply in relation to that use
as if the patent had been granted for the
invention; and if it appears to the CG
that the applicant for the patent has
8

The Section 38 relates to the revocation
of secrecy directions and extension of time.
When any direction given under Section 35
is revoked by the Controller, then, notwithstanding
any provision of this act specifying the time
within which any step should be taken or
any act done in connection with an application
for the patent, the Controller may, subject
to such conditions, if any, as he thinks fit
to impose, extend the time for doing anything
required or authorised to be done by or
under this act in connection with the application,
whether or not that time has previously expired.
3.1.5 Section 39
The Section 39 states that residents
can not apply for patents outside India without
prior permission of the controller. Some of
the important subsections of Section 39 are:
(i)

No person resident in India shall, except
under the authority of a written permit
sought in the manner prescribed and
granted by or on behalf of the Controller,
make or cause to be made any application
outside India for the grant of a patent
for an invention unless an application
for a patent for the same invention has
been made in India, not less than six
weeks before the application outside
India; and either no direction has been
given under subsection (i) of Section
35 in relation to the application in India,
or all such directions have been revoked.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

(ii) Controller shall dispose of each such
application within such period as may
be prescribed “Provided that if the invention
is relevant for defence purpose or atomic
energy, the Controller shall not grant
permit without the prior consent of the CG”.
(iii) Section 39 shall not apply in relation to
an invention for which an application for
protection has first been filed in a country
outside India by a person residing
outside India.
3.1.6 Section 40
The Section 40 of the act is concerned
with the liability for contravention of Section
35 or Section 39. It states that without prejudice
to the provisions 8 contained in Chapter XX,
if in respect of an application for a patent
any person contravenes any direction as to
secrecy given by the Controller under Section
35 or makes or causes to be made an application
for grant of a patent outside India in contravention
of Section 39, the application for patent
under this Act shall be deemed to have been
abandoned and the patent granted, if any,
shall be liable to be revoked under Section 64.
3.1.7 Sections 41 and 42
As per Section 41, all orders of the
Controller giving directions as to secrecy as
well as all orders of the CG under this chapter
shall be final and shall not be called in
question in any court on any ground whatsoever.
As per Section 42, nothing in the act
shall be held to prevent the disclosure by
the Controller of information concerning an
application for a patent or a specification
filed in pursuance thereof to the CG for the
purpose of the application or specification
being examined for considering whether an
order under this chapter should be made or
whether an order so made should be revoked.
3.1.8 Sections 65 and 118
Section 65 and 118 of the Indian Patent
Act also stipulate secrecy directions relating
to inventions relevant for defence purpose.
Section 65 of the Act, after the recent amendments
reads as:
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

(i)

Where at any time after grant of a patent,
the CG is satisfied that a patent is for
an invention relating to atomic energy
for which no patent can be granted under
subsection (i) of Section 20 of the Atomic
Energy Act 1962, it may direct the Controller
to revoke the patent, and thereupon the
Controller, after giving notice to the patentee
and every other person whose name has
been entered in the register as having
an interest in the patent, and after giving
them an opportunity of being heard, may
revoke the patent.

(ii) In any proceedings under subsection
(i), the Controller may allow the patentee
to amend the complete specification in
such manner as he considers necessary
instead of revoking the patent.
Section 118 is about penalties for
contravention of secrecy provisions relating
to certain inventions. It states, “ if any person
fails to comply with any direction given under
Section 35 or makes or causes to be made
an application for the grant of a patent in
contravention of Section 39, he shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term,
which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.
3.1.9 Protection of Security of India
Section 157A of the Indian Patent Act
states that notwithstanding anything contained
in the Act, the CG shall: (i) not disclose any
information relating to any patentable invention
or any application relating to the grant of
patent under the act, which it considers
prejudicial to the interest of security of India;
(ii) take any action including the revocation
of any patent, which it considers necessary
in the interest of the security of India by
issue of a notification in the Official Gazette
to that effect. For the purposes of this Section,
the expression “security of India” includes
any action necessary for the security of
India, which relates to fissionable materials
or the materials from which they are derived;
or relates to the traffic in arms, ammunition,
and implements of war and to such trafficking
in other goods and materials as is carried
9

on directly or indirectly for the purpose of
supplying to a military establishment; or is
taken in time of war or other emergency in
international relations.

3.2 Designs
The expression Design means only the
features of shape, configuration, pattern or
ornament or composition of lines or colours
applied to any article by any industrial process
or means whether manual, mechanical or
chemical, separate or combined, which in
the finished article appeal to and are judged
solely by the eye. It means the features of
shape, etc. applied to an article and not the
article itself. By registration under the Designs
Act, the features are protected as design.
A design can not be registered if it is not
new or original, or has been disclosed to the
public anywhere in India or in any other
country by publication in a tangible form or
by use or in any other way prior to the filing
date for registration or is not significantly
distinguishable from known designs or comprises
or contains scandalous or obscene matter.
Though not directly related to security
considerations, the Controller may refuse to
register a design of which the use would, in
his opinion, be contrary to public order or
morality (Section 35). The Design Act 2000
contains the security related provisions with
respect to the protection of designs as below9.
3.2.1 Specific Security-related
Provision (Section 46)
Notwithstanding anything contained in
the act, the Controller shall: (i) not disclose
any information relating to the registration
of a design or any application relating to the
registration of a design under the Act, which
he considers prejudicial to the interest of
the security of India; and (ii) take any action
regarding the cancellation of registration of
such designs registered under the Act which
the CG may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify in the interest of the security
of India. The expression security of India
means any action necessary for the security
of India, which relates to the application of
any design registered under this Act to any
article used for war or applied directly or
10

indirectly for the purposes of military
establishment or for the purposes of war or
other emergency in international relations.

3.3 Integrated Circuits
The semiconductor integrated circuit means
a product having transistors and other circuitry
elements, which are inseparably formed on
a semiconductor material or an insulating
material or inside the semiconductor material
and designed to perform an electronic circuitry
function. The layout-design means a layout
of transistors, and other circuitry elements
and includes lead wires connecting such
elements and expressed in any manner in
a semiconductor integrated circuit. A layoutdesign shall not be registered, which is not
original or which has been commercially
exploited anywhere in India or in a Convention
country or which is not inherently distinctive
or which is not inherently capable of being
distinguishable from another registered layoutdesign. The Semiconductor Integrated Circuits
Layout Design Act 2000 includes following
security-related provisions 10.
3.3.1 Security-related Provision
Notwithstanding anything contained in
the act, the Registrar shall: (i) not disclose
any information relating to the registration
of a layout design or any application relating
to the registration of a layout-design under
the act which the CG considers prejudicial
to the interest of the security of India; and
(ii) take any action for including the cancellation
of the registration of a layout-design registered
under the Act, which the CG may by notification
in the Official Gazette, specify in the interest
of the security of India. The expression ‘‘interest
of the security of India’’ means any action
necessary for the security of India which
relates to the use of a layout-design or a
semiconductor integrated circuit incorporating
a layout-design or an article incorporating
such semiconductor integrated circuit and
which relates to fissionable materials or the
materials from which they are derived; or
relates to the trafficking in arms, ammunition
and implements of war and to such traffic
in other goods and materials as is carried
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

on directly or indirectly for the purpose of
supplying to a military establishment; or is
taken in time of war or other emergency in
international relations.

of registration of such varieties registered
under this Act, which the central government
may by notification in the Official Gazette
specify in the interest of the security of India.

3.4 Plant Varieties

The expression “security of India” means
any action necessary for the security of
India, which relates to the use of any produce
of any variety registered under this Act directly
or indirectly for the purposes of war or military
establishment or for the purposes of war or
other emergency in international relations.

The plant variety means a plant grouping,
except microorganism, within a single botanical
taxon of the lowest known rank, which can
be: (i) defined by the expression of the
characteristics resulting from a given genotype
of that plant grouping; (ii) distinguished from
any other plant grouping by expression of at
least one of the said characteristics; and
(iii) considered as a unit with regard to its
suitability for being propagated, which remains
unchanged after such propagation, and includes
propagating material of such variety, extant
variety, transgenic variety, farmers’ variety
and essentially derived variety. A new variety
is registrable if it conforms to the criteria of
novelty, distinctiveness, uniformity, and stability.
The registration confers exclusive right on
the breeder to produce, sell, market, distribute,
import or export the variety. The unique features
of this Act are the farmer’s and the researcher’s
rights.
A farmer who has bred or developed a
new variety is entitled for registration and
other protection in like manner as a breeder.
The researcher’s right provide for the use of
any variety registered under the Act to be
used for conducting experiment or research
or the use of a variety by any person as an
initial source of variety for the purpose of
creating other varieties. The Protection of
Plant Varieties and Farmer’s Rights Act 2001
has the following security-related provisions11:
3.4.1 Security-related Provision
The Article 78 of the act states that
notwithstanding anything contained in the
Act, the authority or the Registrar shall:
(i) not disclose any information relating to
the registration of a variety or any application
relating to the registration of a variety under
this Act, which it considers prejudicial to
the interest of the security of India; and (ii)
take any action regarding the cancellation
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

3.5 The Competition Act
The Competition Act 2002 has been
enacted 12 to provide for the establishment of
a commission to prevent practices having
adverse effect on competition, to promote
and sustain competition in markets, to protect
the interests of consumers and to ensure
freedom of trade carried on by other participants
in markets, in India, and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto. The Section
54 of the Act gives power to exempt to the
CG in respect of the application of the act
in the interest of the security of India.
The CG may, by notification, exempt
from the application of this Act, or any provision
thereof, and for such period as it may specify
in such notification: (i) any class of enterprises
if such exemption is necessary in the interest
of security of the state or public interest; (ii)
any practice or agreement arising out of and
in accordance with any obligation assumed
by India under any treaty, agreement or convention
with any other country or countries; and (iii)
any enterprise which performs a sovereign
function on behalf of the CG or a state
government: Provided that in case an enterprise
is engaged in any activity including the activity
relatable to the sovereign functions of the
government, the CG may grant exemption
only in respect of activity relatable to the
sovereign functions.

3.6 Information Technology Act
The Information Technology Act 2000 of
India has been enacted 13 to provide legal
recognition for transactions carried out by
11

means of electronic data interchange and
other means of electronic communication.
Commonly referred to as "electronic commerce",
involves the use of alternatives to paperbased methods of communication and storage
of information, and to facilitate electronic
filing of documents with the government agencies.
The Section 69 of the Act includes
directions in the interest of the security of
India as given below:
(i)

If the Controller is satisfied that it is
necessary or expedient so to do in the
interest of the sovereignty or integrity of
India, the security of the state, friendly
relations with foreign states or public
order or for preventing incitement to the
commission of any cognisable offence,
for reasons to be recorded in writing, by
order, direct any agency of the government
to intercept any information transmitted
through any computer resource.

(ii) The subscriber or any person incharge
of the computer resource shall, when
called upon by any agency, which has
been directed under subsection (i), extend
all facilities and technical assistance to
decrypt the information.
(iii) The subscriber or any person who fails
to assist the agency referred to in subsection
(ii) shall be punished with an imprisonment
for a term, which may extend to seven
years.
The Clause 33 of the Information Technology
(Amendment) Bill 2006 14 introduced in the
Lok Sabha on December 15, 2006 seeks to
substitute Section 69 so as to empower the
CG to issue directions to an agency for
interception or monitoring or decryption of
any information transmitted through any computer
resource. The bill has been referred to the
Standing Committee on Information Technology
for consideration. The proposed substitution
is given below:
(a) Where the CG is satisfied that it is
necessary or expedient so to do in the
interest of the sovereignty or integrity of
India, defence of India, security of the
12

state, friendly relations with foreign states
or public order or for preventing incitement
to the commission of any cognisable
offence relating to above or for investigation
of any offence, it may subject to the
provisions of subsection (ii), for reasons
to be recorded in writing, by order, direct
any agency of the government to intercept
or monitor or decrypt or cause to be
intercepted or monitored or decrypted
any information transmitted through any
computer resource.
(b) The CG shall prescribe safeguards subject
to which such interception or monitoring
or decryption may be made or done, as
the case may be.
(c) The subscriber or intermediary or any
person incharge of the computer resource
shall, when called upon by any agency
which has been directed under subsection
(i), extend all facilities and technical
assistance to provide access to the
computer resource containing such
information; intercept or monitor or decrypt
the information; provide information contained
in computer resource; and subscriber
or intermediary or any person who fails
to assist the agency referred to in subsection
(iii) shall be punished with an imprisonment
for a term, which may extend to seven
years.”

3.7 Confidential Information
A lot of information that is of commercial
importance has to be kept confidential. Knowhow is another important form of intellectual
property generated by R&D institutions that
may not have the benefit of patent protection15.
This could be in the form of an aggregation
of known processes/procedures, an accumulation
of data, a secret formulation, or a combination
of any of these. In defence, a lot of such
information may be obtained as part of the
contracts from the original manufacturer and
may have to be shared or used such as
drawings and maintenance manuals. There
is no separate law in India to protect such
information, which is nevertheless protected
under the civil laws of contracts.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

4. MANAGEMENT OF IPRS IN

DEFENCE
The security-related exceptions are made
in lPRs laws of many other countriesi6. Protection
of lPRs is increasingly getting linked to national
security in view of organised crimes of
counterfeiting and piracyi7. There are issues
in dealing with lPRs in the context of defence
procurements and the businessi8. These include
the protection of confidential information and
third party rights. The other important issues
include defining of ownership of IPR in case
of extramural contracts when getting the
specific tasks accomplished by the involvement
of other research institutionsor private vendorslg,
and lPRs arrangements in international
collaborations in joint R&D20,joint development
and transfer of technology21.
The use of patent information is equally
important for scientists when beginning a
new project2'. It can also help in the assimilation
of new technology, and knowing the actual
owners of the patented technologies, and
obtaining licences for them.
Most scientists and the functionaries in
the government and defence are ignorant
about intellectual property rights and, most
often, find legal language to be confusing.
However, they have a responsibility to protect
the research work and inherent intellectual
property in their respective functional domain
or else the opportunities could be unduly
lost to others. They must learn to manage
protection of their lPRs within day to day
activities and practices.

5. CONCLUSIONS
lPRs are significant in the protection of
the results of research arising out of the
domestic research and development system.
In India, the lPRs laws relating to patents,
designs, integrated circuits, and plant varieties
have specific provisions keeping in view the
interests of national security. The Competition
Act and the Information Technology Act have
also relevant provisions in the context of the
national security. The essential feature of
these provisions is to stipulate and give
DESIDOC Bull. lnf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

effect to the secrecy directions while providing
protection or revoking of such protections.
In the CompetitionAct the government acquires
rights to exempt from application of the Act
if such exemption is considered necessary
in the interests of the national security. In
case of the Information Technology Act, the
government acquires relevant rights to direct
interception of information being transmitted
through computer resource. There are several
other issues in the management of lPRs in
defence like protection of confidential information,
use of patent information in R&D, and sharing
of lPRs during collaboration and the joint
development of technology. The awareness
of the scientists and the functionaries in the
government needs to be enhanced on lPRs
for effectively managing such issues.

REFERENCES
1. Military critical technologies. http://
www.dtic.mil/mctl/DSTL.html (Accessed
on January 2, 2007).
2. Rajan, Y.S. Trade, technology, foreign
policy and national security: Growing
nexus. In Seminar on Globalisation and
India, School of International Studies,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi,
14-17 January 1999.

3. DRDO policies. http://www.drdo.org/
drdopolicies.htm (Accessed on January
2, 2007).

4. Convention establishingthe World Intellectual
Property Organisation (W IPO), 1967 and
amended 1979. (http:llwww.wipo.intltreatiesl
enlconvention/trtdocs~wo029.html
(Accessed on January 2, 2007)
5. The Copyright Act 1957 with amendments
in 1999. Universal Law Publishing Co
Pvt Ltd, Delhi, 2005. 91p.
6. The Trademarks Act 1999. Universal Law
Publishing Co Pvt Ltd, Delhi, 2005, 249.
7. The Geographical Indications of Goods
(registration and protection) Act 1999.
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part IISection 1, 1999.

8. The Patents Act 1970 and Patents Rules
2003 as amended by The Patent Amendment
Rules 2006, Universal Law Publishing
Co Pvt Ltd, Delhi, 2006. 185p.

Attorney Axel H Horns' Blog on Intellectual
Property (Lawhttp://www.ipjur.com/2003/
09/patents-state-secrets-and-threat-of.php3
Accessed on January 4, 2007)

9. The Designs Act 2000. Universal Law
Publishing Co Pvt Ltd, Delhi, 2005. 70p.

17. Intellectual property rights linked to security,
US Dept of State. http://usinfo.state.gov/
ei/Archive/2004/Mar/24-488795.html
(Accessed on January 4, 2007)

10. The Semiconductor Integrated Circuits
Layout-design Act, 2000. Government of
India, 2000.
11. The Protection of Plant Variety and Farmers’
Rights Act, 2001. Government of India,
2001.
12. The Competition Act 2002 (No.12 of 2003),
The Gazette of India, 14 January 2003,
Ministry of Law and Justice, Government
of India.

18. The Ministry of Defence Guide to Intellectual
Property, September 2003, UK.
19. Siddhartha, V. Some salient issues relating
to IPR in S&T agreements, MOUs and
other arrangements. A presentation made
to the Inter-departmental Standing Working
Group on Intellectual Property Rights
(IPRs) issues in international S&T
cooperation, DST, Government of India,
New Delhi, 24 April 1990.

13. Information Technology Act of India, 2000
(No.21 of 2000), The Gazette of India, 9
June 2000, Ministry of Law and Justice,
Government of India.

20. Gupta, V K. Negotiating IPR in international
science and technology cooperation. J.
Intell. Prop. Rights, 2000, 5, 61-71.

14. The Information Technology (Amendment)
Bill, 2006 (Bill No. 96 Of 2006), A Bill
Further To Amend The Information Technology
Act, 2000. Government of India.

21. Gupta V.K., intellectual property rights
in commercialisation of R&D and transfer
of technology, J. Intell. Prop. Rights,
1997, 2, 181-90.

15. Gupta, V.K., Protecting confidential R&D
information. Asia and Pacific Tech. Monitor,
1999, 17, 37-42.

22. Gupta V.K. Use of patent information in
R&D. In Intellectual Property Rights (IPR)
Information for R&D Scientists in CSIR,
Department of Studies in Library and
Information Science, University of Mysore,
Mysore, March 2006 (Thesis).

16. Patents, state secrets, and the threat of
terrorism (6 September 2003). Patent

Contributor

D r V.K. Gupta received his PhD in IPR from Mysore University in 2006.
He is working in the area of science policy studies since last 30
years. His current interest include S&T policy reforms in India, patent
information and quantitative studies based on patent data, and internal
affairs in science & technology. Presently, he is working as Senior
Scientist in National Institute of Science, Technology and Developmental
Studies (NISTADS), a national institute under the Council of Scientific
and industrial Research.

14

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

This document was created with Win2PDF available at http://www.daneprairie.com.
The unregistered version of Win2PDF is for evaluation or non-commercial use only.

