DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 27, No. 4, July 2007, pp. 15-27
© 2007, DESIDOC

The Right to Know and the Copyright
Madabhushi Sridhar
National Academy of Legal Studies and Research
University of Law, Shameerpet, Hyderabad-500 014
ABSTRACT
The paper discusses the importance of the right to know and the copyright and
how they are relevant for democratic functioning.
Keywords: Copyright, fair deal, right to know, fundamental freedom

1. INTRODUCTION
The interface between the right to know
and limited monopoly over creative expressions
to the authentic owner represent conflicts
of interests. Proprietorial concerns on one
hand and the social interests on the other
need to be reconciled in almost every area
where individual rights conflict with social
concerns. If the copyright is considered as
an extension to the right of speech and
expression, it contradicts another fundamental
right, i.e., right to know read with the right
to life under Article 21. Recently, the right
to education, has been incorporated into
part III, The Fundamental Rights chapter of
the Constitution of India by 86th amendment.
Both these rights are equally important and
relevant for democratic function.

2. LIBERTY OF THOUGHT,
EXPRESSION AND COMMUNICATION
Free expression has three dynamic
dimensions. In a democratic society, right

to know, right to think, and right to communicate
are the essential components of freedom of
speech of expression read with the right to
meaningful life. The edifice of democracy
stands on the foundation of people’s will,
which can only be formulated based on knowing,
thinking and then expressing that thought
which includes receiving and responding to
it by others. Exchange of information leads
to discussion.
The democratic spirit lies in discussion.
In fact, democracy can be rightly described
as the governance by discussion. There is
no need to guarantee the liberty of thought
by law. A man is endowed with the attribute
of thinking along with an absolute liberty to
do so. It is inherent in every living being,
more so in a human being. However, the
liberty of thought becomes meaningful only
when thought is communicated, accepted or
disputed, developed or changed into a different
forms. There is need for law to protect this
freedom of communication, since it faces
threats from the powerful sections including
the State. The purpose of discussion and
15

the freedom of speech and expression will
expand the scope of democratic exercise.
The discussion and negotiation are now widely
practiced as methods in resolving the conflicts
between nations and disputes between the
people as alternative dispute resolution
processes.
While consent is the basis of formulation
of the representative democracy, dissent is
essential for its meaningful function. Either
in manufacturing the consent or developing
the dissent, there is dissemination of information
and knowledge. Every citizen is expected to
be vigilant to secure the benefits of the
democracy. The knowledge within accessible
range and means of expression would operate
as instruments of citizens vigilence. It is
also traditionally believed that knowledge
should not be considered as a vested proprietary
interest to be owned physically.
Freedom of expression along with free
flow of information as a human right was
considered to be essential in the pursuit of
peace and progress by the United Nations
in its Unviersal Declaration of Human Rights
(Article 19), in 1948, which reads: “Everyone
has the right to freedom of opinion and expression;
this right includes freedom to hold opinions
without interference and to seek, receive
and impart information and ideas through
any media and regardless of frontiers”.
International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights reinforced this provision [Article 19(2)]
as “Everyone shall have the right to freedom
of expression; this right shall include freedom
to seek, recieve and impart information and
ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers,
either orally, in writing or in print, in the form
of art, or through any other of his choice.”
The integral yoga of informatics literacy
education and social transformation is the
revolutionary essence of the new social order
and the citizens’ right to know. The episode
between the Czar of Russia and revolutionary
leaders explain the linkage between politics
and education. The Czar, worried at the prolonged
disturbances in his empire, once called the
leaders of the revolt for talks. “What do you
want”, he asked. “A better life”, they replied.
16

Asked to be specific, the leaders said, “Reduce
taxes”. “Yes, granted, and then?” the Czar
prompted. “Give education to our children”,
replied leaders.
The Czar was reluctant because he knew
what would happen to the despotism that
the Czars had nurtured in Russia if the power
of knowledge was given to the commoners 1.
Right to know is nothing but right to empowerment
because knowledge is power.

3. RIGHT TO KNOW AND
DISSEMINATION OF
KNOWLEDGE
Traditional societies, especially the Indian
culture, believes in dissemination of knowledge
without imposing any cost or consideration.
Dissemination is an essential attribute of
knowledge. Oral tradition,Gurukul,
and
a
traditional learing centre, where disciples
reside in an Ashram (hermitage) and serve
the teacher to learn the knowledge) practices
that the valuable knowledge passes through
the generations uninterruptedly. Even though
it was criticised that such a tradition led to
a situation where documentation is lacking,
the flow of knowledge did not stop. The
documentation, which is one of the purposes
of copyright law, was also not prohibited.
From palm leaves to internet, the knowledge
has been continuously documented. The
Ramayana, which embodies the ideal human
conduct, has been retold millions of times
in hundreds of languages and dialects in
myriad forms including the new medium,
Internet.
The ancient stories from various Puranic
literature, mythology, legends and some
historically known sources suggest that the
original authors did not attach much value
to the money but were interested in sacred
cause of spreading the ethical and moral
values through their creative writings. Every
story or poetic expression was created with
meaning and purpose or providing eternal
peace and tranquility. Several legends in
ancient India are replete with episodes wherein
writers like Pothana (Bammera Pothana, a
Telugu poet from Orugallu, now called Warangal,
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

is believed to have refused to dedicate his
Bhagawatham to a local king, inspite of mounting
pressures and inducements. He never claimed
authorship to that poetic translation of Vyasa’s
Bhagawath in Sanskrit, which he stated was
an ordain from Lord Rama, Tyagaraja (Thyagaraja,
a Vaggeyakara, a combination of lyricist,
composer and singer, who preferred Rama’s
Sannnidhi to Nidhi, saying ‘nidhi chaala sukhama,
Ramuni Sannidhi seva Sukhama...” in one
of his famous keerthana (devotional songs)),
Annamaya (Tallapaka Annamacharya, also
called Annamayya, a devotee of Lord
Venkateswara of Tirumala, in whose praise
he sang more than 36 thousand devotional
songs which were documented in copper
plates, refused to sing in praise of a local
king in return to material benefits offered by
him. The legend goes that he was imprisoned
and harassed before the God himself broke
his chains), and Saint Jayadeva (author of
Gita Govindam, a famous poetry embodying
the eternal love of Lord Krishna and Radha,
did not yield to the law of local king that he
should sing only his songs or face the
imprisonment) never preferred royal patronage
and rejected the material wealth when offered
in exchange to dedication of creative literary
work.
Acharya Ramanuja [a renowned protagonist
of Vishisthadvaitha (Qualified Monism) belonging
to 11 th century AD] was a philosopher saint
who reformed the Vaishnava cult and broke
the walls of secrecy that shrouded the
“Tirumanthra”, great mantra of Narayana, chanting
or meditating which leads to salvation, and
offered it to all irrespective of caste, creed
or religion, by stating it from the top of the
Gopuram. Adi Shankara Acharya [a famous
protagonist of Advaitha (Monism) belonging
to 9th century AD], was another great saint
who’s short but reverberate life presents his
philosophy of spreading the knowledge. He
reformed the religion to open up learning
process breaking the social barriers.
Almost every language and every Indian
state has such legendary personalities who
never cared for material prospects and went
on disseminating the knowledge freely. Thus
the exploitation of economic value from the
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

writings or selling it for money or limiting its
reach or monopolysing or blocking the wisdom
was never the objective for these valuable
creators. A stagnated knowledge does not
serve the purpose and is almost equivalent
to non-existent. Even the modern democratic
working requires free flow of information and
knowledge without any hurdles. The right
to know is not specifically guaranteed by
the Constitution of India, but is Read into
the Right to Live under Article 21.
Almost all democratic constitutions provided
a guarantee for right to freedom of speech
and expression. It is aimed that the laws of
copyright would enhance the value of such
speech and expression, as it guarantees an
effective protection from economic exploitation
to the creative speeches and expressions
like poetry, criticism, etc. from being reproduced
without a licence.
First amendment to the US Constitution
prohibits Congress from making any law abridging
the freedom of speech and expression of
press. The same Article 1 (Section 8) states
that the “Congress shall have power…to permit
progress of science and useful arts by securing
for limited time the authors and inventors
exclusive rights to their respective writings
and discoveries".
Article 19 (Section 1a) of constitution of
India, provides for right to freedom of speech
and expression. The grounds of restrictions
listed under Article 19 (2) do not contain
‘copyright’. Does it mean that constitution
makers did not contemplate copyright as a
restriction on the freedom of speech? The
judiciary has recognised the right to know
in Article 21 as a necessary ingredient of
participatory democracy [Reliance Petrolium
Ltd vs Proprietors, Indian Express Newspapers,
Bombay (P) Ltd, (1988) 4 SCC 592]. Justice
P. Venkatarama Reddy, explained, the basis
of right to know in our constitutional democracy
in the March 13, 2003 judgment [Supreme
Today 93] (2003) 3 nullifying the Amendments
to Representation of People’s Act in the
following words:
“In the Constitution of our democratic
Republic, among the fundamental freedoms,
17

freedom of speech and expression shines
radiantly in the firmament of Part III. We
must take legitimate pride that this cherished
freedom has grown from strength to strength
in the post independent era. It has been
constantly nourished and shaped to new
dimensions in tune with the contemporary
needs by the courts. Barring a few aberrations,
the Executive Government and the Political
Parties too have not lagged behind in safeguarding
this valuable right, which is the insignia of
democratic culture of a nation.”
Nurtured by this right, press and electronic
media have emerged as powerful instruments
to mould the public opinion and to educate,
entertain, and enlighten the public.
Freedom of speech and expression, just
as equality clause and the guarantee of life
and personal liberty has been very broadly
construed by the Supreme Court right from
1950s. It has been variously described as
a 'basic human right', 'a natural right' and
the like. It embraces within its scope the
freedom of propagation and inter-change of
ideas, dissemination of information which
would help formation of one's opinion and
viewpoint and debates on matters of public
concern. The importance which our constitutionmakers wanted to attach to this freedom is
evident from the fact that reasonable restrictions
on that right could be placed by law only on
the limited grounds specified in Article 19(2),
not to speak of inherent limitations of the right.
'The right to know', as was observed by
Justice Mathew is "Which is derived from
the concept of freedom of speech, though
not absolute is a factor which should make
one wary, when secrecy is claimed for
transactions which can, at any rate, have no
repercussion on public security". As said
very aptly:"In a Government like ours, where
all the agents of the public must be responsible
for their conduct, there can be but few secrets.
The people of this country have a right to
know every public act, everything that is
done in a public way, by their public functionaries."
The next milestone, which showed the
way for concretising this right, is the decision
in S.P. Gupta vs Union of India [(1981) Suppl.
18

SCC, page 87] in which the Supreme Court
dealt with the issue of High Court Judges'
transfer. Justice Bhagwati, observed "The
concept of an open government is the direct
emanation from the right to know which seems
to be implicit in the right of free speech and
expression guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a).
Therefore, disclosure of information in regard
to the functioning of the Government must
be the rule and secrecy an exception...”.
These two decisions have recognised
that the right of the citizens to obtain information
on matters relating to public acts flows from
the fundamental right enshrined in Article
19(1)(a). The pertinent observations made
by the learned Judges in these two cases
were in the context of the question whether
the privilege under Section 123 of the Evidence
Act could be claimed by the State in respect
of the Blue Book in the first case, (Raj
Narain's case), and the file throwing light on
the consultation process with the Chief Justice,
in the second case. Though the scope and
ambit of Article 19(1)(a) vis-a-vis the right to
information did not directly arise for consideration
in those two landmark decisions, the observations
quoted have certain amount of relevance in
evaluating the nature and character of the right.
Then, in Dinesh Trivedi vs Union of India
[(1997) 4 SCC, page 306], the Supreme
Court was confronted with the issue whether
background papers and investigatory reports
which were referred to in Vohra Committee's
Report could be compelled to be made public.
The observations of Chief Justice Ahmadi,
are quite pertinent, "In modern constitutional
democracies, it is axiomatic that citizens
have a right to know about the affairs of the
Government which, having been elected by
them, seeks to formulate sound policies of
governance aimed at their welfare. However,
like all other rights, even this right has recognised
limitations; it is, by no means, absolute."
The next decision, which deserves
reference, is the case of Secretary, Ministry
of I & B vs Cricket Association of Bengal
[(1995) 2 SCC page 161]. Has an organiser
or producer of any event a right to get the
event telecast through an agency of his choice
whether national or foreign? That was the
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

primary question decided in that case. It
was highlighted that the right to impart and
receive information is a part of the fundamental
right under Article 19(1)(a) of the constitution.
On this point, Justice Sawant, had this to
say at Paragraph 75. "The right to impart
and receive information is a species of the
right of freedom of speech and expression
guaranteed by Article 19(1)(a) of the constitution.
A citizen has a fundamental right to use the
best means of imparting and receiving information
and as such to have an access to telecasting
for the purpose. However, this right to have
an access to telecasting has limitations on
account of the use of the public property....."
Justice Jeevan Reddy, spoke more or
less in the same voice. "The right of free
speech and expression includes the right to
receive and impart information. For ensuring
the free speech right of the citizens of this
country, it is necessary that the citizens
have the benefit of plurality of views and a
range of opinions on all public issues. A
successful democracy posits an 'aware' citizenry.
Diversity of opinions, views, ideas and ideologies
is essential to enable the citizens to arrive
at informed judgment on all issues touching them."
A conspectus of these cases would reveal
that the right to receive and impart information
was considered in the context of privilege
pleaded by the State in relation to confidential
documents relating to public affairs and the
freedom of electronic media in broadcasting/
telecasting certain events. The right to know
is not only against the information from the
monopolistic holding of the state but also
from the clutches of private corporations
and the individuals, unless they infringe upon
the confidentiality or privacy respectively.
Thus, only the security condition can justify
holding of information by the government,
and similarly the confidentiality or privacy
can block the information flowing from private
bodies or persons.
Therefore, the copyright regulation in
the context of right to liberty of thought,
expression, economic exploitation and right
to know as provided to every person or citizen
of this country needs to be studied.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

4. WHAT IS COPYRIGHT?
Copyright is the exclusive right of the
author to derive economic benefits from his
own writing or artistic performance or creative
work. Copyright regulation basically protects
the interests of writer or creator or performer
from commercial exploitation by others. As
nobody can own or perpetuate perpetual vested
interest in knowledge, even the copyright
regime throws every creative writing or invention
for the world open after certain prescribed period.
The copyright law provides an incentive
to creative activity and then permits the
society to benefit at large. After the invention
of printing press the multiplying of any creative
writing became much easier and necessity
to protect the right for the creator also increased.
Copyright is relatively a modern concept
that came into existence with British rule.
The concise Oxford Dictionary defines
copyright as “the exclusive right given by
law, for certain term of years to an author,
composer, etc. to print, publish, and sell
copies of his original work". The moral justification
for providing legal protection is the principle
that a man should reap the fruits of his own
creation or mechanical labour.
Copyright is basically the right to copy
and make use of literary, dramatic, musical
and artistic works and cinematography films,
sound records, broadcast and telecast.
Technological progress has made piracy of
copyright work simple and difficult to control.
In the rapidly changing technological environment,
copyright protection is being extended to
many areas of creative work particularly in
the computer industry, relating to computer
software and databases. To act as a deterrent
against computer software piracy and video
piracy, the provisions relating to protection
of computer software have been tightened.
According to Paul Goldstein, the traditions
of copyright and author’s right rest on sharply
differing premises. Copyright’s philosophical
premise is utilitatian: the purpose of copyright
is to stimulate production of the widest possible
variety of creative goods at the lowest possible
price. By contrast, author’s right is rooted
19

in the philosophy of natrual rights; an author
is entitled to protection of his work as a
matter of right and justice. The ideal author’s
right legislator will vote to extend protection
without any showing of social necessity and
will reject it only if the extended protection
would materially hamper socially valuable
uses of protected works. Berne Convention
bridges the two traditions, with the result
that its extensive minimum standards have
dictated substantively similar rules for countries
in both camps. Similarities in economic,
political, and social structures across the
two systems also explain the convergence,
as do local industry politics. Professor William
Cornish is certainly correct to observe that
“Over primary issues of making the rights
granted legally effective and so economically
meaningful, the two approaches flow together
in a single stream. Where there are divergencies,
they are often more the product of low political
lobbying rather than of high and disinterested
thought”2.
National laws on copyright and neighbouring
rights are far more similar than they are
different. Widespread adherence to the Berne
Convention for the protection of literary and
artistic works explains much of this harmony.
Around 140 countries belong to Berne Union.
The TRIPS agreement with 135 adherents,
brings national laws into more immediate
compliance with Berne norms as well as
with norms introduced by the TRIPS Agreement
itself. A handful of universal principles are
common in national copyright laws. One is
the axiom that copyright law will protect
only original expression, leaving ideas –building
blocks of creativity free for all to use. Legislation
or case law in every country holds that a
literary work’s themes, plots, and stock
characters are unprotectable, as are discrete
colours and shapes in visual art, and rhythm,
notes and harmony in music.
Article 9 of the TRIPS Agreement, obligating
members to comply with Articles 1 through
21 of the Berne Convention’s Paris Act,
presumably requires them to protect all forms
of ‘literary and artistic works’ including “every
production in the literary, scientific and artistic
domain” and not only the examples listed in
20

Article 2 of the Convention. To these classes
of projectable subject matter, Article 10 of
the TRIPS Agreement adds that “computer
programs, whether in source or object code,
shall be protected as literary works under
the Berne Convention TRIPs Agreement Article
10(1), and that “compilations of data or other
material, whether in machine readable or
other form, which by reason of the selection
or arrangement of their contents constitute
intellectual creations shall be protected as
such” [TRIPs agreement Article 10(2)]. Article
9(2) (“Copyright protection shall extend to
expressions and not to ideas, procedures,
methods of operation or mathematical concepts
as such”) expresses the traditional principle
that has long been a norm of international
copyright protection. The origin of the clause
can be traced to a Japanese proposal that
would have excluded programming languages,
rules, or algorithms from the scope of protection
for computer programs; the proposal evolved
into an exclusion for ideas, procedures, methods,
or systems underlying computer programs
or databases, which was then expanded
and applied to all forms of literary and artistic
works.
By throwing open the ideas, themes,
plots and stock characters, the copyright
laws of different countries and the Berne
Convention have secured the discussion,
free flow of creative thinking. This is a point
of reconciliation between all important right
to know and significant copyright. However,
one of the most important aspects to maintain
the minimum standards as agreed upon by
Berne Union, to provide a uniformity and
universality of the norms. Appreciating the
need and social purpose of leaving knowledge
for the universal absorption, the copyright
law provided for throwing the expressed
knowledge open after a limited period of
protection to its creator.
The limitation on monopoly of the knowledge
as explained by the term of life of the author
and 50 years. The TRIPs agreement provides
that in the case of works, other than photographs
and applied art, for which the term of protection
is calculated on a basis other than a natural
life, the term shall be no less than fifty
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

years from the year of publication or, if the
work is not published within fifty years, then
fifty years from the year it was created ( TRIP
Agreement, Article 12). Though the Agreement
says it is minimum of the term, which means
that the nations are at liberty to increase
the term, it is not ethical and reasonable to
extend the period of monopoly beyond fifty
years. The Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension
Act, 1998 passed by Clinton Government
extended the term by another 20 years by
increasing the monopoly to the life time of
creator and 70 years only to further exploit
the economic benefits from Disney cartoon
“Steamboat Willie”, the cartoon in which Mickey
Mouse (though his name was Mortimer in
this work) appeared for the first time. The
cartoon got its first copyright in 1928. It was
created under 1909 Act and so with its single
renewal. Steamboat Willie would have passed
into the public domain in 1984, available for
anyone to use without permission. When
the 1976 Act went into effect it gave all pre
1978 works protection until 2004. But the
extension under the Bono Act now provides
copyright protection for Steamboat Willie till
2023, 95 years from its creation. Thus Disney
will still be able to protect Mickey Mouse
under trademark law even after the copyright
for Steamboat Willie finally expires. Such
an extension beyond the ‘standard minimum’
defeats the objective of limited monopoly.
Another area where the conflict between
the right of society to know and the copyright
of author or the transferee from him is the
doctrine of fair use and varieties of exemptions
made available for the use of copyrighted
knowledge though it amounts to infringement
otherwise. In the absence of fair use doctrine,
the copyright law would be harsh, unreasonable
and against public policy favouring dissemination
of information and knowledge and plainly
would have been unenforceable. The old 1909
Copyright Statute of USA was stringent as
it gave each copyright holder an exclusive
right to ‘print, reprint, publish, copy and
vend the copyrighted. As stated in this act
the right was absolute: the wording was put
in such terms that even pencil-and-paper
copying was a violation of the US Copyright
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

Act. The 1909 Statute’s terms were so stringent
that if enforced to the letter, it could have
prevented anyone except the copyright holder
from making any copy of any copyrighted
work. American courts assumed, in creating
a judge-made exception to the absolute language
of the 1909 copyright statute, that “the law
implies the consent of the copyright owner
to a fair use of his publication for the advancement
of science or art (satement of Wittenberg
who offered a good non-technical description
of fair use before it was expanded in 1967
as quoted by Dwight L. Teeter and Bill Loving
in Law of Mass Communications, Freedom
and Control of Print and Broadcast Media,
NewYork Foundation Press, 2001, p.854).
The fair use doctrine, although a rather elastic
yardstick, was a needed improvement.
If the violation is for fair purposes and
non-commercial, non-exploitative purposes,
it cannot be penalised. The author can copyright
the work only when it is original. To prove
or establish originality is the pre-requisite
for the action for violation, and secondly the
defence available to the defendant is 'fair dealing'.
Section 52 gave a detailed explanation
as to what is not an infringement, and explained
the doctrine of fair dealing or fair use. These
provisions, as given below, balance the interests
of community with those of individual authors,
and permits spread and dissemination of
knowledge:
A fair dealing with a literary, dramatic,
musical or artistic work for private use,
including research, criticism or review,
whether of that work of any other work
Making of copies or adaptation of computer
program to use, for back up copies, for
using it for inter operability, to observe,
study or test of the computer program,
or making copies for non-commercial
personal use
A fair dealing for reporting current events
in a newspaper, magazine or similar
periodical, or by broadcasting or in a
cinematograph film or by means of
photograph
21

Reproduction for purpose of judicial
proceedings or for report of a judicial
proceedings
Reproduction of work prepared by
Secretariat for the use of members of
that legislature
Recitation of reasonable extract from
a published literary or dramatic work
in public
The publication in collection for the
use of educational institutions
Reproduction by teacher in course of
institutions or in question papers
Performance in the course of educational
activities in institutions
Paying in public in an enclosed room
or in clubs in certain circumstances.
Prformance in an amateur club given a
non-paying audience or for religious
institutions including a marriage procession
Reproduction in newspaper and magazine
of an article on current economic, political,
social or religious topics in certain
circumstances
Publication of report in newspaper, of
a lecture delivered in public
Making a maximum of three copies for
the use of a public library
Reproduction of unpublished work kept
in a museum or library, where the author
is known and publication is made 60
years after his death, it is not infringement
Reproduction of any matter published
in Official Gazette or reports of Government
Commission or other bodies and any
judgement or order of court, tribunal or
judicial authority not prohibited from
publication
Production or publication of a translation
of Acts of Legislature or rules

22

Publishing a painting or photograph of
a work of architecture
Publishing of a painting, drawing,
photographs or engraving of sculpture
which is permanently situated in a public
place, and Including such things in the
films
The use by the author of an artistic
work, where the author is not the owner
of the copyright therein, provided he
does not thereby repeat or imitate the
main design of the work
Reconstruction of a building referring
to original architecture, drawing or plans,
and
Exhibition of film after the expiration of
the term of copyright therein, etc.

4.1 Exemptions
However, in order to protect the interests
of users, some exemptions have been prescribed
in respect of specific uses of work enjoying
copyright. Some of the exemptions are the
uses of the work like for the purpose of
research or private study; for critcism or
review; for reporting current events; in connection
with judicial proceeding; and performance
by an amateur club or society if the performance
is given to a non-paying audience.
The Karnataka High Court justified the
provisions of balance between the rights of
authors and interests of society [Gramaphone
Co. of India vs Mars Recording Pvt Ltd 2000
PTC 117 (Kar)]. The provisions under Section
52 are intended to ensure that the monopoly
rights should not be detrimental to the larger
interests of general public. It is a perfect
balance of the statute till the technological
advances broke down this balance. The
multimedia improved the quality of reproduction
and speed of transmission besides converging
the entire existing media into one. The Internet
and digital media made the rights of individual
author very vulnerable.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

4.2 Intention
Once the copyright is found to be infringed
the motive or intention of the person who
violated it is irrelevant. If the conditions under
Section 51 are satisfied and none of the
exceptions specified in Section 52 are applicable,
the infringement would invite the penalty
prescribed under the law, irrespective of the
good motive or lofty intention of the violator.
Even though the defendant acted innocently,
the invasion constitutes a wrong as the copyright
is a proprietary right.

4.3 Changes in Doctrine of Fair
Use
The doctrine of fair use has underwent
several changes in India. Importing copyright
work into India is an infringement according
to Section 51 (b) (iv). Earlier importing for
the private and domestic use of the importer
was not an infringement. The words "except
for the private and domestic use of the importer"
omitted by Act 65 of 1984, Section 3 with
effect from 8 October,1984 have become
infrigement. It was in fact originally a fair
use and from 1984 onwards it became unfair.
But another provision is added to this Section
stating that “Import of one copy of any work,
for the private or domestic use of the importer
is not an infringement”.
The 1995 amendment substituted clause
(ii) of Section 51 (a), with regard to
communication of the work to the public,
which can include even Internet, the copyrighted
work. Copyright is deemed to be infringed
if any person permits, for profit, any place
to be used for the communication of the
work to the public where such communication
constitutes an infringement of the copyright
in the work. However, an exception is also
provided in the same clause stating "Unless
he was not aware and had no reasonable
ground for believing that such communication
to the public would be an infringement of
copyright.” Thus, lack of knowledge about
existence of copyright in the place, which
he is communicating to public for profit will
absolve from liability for infringement.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

Section 52 deals with exceptions and
fair use doctrine. Section 52 (1) (aa) specifically
refers to exceptions to computer programs'
copyright infringement. The making of copies
or adaptation of a computer program by the
lawful possessor of a copy of such computer
program in order to utilise for the purpose
for which it was supplied, or to make back
up copies for temporary protection is permitted.
This is an obvious thing which was restated.
But there is no element of exception which
doctrine of fair use accorded to other kinds
of infringements of other types of copyrights.
However, clause (ab) permits the lawful
possessor of a computer program, to obtain
any other essential information for interoperability
of an independently created computer program,
if that information is not readily available.
Clause (ac), permits the observation, study,
or test of functioning of the computer program
in order to determine the ideas and principle
which underline any elements of the program
while performing such acts necessary for
the functions for which the computer program
has been supplied. Clause (ad) allows the
making of copies or adaptation of the computer
program from a personally legally obtained
copy for non- commercial personal use.

5. RECENT CASES ON PUBLIC
INTEREST AND FAIR USE
In 1998, in Pro Sieben Media AG vs
Carlton UK Television Ltd. [(1999), 1 WLR
605] the Calton UK TV broadcast a current
affairs programme, which critically analysed
the issue of cheque book journalism and the
sale of stories about people’s private lives
to the media. The programme included a 30
second sequence taken from an interview,
which was the broadcast of the plaintiff Pro
Sieben with Mandy Allwood, a woman who
was notorious at the time for being pregnant
with eight fetuses, and making money out
of her situation. The plaintiff complained
infringement of his copyright and the defendant
pleaded the fair use defence for criticism or
review. The trial judge refused to accept the
defence of fair use and held there was no
sufficient acknowledgment of the author of
original programme. The Court of Appeal
23

reversed the decision finding that there had
been sufficient acknowledgement. The Court
explained that the exemptions under doctrine
of fair use had achieved proper balance between
protection of the rights of a creative author
and the wider public interest and that the
free speech is an important part of that
wider public interest. The fair dealing is for
the purpose of criticism, that criticism may
be strongly expressed and unbalanced without
forfeiting the fair dealing defence. The words
‘for the purpose of criticism or review’ and
‘for the purpose of reporting current events’
should be construed as composite phrases.
The intentions and motives of the user of
copyright material were highly relevant in
relation to fair dealing. The criticism includes
the criticism of ideas and style. The programme
was a comment on cheque book journalism
in general and the treatment by the media
of the Allwood story in particular. The event
was a current event, and the use of extract
was short, and thus there was no infringement.

5.1 Diana Case
In Hyde Park Residence Ltd, vs Yelland
(2001 Ch. 143), a newspaper published still
photographs taken on a security camera
when than Princes of Wales Diana, and her
friend Dodi Fayed visited Villa Windsor in
Paris on the day prior to their deaths in a
car accident. The photographs were stolen
by a security guard and sold to the newspaper,
which published them more than a year later.
Hyde Park had sought summary judgment
at the first instance relying on breach of
copyright. The defendant relied on the defence
of fair dealing for the purpose of reporting
current events. The judge upheld it as fair
use. However, it was reversed on appeal on
motives of the alleged infringer, the extent
and purpose of the use, whether that extent
was necessary for the purpose of current
events in question. In the case the work
(photographs by security camera) had not
been published or circulated to the general
public. This was considered to be one of the
important indicators that the use was not
fair and not for the purpose of reporting
current events.
24

The Court examined the doctrine of fair
use on the touchstone of a reasonable man
and said: “A fair minded and honest person
would not pay for the dishonestly taken driveway
stills and publish them in a newspaper knowing
that they had not been published or circulated”.
Also, the extent of the use was also held
to be excessive.

6. WHO DERIVES THE
ECONOMIC BENEFIT?
Though the law contains several provisions
which try to reduce the rigour of the monopoly
created by copyright protection, practically
the copyright in the hands of an outright
purchasing publisher becomes a tool of economic
exploitation of creator’s work. Generally the
unilateral, arbitrary and unreasonable agreements
of copyright transfer all statutory benefits to
corporate or commercial publishing houses.
As the unscrupulous publishers desire to
derive more profits, they increase the price,
offer higher commissions for the sellers and
pay very less to the author for an outright
purchase of copyright and then enjoy the
commercial benefits for life of the author
and 60 years. In India the book industry is
not writer’s market. Especially in Andhra
Pradesh, the reduced book reading habit
and buying capacity offers no incentive to
author.
The publisher is cleverly exploiting such
a position. This in fact, leads to a situation
where the financial incentives for the author
are negligle, and discourages him from writing
a second book. This defeats the purpose of
the copyright law totally. Thus because of
these pathetic conditions in developing countries,
the law must not be too harsh in protecting
the corporate publisher rights; rather it should
be soft towards the rights of the authors and
interests of the ultimate reading consumer
population. If not, the law serves the interests
of commercial publishers depriving both, the
authors by meagre payments and the readers
by collecting the higher price.
An incident, which instead of operating
as an incentive to original author for generating
an idea and expressing in a tangible manner,
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

helped those who copied it to make huge
profits. In Indian Express Newspaper (Bombay)
Pvt Ltd vs Jagmohan (AIR 1985 Bom 229),
the reporter of Indian Express, Ashwini Sarin
investigated the flesh trade in Madhya Pradesh
and purchased in Shivpuri village, a woman
"Kamla" for Rs 2,300 to establish the trafficking
in women. He then wrote series of articles
exposing the prostitution trade and involvement
of bigwigs from politics and police department
on 27th, 29th, and 30th April 1981 and
subsequently on 2nd May 1981.
Mr Vijay Tendulkar, well known playwriter,
scripted a play by name 'Kamla' based on
the Indian Express exposure, and staged
the play for 150 times in 32 cities and in
seven languages. Jagmohan Mundhara, a
film producer, planned to produce a film on
the same theme based on the script of Vijay
Tendulkar. Ashwini Sarin and the Indian Express
newspaper complained that Jagmohan and
Vijay infringed their copyright. The Indian
Express contended that, when series of
sensational reports resulted from sweat of
brow of the journalists, and forms an effective
expression of what was happening around,
why not it be protected? How is that others
could make capital out of it leaving the original
authors of the ‘exposure’ without any protection
to their writing?
The Bombay High Court held that there
could not be any copyright in an event,
which actually took place. The Court observed
that "There is distinction between the materials
upon which one claiming copyright has worked
and the product of the application of his
skill, judgment, labour and literary talent to
these materials. The ideas, information, national
phenomena and events on which an author
expends his skill labour, capital, judgment
and literary talent are common property and
are not the subject of the copyright".
This judgment ignored the skill, capital,
talent and labour invested by the journalist
besides his skillful expression in the form
of investigative story and simply termed the
incident as national phenomena and finally
refused the copyright to journalists. The Court
should have recognised the way the national
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

phenomena or tragic happening in society
was creatively reported by the journalist alerting
the authorities.
The justice could have been ordering
Vijay Tendulkar and Jagmohan to acknowledge
the efforts and risk of journalist and secure
his permission on reasonable payment of a
share in their proceeds, otherwise, it would
amount to permitting a theatre and cinema
person to commercially exploit an expression
of idea which is not their own, which is
against the spirit of copyright regulation.

7. HARSHNESS OF ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE
An Anton Piller Order can be passed by
the court in response to the petition by the
copyright holder. It is an exparte order directing
the defendant to permit the plaintiff, accompanied
by the solicitor or attorney to enter his premises
and take inspection of relevant documents
and articles and take copies thereof or remove
them for safe custody. It is an extra ordinary
remedy, which is not generally available for
any plaintiff in other civil cases. This special
order was extended by the courts to operate
against multiple number of unknown defendants
who might have been infringing the copyright
as per the apprehensions of the plaintiff. It
is called John Doe order, the name indicates
the common man of the US, against whom
the exparte search and seizure order was
issued. The US courts limited it to a maximum
of ten unknown defendants. But in Ten Sports
judgment the Supreme Court in India has
issued the “John Doe” order against multiple
numbers of unknown defendants.
The Supreme Court in India has issued
the John Doe order in Ten Sports case, in
addition to orders the nature of Anton Piller
order. The Advocate Commissioner appointed
by the Court is permitted by this order to
enter the premises of unnamed defendants
and record evidence of infringing materials
(photographs and video shots), which could
be used in civil or criminal proceedings.
The Supreme Court proved that such
orders can be passed against an unspecified
25

number of defendants, which means that
authority wider than provided for in developed
countries like the US and Canada was made
available. This may be found necessary to
expedite the action and enabled the judiciary
with much needed authorisation to crack
down on copyright infringement in the film
and broadcast industry. There can be the
seizure of the material from the unnamed
defendant’s premises also. Class actions of
a group of defendants were also permitted
in this case. It is an abnormal power to
check piracy with an urgency that is imperative
for Intellectual Property with short shelf life.
It may appear to be reasonable in curbing
the video and audio piracy racket, which is
rocking the film industry, but generally it
creates hardship for hundreds of people. If
the unscrupulous publishers can use this,
even the authors sometimes, may become
victims at the hands of their own copyright
assignees. It may be against natural principles
of procedural justice embodied under different
municipal law generally. Except in cases of
video and audio cassettes involving the feature
films, this procedure will leave unreasonable
harshness to favour copyright holders rather
than the authors.

8. CONCLUSION
The purpose of liberalisation, privitisation
and globalisation is again to throw the enterprise
open to any competitor depending on his
efficiency and intelligence in production and
marketing. The Internet is the super high
way of information, which technically cannot
be limited or regulated. By creating a vested
interest of property in knowledge in some
companies or individuals, the copyright or
patent tries to limit the spread and its utility
for welfare of mankind. One has to understand
the concept of copyright and the context in
which the copyright regulation is being made
into a rigid law all over the world. In a modern
knowledge society of the democratic world,
the research is a continuing process and
every one in any corner of the world must
have freedom to develop from earlier thought
and scientific or technological invention or
discovery. Rights of individuals in the society
and the interests of community has to be
26

kept in mind in providing exclusive rights
over the so called knowledge. The technological
advancement has made the violation of copyright
very easy and regulation very difficult or
sometimes impossible. The advancing
technology converges various media into one
or another. If the spoken word is the example
of inter-personal communication, the book
and newspaper represents printed word. Audio
is repeatable spoken word. The cinema is
a mixture of spoken word and visual word.
The speech and scene converge together in
cinema, making it more powerful medium.
The video is another dimension of cinema,
capable of easy multiplying the possibilities
of exhibition for an individual or a small
gathering. Video includes within itself, audio,
cinema, printed or spoken word.
The Internet is convergence of all these
media plus a whole lot of world's library of
audio-visual and book archives. As the new
media techniques are conquering the world
of communication, copying is becoming easier
and speedier than printing. Multiplication is
easy. Exhibition or performing for smaller
gatherings has become much more easier.
If 'fair dealing' is not allowed, and everything
other than 'original' is not hindered from
reaching the nook and corner of the world,
the copyright regulation would become a
hindrance for the democratic need of
communication and information flow.
The multinational corporations of advanced
countries, who have major stakes of vested
interests in monopolising the knowledge,
pose a threat if armed with the stricter copyright
regulation. As apprehended the patents in
pharmaceuticals might threaten the right to
life and right to health of an individual in a
poor country because the monopoly of drug
making. The rigid copyright regime also might
threaten the countries with less knowledge
in relation to their existence and economic
advancement. However, there is still a need
to protect the copyright of the authors from
clever publishers and commercial exploiters.
The enforcing officers and the judicial machinery
have to understand the limitations of the
statute and interests of individual consumers
of 'knowledge' and must have a fair deal
between 'originality' and 'fair use'.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

As the copyright is an extension of freedom
of speech and expression, a constitutionally
recognised fundamental right, the individual’s
right to protect the economic interests derived
from the publication, public exhibition and
any other kind of multiplication for a protected
period must be limited to as minimum period
as possible, while expanding the scope of
fair use as far as possible.

intellectual property should belong to the
mankind as a whole.

The limited monopoly should end as
soon as possible, and beyond which the

3. Gervais, Daniel. The TRIPs Agreement:
Drafting history and analysis. 1998.

REFERENCES
1. Freedom of Information.Sri Aurobindo’s
Action, 1990, 20 (1), 2 and 16.
2. Goldstein, Paul. International Copyright,
principles, law and practice. OUP, 2001.

Contributor

Dr Madabhushi Sridhar obtained his Masters degree in Communications
and Journalism. He received his Doctoral degree for his thesis on 'Freedom of Press and Defamation'. He is a recipient of four gold medals in
MCJ and one in LLB. He has undergone training in advance techniques in
mass media in then Czechoslovakia and is currently pursuing research in
media law. He pursues his journalistic interests by contributing regularly
in various newspapers, magazines and online website journals. Dr Sridhar
has developed course curriculum in distance education on 'Women and
Law' and 'Human Rights' for Ambedkar Open University. He has written
four modules for PG Diploma in Media Law, a Nalsar-pro online course,
and developed PG Diploma course in Insurance Law. His areas of interest
include Media Law, Copyright, Legal Language, Women and Law and
Child Rights. He has several books and articles to his credit in both Telugu
and English. At the NALSAR University of Law, Dr Sridhar teaches Tort Law,
Criminal Law, Media Laws, Insurance Law, ADR methods and Child Rights.
He has authored two books on Alternative Dispute Resolution Negotiation
and Mediation and Right to Information published in 2006.

“aano bhadra krathave yanthi visvathaha”
Let noble thoughts come to us from every side
- Rigveda, I-89-i.

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

27

