DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 27, No. 4, July 2007, pp. 29-36
© 2007, DESIDOC

Infringement of Copyright and
Doctrine of Fair Use
G.B. Reddy
University College of Law, Osmania University, Hyderabad-500 007
E-mail: gbredlaw@yahoo.co.in

ABSTRACT
The paper analyses the Indian laws related to copyright, concept of infringement
of copyright and exceptions to the same particularly with regard to fair use or fair
dealing of copyright.
Keywords: Copyright, IPR, WIPO, UCC, WPTT, neighbouring rights, TRIPs, WTO, neighbouring
rights, fair dealing.

1. INTRODUCTION
Creative work pertaining to literary, dramatic,
musical, artistic, cinematography, sound
recording, etc. is protected under Intellectual
Property Right (IPR) through copyright protection.
Copyright is a unique kind of intellectual
property importance of which is increasing
day by day. It does not fall in the category
of industrial property. In fact, copyright was
the first intellectual property, which received
legal protection in the world. Copyright law,
unlike patent and trade secret, protects the
expression of an idea rather than the underlying
idea itself. Unlike patents, the subject matter
of copyright is literary and artistic works.
All such works are protected as long as
these are original expressions of an idea.
The idea/expression dichotomy enables others
to express the same or similar idea and
receive copyright protection as long as the
expression satisfies the test of originality.
The most basic right conferred by copyright

is the right to exclude unauthorised reproduction
of the copyrighted work. Most laws related
to copyright also prohibit certain acts such
as performing the work in public, making a
sound or audio-visual recording of the work,
making a motion picture of the work, broadcasting
or publicly communicating the work and
translations or adaptations of the work. In
addition to these economic rights, most copyright
laws recognise moral rights, which normally
include the author’s right to claim authorship
and to protect the work from mutilation or
distortion1. It is said that what is worth copying
is worth protecting. This principle is squarely
applicable to the protection of copyright in
relation to various works like artistic, literary
and musical works.
Copyright is the most vulnerable form of
intellectual property, as it is the most fragile
and prone to abuse and theft. Generally, it
is said that advancement of science and
technology improves the standard of life in
29

the society. However, in the case of copyright
protection the advancement has posed greater
challenges for protection of copyright right
from the invention of printing machine by
Johannes Gutenberg of Mainz, Germany.
With the advent of reprographic technologies
like photocopying, etc. it has become more
difficult to protect the copyright of the authors.
As the protection of intellectual property is
based on the principle of economic reward
or incentive to the creator, they feel insecure
in the present environment. Further, the days
of believing that copyright is concerned primarily
with lonely starving artists are gone forever
as this is now concerned with companies
ranging from small to big and not for profit
concerns to huge multimedia and publishing
conglomerates 2. Apart from the institutions
imparting information, like the libraries, copyright
is related to the publishing industry, entertainment
industry, and information technology industry.

the interest of the artist or the author alone.
Enrichment of culture is of vital interest to
each society and the copyright law protects
this social interest (Manu Bhandari vs Kala
Vikas Pictures Pvt Ltd, AIR, 1987, Delhi).
The Copyright Act has been enacted to check
the piracy, i.e., the labour put by the author
or the copyright owner may be enjoyed by
them and not by the pirates, who indulge in
plagiarism and other undesirable and illegal
activities of theft of intellectual property (Girish
Gandhi vs Union of India, AIR, Raj, 1978 at
p. 84). Thus the objects of the copyright
protection are (i) enrichment of culture and
heritage, (ii) dissemination of information
and knowledge, and (iii) protection of the
legitimate interests of authors and owners
of copyright.

The unique nature of copyright material
does not just extend to the printed word; the
original medium for which copyright was
designed. It also extends to other forms of
intellectual expression including audio tapes,
video material, and software though in many
countries this has been the subject matter
of intense debate. In each and all, it is
possible to deprive the copyright owner whilst
leaving the original material unchanged and
untouched. This is clearly a unique area of
theft. Current statistics suggest that the
photocopying of copyright material totals
around 3,00,000 million pages a year 3. In
recent years, the control of piracy in copyrighted
works is becoming a more pressing issue,
particularly with the rapidly advancing technologies
that facilitate cheap and easy dissemination
of these works. The sad thing is that most
of the piracy is often sought to be projected
as ‘fair use’ or ‘fair dealing’.

The first copyright dispute occurred in
around 560 BC between Saint Columba and
Saint Finnian when Columba secretly copied
a Finnian, psalter after granted permission
to look at it. When Finnian found out about
Columba's copy, he disputed Columba's right
to it. Diarmaid Mac Cearbhaill, the then High
King of Ireland, ruled in favour of Finnian,
saying "To every cow her calf, and to every
book its copy".

2. OBJECTIVE OF THE COPYRIGHT PROTECTION
The hallmark of any culture is the excellence
of its arts and literature. In fact, the quality
of creative genius of artists and authors
determine the maturity and vitality of protection.
What the law offers is not the protection of
30

3. HISTORY OF COPYRIGHT
LAWS

The origins of copyright systems are
generally placed in the practice of various
monarchs in granting ‘letters patent’, arbitrary
grants of monopoly over a particular practice
or trade. Such grants were an invaluable
source of power for rulers who possessed
much theoretical authority, but little cash
(the abuse of monopolies by the early Stuarts
was a major factor leading to the English
civil war). In the two centuries, following the
invention of the printing press, such grants
were given periodically to printers and
occasionally to the authors with regard to
a particular work. In Britain, the culmination
of this practice was the Licensing Act of
1662, which granted a monopoly on the entirety
of English publishing to the Stationer’s Company
of London (the quid pro quo for this grant
was censorship of heretical and seditious
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

material). The Stationer's company had developed
its own inter-publisher system for regulating
competition, now known as Stationer's copyright,
which was effectively a private copyright system
made enforceable by the Stationer’s monopoly.
Similar contemporary developments elsewhere
(such as Venice) left publisher in a
disadvantegeous position with the repeal of
the Licensing Act in 1681 and widespread
objection to monopolies 4.
Copyright law started with the The Statute
of Anne, the world’s first copyright law passed
by the British Parliament in 1709. Yet the
principle of protecting the rights of an artist
predates this. It may sound like dry history
at first blush, but since there was precedent
to establish and rights to protect, much
time, effort, and money have been spent in
legal battles over the centuries. In the US,
the principle took hold during the Constitutional
Convention of 1787 when James Madison
suggested that the Constitution include language
secure to literary authors their copyrights
for a limited time. The provision was passed
unanimously as found in Article I, Section
8, of the US Constitution. It states: “The
Congress shall have power . . . to promote
the progress of science and useful arts, by
securing for limited times to authors and
inventors the exclusive right to their respective
writings and discoveries”. Before the free
speech, freedom of assembly, freedom of
religion, there was copyright protection in
the US Constitution. The founding fathers of
the US Constitution knew copyright protection
could improve society by preserving the economic
incentive for people to come up with brilliant
ideas and inventions. They also realised the
fundamental fairness of granting control of
the creative work to the author.
President George Washington signed
the first Copyright Law on May 31, 1790.
Nine days later, author John Barry registered
his work, The Philadelphia Spelling Book, in
the District Court of Pennsylvania, making
it the first writing protected by the copyright.
Since then, the Copyright Laws have been
revised numerous times. The revisions have
been aimed at balancing the author’s right
to reap the benefits of his or her work, and
society’s ability to benefit from that same work5.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

4. INTERNATIONAL LEGAL
REGIME OF COPYRIGHT
The copyright has no territorial limits
and is transnational in nature. As access to
information, which is copyrighted has become
easy all over the world, thanks to the
advancements made by science and technology,
it has become imperative to protect the copyright
not only nationally but also internationally.
The international efforts to protect the copyright
started in the late 19th century with the
Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary
and Artistic works in 1886. It was entered
into force on December 5, 1887 and has
been revised five times since then. It is
administered by the World Intellectual Property
Organisation (WIPO). The Convention is based
on the principles of National Treatment and
Convention minima. The Convention’s scope
and applications are very broad encompassing
literary and artistic works which include every
production in the literary, scientific and artistic
domain, irrespective of the mode or form of
its expression. Therefore, works such as
choreography, painting, architecture, compilations
and derivative works find protection under
this Convention.
The published and unpublished work of
authors of the member countries, are also
covered under the protective umbrella of this
Convention. It has established a minimum
term of protection as life plus 50 years or
an alternative of 50 years from publication
for anonymous and pseudonymous works
under Article 7 of the Convention. It also
recognises certain limitations to the exclusive
rights such as privilege of fair use and a
possible limitation on the right of recording
of musical works. Apart from the economic
rights, Berne Convention also requires that
the authors’ moral rights be recognised and
endured beyond the life of the copyright as
well as term of copyright protection. India is
a member of this Convention since
April 1, 1928.Another international convention
related to copyright is the Universal Copyright
Convention (UCC) of 1952 which was developed
by certain major States like the USA, USSR
(erstwhile) and China as an alternative to
Berne Convention.
31

The basic principle followed by the UCC
are similar to those of Berne, except certain
aspects like reduced term of protection for
minimum 25 years. UCC has simpler procedures
and formalities of registration, and special
provisions to allow the developing countries
to obtain compulsory licenses under certain
conditions to translate copyrighted works
for teaching, scholarship, and research purposes.
One notable feature of the UCC is that it
contains a Berne Safeguard Clause, which
prohibits a Berne Convention country from
denouncing Berne Convention and relying
on the UCC in its copyright relations with
members of the Berne Convention (Article
XVII and appendix declaration relating to
Article XVII of the Convention). India is also
a member of the UCC.
Another important convention, called Rome
Convention, came into existence on May
18, 1964. Rome Convention aims to protect
the neighbouring rights, i.e., (i) the rights of
performers like dancers, magicians, acrobats
and jugglers, (ii) producers of phonograms,
and (iii) broadcasting organisations and
broadcasters. These rights include right to
first fixation of performances, right to prohibit
the direct or indirect reproduction of their
programmes in the form of phonograms, and
the right to fixation, reproduction and rebroadcast.
Generally, the protection is granted for 20
years, computed from the end of the year
when the fixation was made for phonogram
and performances incorporated therein. If
the performance is not incorporated in a
phonogram, the term will be calculated from
the end of the year when the performance
took place. For the broadcasts, the year
when the broadcast took place will determine
the duration of protection.
The digital revolution has made an immense
impact on the copyright. The advent of Internet
has changed the traditional right of reproduction.
In order to meet the challenges of digital
era, two treaties were concluded at the WIPO—
the WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT) and the
WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty
(WPPT) in December 1996. Together, these
treaties also known as Internet treaties represent
a milestone in modernising the international
system of copyright and related rights, ushering
32

the copyright system into the digital age.
The purpose of the treaties is to update and
improve the protection of the already existing
copyright and related rights treaties, which
date backs more than a quarter of a century
to the days before the development of personal
computers and the Internet. The WCT and
WPPT contain a number of new standards
and serve to clarify the older treaties and
most importantly provide responses to the
challenges of the new digital technologies.
Both treaties require member countries to
provide a framework of basic rights, allowing
creators to control and/or be compensated
for the various ways in which their creations
are used and enjoyed by others. Most important,
the treaties ensure that the owners of the
rights will continue to be adequately and
effectively protected when their works are
disseminated through new technologies and
communications systems such as Internet.
The treaties also clarify that the owners
of rights can control whether and how their
creations are made available online to individual
consumers, e.g., at home via the Internet.
The two treaties also break new ground by
requiring countries to provide not only the
rights themselves, but also two types of
technological adjuncts to the rights. The
first, known as the ‘anti-circumvention’ provision,
tackles the problem of hacking. It requires
countries to provide adequate legal protection
and effective remedies against the circumvention
of technological measures such as encryption
used by the right holders to protect their
rights when their creations are disseminated
on the Internet.
The second type of technological adjunct
safeguards the reliability and integrity of the
online marketplaces by requiring countries
to prohibit the deliberate alteration or deletion
of ‘electronic rights management information’6.
India has yet not signed both these treaties.
Another important international trade agreement
concerning the copyright is the TRIPS Agreement
of World Trade Organisation (WTO). This
agreement requires the member states to
protect computer programs and compilations
of data as literary works and also to protect
the neighbouring rights under Article 9 to 14
of the agreement.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

5. NATIONAL REGIME GOVERNING COPYRIGHT
In India, the Copyright Act 1957 is the
primary legislation relating to the copyright
protection. This act as amended by the Copyright
Amendment Act, 1999 (w.e.f January 15,
2000) contains 79 sections and is supplemented
by 28 Copyrights Rules. It is a comprehensive
legislation covering almost all the aspects
of the copyright protection in India. The act
defines various terms like artistic work, author,
adaptation, broadcast, cinematograph film,
computer program, copyright society, dramatic
work, musical work, performance, and sound
recording in the definition clause contained
in Section 2 of the Act.
Apart from dealing with the copyright,
its meaning, ownership of registration, the
act also deals with the other aspects like
licenses by owners of copyright, copyright
societies, performers and broadcasting and
organisation rights. The act provides for a
comprehensive scheme to deal with the
infringement of copyright and civil remedies
for the same.In the preceding paras, the
concept copyright, its subject matter, the
legal regime in India governing the same
and the extent of copyright protection, etc.
have been discussed. One of the main objective
of copyright legislation is to protect the copyright
and the exclusive right to do certain acts in
respect of the work. The nature of rights and
the extent of protection and licenses, given
to the owners of copyrights etc. depend on
the nature of the work. Therefore, reproduction
of the work in any material form, or performing
the work in public in any forms are the most
usual methods by which the copyright in
any work is commercially exploited for profit.
If any person, without authority commercially
exploits the work for profit, he will be infringing
the copyright.

6. SUBJECT MATTER OF
COPYRIGHT PROTECTION
The copyright law in India protects many
works such as original literary, dramatic,
musical and artistic works, cinematograph
films, and sound recordings under
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

Section 13. Similarly, the computer programs,
photographs, and databases are also protected
by copyright under Sections 14 and 25. The
copyright law does not insists on cent-percent
originality as a prerequisite for copyright
protection. Thus derivative works such as
guide books (E.M. Forster vs A.N. Parasuram,
AIR 1964 Madras) Page No. 331, reviews,
dictionaries (V. Govindan vs Gopalkrishna
Kone, AIR, 1955, Madras.) and other compilations
(Satsang vs Kiron Chandra, AIR, 1972, Calcutta)
and even commentaries are all protected
under the copyrights.
It has also been held by the courts that
examination papers (Jagdish Prasad Gupta
vs Parameshwar Prasad Singh AIR 1966
Patna) tambola tickets (Rai Toys Industries,
Delhi vs Trisea Publication 1966 PTC 597
Delhi), notes and head-notes of judgments
published in journals (Eastern Book Co. vs
Navin J. Deais, AIR 2001 185 Delhi), and
calendar/date-pads (Deepak Printery vs Forward
Stationer Mart, 1976, 17 Gujarath Law Reporter)
also attract copy right protection.
As far as, the neighbouring rights are
concerned, the Indian law protects the rights
of performers, producers of phonograms and
the broadcasters (Chapter VIII and more
particularly Sections 37 and 38 for broadcast
reproduction right and performers right). In
this context performer includes an actor,
singer, musician, dancer, acrobat, juggler,
conjurer (magicians) and even a person delivering
a lecture [Section 2 (qq) of the Act].

7. MEANING OF COPYRIGHT
Copyright is not a single right but it
represents a bundle of rights enjoyed by the
owners of certain works. Section 14 of the
Copyright Act 1957 lists out the various
manifestations of copyright in respect to
different works. These include the right to
reproduce the work whether published or
not, right to publish it, right to communicate
to the public, right to translate the work,
right to perform the work in public, right to
adapt it as a cinema or other medium of
expression, and the right to give it on lease/
hire/rent, etc. The list is only illustrative and
not exhaustive.
33

The rights vary depending on the nature
of the work. Copyright confers not only the
economic rights such as the right to assign
the copyright (under Section 18), right to
sell or to offer for sale or hire any computer
program whether in circulation or not [under
Section 14(b)], collective administration of
rights of owners by copyright owners (under
Section 34), right to grant licenses (under
Section 30), and resale share right in original
copies (under Section 53 A). It also protects
the moral rights of the authors.
These moral rights, also known as special
rights of authors, include the paternity right—
the right to be, recognised as an author of
a work; and the integrity right—the right
against mutilation and distortion of the work.
These rights are independent of the authors’
copyright and can be exercised even after
the assignment either wholly or partially of
the said copyright (under Section 57). The
authors can restrain or claim damages in
respect of the mutilation or distortion of the work.

8. TERM OF COPYRIGHT
PROTECTION
The Indian copyright law protects the
copyright in literary, dramatic, artistic and
musical works for a period of lifetime of the
author and 60 years after his death (Section
22). Same applies to computer programs
also. In case of photographs and sound
recordings the term of protection is 60 years
from the beginning of the calendar year following
the year in which the photo was taken or the
sound recording was made (Sections 25
and 26).
In case of anonymous, pseudonymous
and posthumous works, the term is 60 years
from the beginning of the calendar year following
the year in which the work is first published
(Sections 23 and 24). In the case of the
neighbouring rights, it is 25 years in case
of broadcast reproduction right and 50 years
in case of performer’s rights. Since TRIPS
Agreement insists on a minimum term of 50
years (Article 12), the Indian law provides
TRIPS plus protection.
34

9. INFRINGEMENT OF COPYRIGHT
Copyright is the most fragile and the
weakest form of intellectual property as every
copyrightable work is generally exposed to
the public. The phenomenal advances made
in the field of science and technology starting
from the invention of printing machine, advent
of reprographic technology and recent
developments of digital revolution and Internet
have posed greater challenges to the copyright
protection. It is now possible to make multiple
copies of copyrighted works within no time,
without affecting the quality of the original
work and without caring the national boundaries.
Also, there have been plagiarism and piracy
right from the recognition of literary property.
Copyright infringement and plagiarism are
not exactly the same thing. For example,
someone is copying a large portion of someone
else’s work, say more than a paragraph,
then one should get permission for copying.
Copying without getting permission and without
proper attribution tantamount to both infringement
and plagiarism.
Copying with permission but without
attribution, imply plagiarism, but not infringement,
while coping without permission but with
attribution, will imply infringed but not plagiarised.
Infringement and plagiarism involve more than
the specific legality; what is involved here
is proper etiquette, what we ought to do. In
modern times, it is called infringement. The
infringement of copyright in a work occurs
when one or more of the following acts take
place without the authorisation of the copyright
owner:
Reproduction of the work in a material
form,
Publication of the work,
Communication of the work to the public,
Performance of the work in public,
Making of adaptations and translations
of the work and doing any of the above
acts in relation to a substantive part of
the work.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

These principles clearly explain the
circumstances and instances pertaining to
copyright infringement. The Supreme Court
in the landmark judgment of Anand vs. Deluxe
Films [AIR 1978 SC 1613(1627)] has laid
down the following principles, which are selfexplanatory:

also material and broad dissimilarities,
which negate the intention to copy the
original, and the co-incidences appearing
in two works are clearly incidental, no
infringement of the copyright comes
into existence.
(vi)

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

There can be no copyright in an idea,
subject matter, themes, plots or historical
or legendary facts and violation of the
copyright in such cases is confined to
the form, manner and arrangement and
expression of the idea by the author of
the copyrighted work.
Where the same idea is being developed
in a different manner, it is manifest
that the source being common, so
similarities are bound to occur. In such
a case the courts should determine
whether or not the similarities are on
fundamental or substantial aspects of
the mode of expression adopted in the
copyright work. If the defendant’s work
were nothing but a literal imitation of
the copyright work with some variations,
it would amount to violation of the copyright.
In other words, in order to be actionable,
the copy must be a substantial and
material one which at once leads to
the conclusion that the defendant is
guilty of an act of piracy.
One of the surest and safest test to
determine whether or not there has
been a violation of copyright is to see
if the reader, spectator or the viewer
after having read or seen both the works
is clearly of the opinion and gets an
unmistakable impression that the
subsequent work appears to be a copy
of the original.

(iv)

Where the theme is the same but is
presented and treated differently so
that the subsequent work becomes a
completely new work, no question of
violation of copyright arises.

(v)

Where, however, apart from the similarities
appearing in the two works there are

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

As the violation of copyright amounts
to an act of piracy it must be proved
by clear and cogent evidence after applying
the various tests laid down, and

(vii) Where, however, the question is of the
violation of the copyright of stage play
by a film producer or a Director, the
task of the plaintiff becomes more difficult
to prove piracy. It is manifest that unlike
a stage play, a film has a much broader
perspective, wider field and a bigger
background where the defendants can
by introducing a variety of incidents
give a colour and complexion different
from the manner in which the copyrighted
work had expressed in idea. Even so,
if the viewer after seeing the film gets
a totality of an impression that the film
is by and large a copy of the original
play, violation of the copyright may be
said to be proved.

10. EXCEPTIONS TO COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT
The protection of copyright given to
owner or licensee is not absolute. It is subject
to certain exception and restrictions. Section
52 of the Act gives a lengthy list of acts
under the heading ‘certain acts not to be
infringement of copyright’, which can be called
statutory exceptions to copyright infringement
have been discussed hereunder briefly.

10.1 Fair Dealing
A fair dealing with a literary, dramatic,
musical or artistic work but not being a
computer program, for the purposes, viz., (i)
private use, including research, and (ii) criticism
or review, whether of that work or any other
work does not amount to infringement of
copyright. It may be seen that it is only
when the court has determined that a substantial
35

part of a literary, artistic, dramatic or musical
work, has been taken that any question of
fair dealing arises. Though, once this question
arises, the degree of substantiality, that is
to say, the quantity and value of the matter
taken, is an important factor in considering
whether or not, a fair dealing is there. Further,
in considering whether dealing with a particular
work was fair, it would have considered whether
any competition is likely to exist between
two works.
A fair criticism of the ideas and events
described in the books or documents would
constitute a fair dealing (Civic Chandran vs.
Ammini Amma, 1996, PTC, 670 (Kerala).
Publication of confidential information leaked
by the third party cannot constitute fair dealing
for the purpose of criticism or review [Bellof
vs. Pressdram (1973) 1 All.ER.24]. It is only
when the court has determined that a substantial
part has been taken that any question of fair
dealing arises. Though, once the question
arises, the degree of substantiality, that is
to say, the quantity and the volume of the
matter taken, is an important factor in considering
whether or not there has been a fair dealing.
Further, it is thought that, even under the
present law, in considering whether dealing
with a particular work was fair, it would have
to be considered whether any competition
was likely to exist between the two works.
But each case will depend on its facts, and
what may be fair in one case will not necessarily
be fair in other case. Criticism or review
may relate not only to literary style but also
to be doctrine or philosophy of the author
as expounded in his books. A fair criticism
of the ideas and events described in the
books or documents would constitute fair
dealing.

36

11. CONCLUSION
An analysis of the relevant law and practice
shows that the copyright and related rights
are associated not only with the cultural
world but also with the commercial world.
Copyright is not concerned any more with
the lonely authors but also with the publishing,
entertainment, and also with the IT industry.
It is said, “Till recently, the world’s richest
man was an oil worker. Today he is a knowledge
worker”. This statement sums up the importance
of the knowledge in a rapidly changing society,
the world over. In the good old days, the
popular adage was that ‘Knowledge is power’
but in modern times, knowledge has been
recognised not only as a source of power
but also as the primary source of property.
It is this recognition that justifies the protection
of intellectual property created either by individuals
or by communities more particularly the copyright.
Bill Gates, J.K. Rowling and Azim Premji
stand testimony to the fact that knowledge
is not only power but also property.

REFERENCES
1. Watal, Jayashree. Intellectual property
rights in the WTO and developing countries.
Oxford University Press, New Delhi, 2001.
207p.
2. Chesterman, J. & Lipman, A. The Electronic
Pirates. London, Comedia, 1988.
3. Clark, C. Collective administration of
reprographic reproduction rights–principles
and practice: The British experience.
London, CLA, 1933.
4. http://www.encyclopedia.htm
5. http://www.riaa.htm
6. http://www.wipo.int/treaties/ip/index.html

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

