DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 27, No. 4, July 2007, pp. 37-40
© 2007, DESIDOC

Protection of Geographical Indication of Goods
C. Rajashekhar
Faculty of Law, Karnataka University, Dharwad-580 001
E-mail:rajashekar@hotmail.com

ABSTRACT
The paper defines the term geographical indications, its description and limitations
under various licensed agreements. It also describes the impact of geographical indication
on reputation, quality and attributes of goods and products manufactured in particular
country, region and area.
Keywords: Geographical indication, trademark, IPR, TRIPs, genercide

1. INTRODUCTION
Goods manufactured or processed in a
particular place or area may acquire reputation
and commercial value due to their unique
quality essentially derived from that geographical
area or place. These goods can be identified
with the geographical area, and a link between
the product and place can be well established.
The geographical association of the area
with the product may give it a unique commercial
value. The geographical indication (GI) of a
product acquires the status of an intangible
property. This property is acknowledged as
a distinct intellectual property (IP). Thus,
GI is an indication identifying a good as
originating in a particular country, region or
locality of that country. The reputation, quality
or characteristics of such goods are attributable
to their geographical origin. A GI may include
geographical names like Darjeeling Tea, Mysore
Silk, Champagne Wines, Cuban Cigars or
it may also include traditional non-geographical

names like Basmati Rice or Feta Cheese
from Greece. Even such non-geographical
names are considered as GIs as the products
with which they are associated originate from
a specific geographical area, which imparts
them a unique quality.
The reputation and quality, which a GI
of a good acquires is also due to the human
factors, i.e., continuous and sustained efforts
of individuals and associations. As a result,
the GIs become part and parcel of tradition
and culture of that area. Also, the commercial
value and goodwill acquired by such products
become an attraction for unscrupulous persons,
who in no way contribute to its reputation
but try to exploit it to their advantage by
using these GIs for their goods. Any use of
GIs for a product, which does not originate
in that geographical area is unauthorised
and amounts to usurpation. Such a misuse
of GI is similar to passing off of a trademark.
However, GIs are different from trademarks
37

and have many distinguishing characteristics
between them. Trademark is a trader's private
property, but GIs are a collective public right.
Trademark denotes the source of the product
whereas GIs, apart from identifying the
geographical origin of the product, also indicate
that the product possesses certain quality
derived from that particular area. Further,
trademark is assignable, but GIs cannot be
assigned, but they are heritable. A trader is
at liberty to choose any trademark and create
new ones, while GIs are evolved over a period
of time. A GI cannot be used as a trademark
as it would amount to privatisation of a public
right, however, a GI can be used in conjunction
with a trademark. In such cases the product
must originate from the concerned geographical
area. Some of such trade names are Teachers'
Scotch whiskey, Lindt Swiss chocolate, Kohinoor
basmati rice, etc.

2. PROTECTION OF GI UNDER
DIFFERENT INTERNATIONAL
INCITEMENTS
The term GI was used for the first time
in Trade Related Intellectual Properties (TRIPs)
Agreement of World Trade Organisation (WTO).
Earlier, terms like 'indications of source' and
'appellation of origin' were used in many
international and regional instruments to denote
GIs. Indication of source designates a country
or a place situated in that country from
where the particular product in question
originates. But such designation does not
warrant any quality, character or reputation
linked to the geographical origin.
Similarly, appellation of origin points out
the place where the goods relative to the
appellation have been manufactured. Appellation
like ‘Made in USA’, means that the goods
are manufactured in the USA and protection
is available only for such geographical indication.
Paris Convention in 1883, for the protection
of industrial property, was the first multilateral
agreement, which provided for protection of
indications of source and appellations of
origin, though it does not define these terms.
Article 1(2) of the Convention includes indications
of source or appellations of origin as the
38

objects, inter alia, of industrial property protection.
Further Article 1(3) provides that industrial
property shall be understood in the broadest
sense and shall not apply only to industry
and commence proper, but also agricultural
and extractive industries and to all manufactured
or natural products like wines, grain, tobacco
leaf, fruit, cattle, minerals, mineral water,
beer, flowers, and flour. Under Article 10 the
members may seize the goods on importation
if these directly or indirectly use a false
indication of source of the goods or the
identity of the producer. If the laws of such
countries do not permit such seizure, such
imports may be prohibited or goods may be
seized inside the country.
Madrid Agreement in 1891 was a little
improvement over Paris Convention as it
specifically provides for false as well as
deceptive indications of source. Under this
Agreement, the use of false representation
on the product itself and in advertising or in
any other form of public announcement is
prohibited. However, the Madrid Agreement
is ineffective where false or deceptive indications
are used in translation or accompanied by
qualifiers such as kind, type, style, etc.
Thus the use of 'Scotch style' for whiskey
manufactured outside Scotland is not actionable
under this agreement.
The Lisbon Agreement of 1958 provides
a better protection and is the first agreement
to define the term 'appellations of origin'
under Article 1 of the Agreement. Once registered,
an 'appellation of origin’ is protected by other
member countries also. Article 2 (1) of the
Agreement defines appellation of origin as
"the geographical name of a country, region,
or locality, which serves to designate a product
originating therein, the quality, and characteristics
of which are exclusively or essentially due
to the geographical environment, including
natural, and human factors". Thus, the
Agreement applies to an ‘appellation of origin’
only if it is a geographical name and its
quality and characteristics are linked to the
geographical environment.
The Lisbon Agreement is an improvement
over Madrid Agreement as the protection
under it is extended to include any ‘usurpation’
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

or ‘imitation’, even if the true origin of the
product is indicated in translated form or
accompanied by terms such as kind, type,
make, imitation or like. Interestingly, the
use of an ‘appellation of origin’ on dissimilar
goods may also be considered as ‘usurpation
of the appellation’. Thus, Cuba Tobacco, a
body concerned with the protection of the
name Havana in respect of a special cigar
originating from the Havana successfully prevented
the use of Havana on cosmetics and perfumes
through an injunction obtained from a French
Court.
The Lisbon Agreement also has certain
limitations. The agreement does not protect
non-geographical names, which have acquired
secondary meaning as GIs. Secondly, the
Agreement does not include ‘appellation of
origin’, which possesses merely certain
reputation, but does not possess certain
qualities and characteristics essentially linked
to the geographical region. Thirdly, international
protection is accorded under Article 1 of the
Agreement only if the GI is protected in the
country of origin 'as such', i.e., as an ‘appellation
of origin’.

3. TRIP AGREEMENT
TRIPs is the first international agreement,
which uses the term GIs and provides inter
alias a specific protection. Article 22.1 of
the Agreement defines GIs as: "Indications
which identify a good, as originating in the
territory of a member, or a region or locality
in that territory, where a given quality, reputation
or other characteristics of the good is essentially
attributable to its geographical origin". This
definition of GIs is much wider than the
‘appellation of origin’ under Lisbon Agreement,
as it is not limited to geographical names.
It includes non-geographical names like basmati,
Feta, Alphanso, Tajmahal or Eiffel tower.
These traditional names have acquired
geographical links through usage over the years.
The product to which GI relates possesses
a certain quality, reputation, or other
characteristics, which are essentially attributable
to its geographical origin. Further, TRIPs
Agreement covers GIs possessing a mere
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

reputation. For example, Sheffield Cutlery,
Stilton Cheese, Swiss Watches, and Swiss
Knives are all associated with their respective
regions, but do not derive their quality or
characteristics from their geographical area,
i.e., are not attributable to the geographical area.
TRIPs definition of GIs does not include
services but the member countries are free
to extend such protection to services also.
Thus, the traditional Aurvedic massages and
medical services available in some parts of
India like Kerala and Karnataka may be covered,
as an extension of GIs to such services and
will not be prohibited under TRIPs Agreement

4. IMPLICATIONS OF GI FOR
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Protection of GIs is useful for both developed
and developing countries. As these GIs develop
over the years and acquire certain reputation,
quality and characterises associated with
the geographical area of place, they become
part of tradition and society, which employ
such traditional methods, practices and knowhow to produce these goods. Protection of
GIs of goods would act as a boon to the
people who have developed that knowledge
system. Many traditional methods and practices
are associated with specific regions and are
identified by their geographical origin.
The reputation, which such knowledge
possesses, attracted unscrupulous elements
who tried to acquire private monopoly right
by obtaining patents in foreign countries.
Patenting of medicinal uses of turmeric, antifungal
properties of Neem, basmati rice, are the
examples of such acts of bio piracy. Protection
of GIs of such products could be one of the
effective means of protection of the traditional
knowledge. Thus, the economic advantages,
which accrue from such protection, would
act as a fillip to the economic development
of such traditional indigenous communities.
The Intellectual Property Rights (IPR)
Commission in its report published in 2002,
has stated that surveys of the existing protection
of traditional knowledge and folklore show
that GIs are used to protect traditional products
39

as liquors, sauces and teas in Venezuela
and Vietnam. The protection provided by
GIs is in its perpetuity. In India also, there
is great scope for such protection of traditional
knowledge through the protection of GIs.
India has enacted the GIs of Goods
(Registration and Prohibition) Act, 1999. The
Act came into force with effect from September
15, 2003. The Act has been enacted in fulfillment
of the obligations under TRIPs Agreement to
which India is a signatory. The purpose of
the Act is to exclude unauthorised persons
from misusing GIs and to protect the consumers
against deception by passing of goods not
related to any geographical area as those
of such area with view to gain wrongful advantage
and profits. Under the Act, the protection
has been granted through registration with
the Registrar of GIs. The registration of GIs
is valid for ten years and can be successively
renewed for further ten years.
Registration of GIs is done in two parts.
Part A relates particulars of the proprietor of
GIs. Part B contains particulars about authorised
users of GIs. Only these two categories of
persons shall have exclusive right to use the
GIs in relation to the goods in respect of
which the GI has been registered. The rights
to GIs are not transferable in any manner
such as licensing, pledge, mortgage or sale.Any
unauthorised use of GI with a view to mislead
the consumers will amount to infringement
of GIs. The Act also provides remedies against
any infringement by way of injunction and
damages. Thus, the legislation appears to
be quite comprehensive, but since it is in
its nascent stages it is too early to make
any prediction about it effectiveness and
adequacy.

6. CONCLUSION
In India, there is a grater need to create
awareness among the general public about
advantages that ensue from proper identification
and registration of GIs. Goods marketed
under GIs are known for their high quality,
and demand for them in the market is guaranteed.
There was 40 per cent increase in the profit
after 'Mysore Silk' registered as a GI. Same
is true for 'Darjeeling Tea' which is sold at
a premium even in India. Ultimately, it is the
producers who will be benefited. There is an
urgent need to identify goods, which can be
protected under the GIs Act, otherwise there
is a danger of many such GIs becoming
generic (the process is known as genercide).
Once that happens, communities will lose
their exclusive right over GIs as Sherry
manufacturers in the UK lost the exclusive
right to use the term 'Sherry' which became
a generic term due to laches and acquiescence.
In India, Kolhapur footwear has met the same
fate.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Daniel, Gervail. The TRIPs agreement–
drafting history and analysis. Sweet and
Maxwell, London, 2003.
2. Nair, Latha R. & Kumar, Rejendra.
Geographical indications—a search for
identity. Buttewoths, London, 2005.
3. Wadehra B.L. Patents, trademarks,
copyrights and designs and geographical
indications. Universal Law Publishing Co.
Pvt Ltd., Delhi, 2005.

Contributor
Dr C. Rajashekhar obtained his LLB and LLM from the Mysore University.
He received his PhD on 'A Critical Study of Humanisation of Prisons in
India' from the Karnataka University. Dr Rajeashekhar received Ist rank
in LLM, and was awarded Lalana Narayan Gold Medal and Pramesh
Chandra Guru Prize. He has 20 years of teaching experience of Postgraduate
classes. Dr Rajashekhar has written one book on 'Social Revolution
under the Indian Constitution' and edited another on 'Indian Judiciary: An
Audit'. He has guided five students for PhD and is guiding another six
for PhD in Law.
40

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

