DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 27, No. 4, July 2007, pp. 41-44
© 2007, DESIDOC

Data Exclusivity: An Absolute Monopoly
Gopal Dabade
Drug Action Forum, Sony, 57, Tejaswinagar, Dharwad-580 002
E-mail: drdabade@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
The paper describes data exclusivity, its implication on generic drug manufacturers,
and on cost of life-saving drugs in developing countries like India.
Keywords: Data exclusivity, patent act, DRA, DCI, ARV

1. INTRODUCTION
Data exclusivity (DE) refers to test and
other data that a pharmaceutical company
must provide to the concerned national Drug
Regulator Authority (DRA), in order to get
first time registration for any new drug it
wants to introduce in the market of that
particular country. These tests are necessary
to demonstrate the safety and efficacy of
the drug. After registration by DRA the drug
gets into the market for use by the public.
When generic manufacturers later apply to
register another version of an already-registered
drug, they only have to demonstrate that
their product is equivalent to the original.
For this the generic drug companies use
the tests that have already been conducted
by multinational drug companies.
To limit generic competition, multinational
drug companies are demanding that they
should have exclusive right over their test
data and are pushing for DE measures that
will even prevent the DRA from relying on
test data already in their possession for

subsequent approval of generic versions of
the drug. Therefore, DE measures imply much
more than non-disclosure of test data by the
DRA to rival pharmaceutical companies. The
US Government under pressure from the
Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturer
of America (PhRMA), the organisation
representing the interest of the United States
of America's multinational drug companies,
is seeking data exclusivity legislation from
countries including India to provide 'exclusive
rights' over pharmaceutical test data for a
period of five years or more. This will only
further strengthen the hold of multinational
drug companies over drug pricing, and will
have grave ramification in developing countries
like India where the live-saving drugs will
become beyond the reach of the poor people.

2. IMPLICATIONS OF DATA
EXCLUSIVITY
Data Exclusivity measures extend the
period of patent protection for drugs beyond
the stipulated 20 years, adversely affecting
41

access to affordable generic drugs. Once
the legally stipulated 20 years of patent
protection is over, the pharmaceutical companies
will not be able to undertake clinical trials
to obtain marketing approval to manufacture
and sell these generic drugs. Therefore if
clinical trials are mandated in India for generic
manufacturers, it will ensure that the process
of marketing approval takes a few more years
that are required to undertake and complete
clinical trials. This will automatically ensure
an extension of the patent monopoly on the
drug for the patent holder.
Public interest groups, like Doctors Without
Borders are concerned that DE measures
will impact access to generic drugs as they
are designed to limit generic competition
and the ability of the government to make
use of safeguards in their patent laws to
protect public health. DE measures in other
countries are already preventing drug regulatory
authorities from granting approval to generic
medicines for up to 5-10 years seriously
delaying access to affordable generic versions
of drugs.

patients will have no access to the results
of safety and efficacy tests of the medicine
that they are taking. However, till date, for
any new drug, which is released into the
market, data and research related to efficacy
and toxicity is considered public property.

4. INDIA AND DATA EXCLUSIVITY
As of now, there are no DE provisions
in Indian law. As per current practice in
India, generic manufacturers have to apply
for marketing approval of the generic version
of a medicine to the DRA of India. They are
only required to provide simple and straight
forward studies to prove that their generic
version of the medicine is the therapeutic
equivalent to the original and thus they do
not need to re-submit test data regarding
safety and efficacy, which is already with
the DRA. For this, the DRA is entitled to
rely on test data submitted by the pharmaceutical
company who first sought marketing approval
for the medicine.

In Guatemala in February 2004, Atazanavir,
an anti-retroviral (ARV) drug (priced at US$
10, 000 per person per year) received data
exclusivity protection for five years under
the law passed by the Government. With
generic competition the price can be expected
to fall by approximately 95 per cent. However,
even if a more affordable generic version of
Atazanavir is developed, it cannot enter the
Guatemalan market until 2009 as drug regulatory
authorities have to provide DE protection to
test data related to Atazanavir. As a consequence,
DRA in Guatemala is barred from relying on
it to approve subsequent generic versions.

The government of India is considering
amendments to the Drugs and Cosmetics
Act, under pressure from the US, European
countries and multinational pharmaceutical
companies to amend the act to include DE
protection provisions. If such DE provisions
are introduced in the Drugs and Cosmetics
Act, the Drug Controller will be barred from
relying on test data, which is already in its
possession in granting marketing approval
to generic medicines. Instead, it will be forced
to ask the generic manufacturer to carry out
its own clinical trials showing efficacy and
safety of the medicine thus seriously affecting
the production of affordable generic medicines
in the country.

3. IMPACT OF DATA EXCLUSION ACCESS TO INFORMATION

5. CONCLUSION

The DE protection is being advocated
by multinational pharmaceutical companies
on the basis of commercial reasons. This is
being done without considering the importance
of public access to pharmaceutical test data.
Data exclusion protection in law implies that

The right to information bill has been
passed in the parliament with much fanfare
and media coverage. But simultaneously the
Prime Minister Office is contemplating to
amend the Drugs and Cosmetic Act, as it
is buckling under pressure from the US, and
granting of DE, which in a larger sense

42

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

means that generic drug manufacturers will
not be allowed to get the drug data testing
information for a definite period of time. Thus,
there will be no competition, as no generic
manufacturer will be able to make it. This
will give absolute monopoly to the multinational
drug companies.
If the Right to Information is a step
forward then granting of DE is taking us

several steps behind (with regard to access
to life and essential saving medicines).
One wonders if the laws of this country
are being remade to help the US-based drug
industry. It is for the people and our political
leaders to take up this issue. Because right
to life saving and essential medicines is a
part of Right to Health, which is enshrined
in our constitution.

Contributor

Dr Gopal Dabade has obtained MBBS, Diploma in Laryngo-Otology, and
Postgraduation in ENT. He has worked with various rural non-government
development agencies as In-charge of Community Health Projects like
India Development Service, India’s New Group for Raichur’s Integrated
Development, Hubli Hospital for Handicapped in Karnataka,as a Lecturer
for basic science at Human Anatomy Department at the SDMCDS, Dharwad,
Karnataka, and as a health activist in BUKO Pharma-Kampagne, Bielefeld,
Germany. Presently, Dr Dabade is working at SDM Medical College,
Dharwad, and is also President, Drug Action Forum, Karnataka—a State
level campaign group committed to rational drug therapy and drug policy.

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

43

