DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 27, No. 4, July 2007, pp. 46-51
© 2007, DESIDOC

Information Management in Digital Environment:
A Librarian’s Perspectives*
M.S. Sridhar
Head, Library & Documentation
ISRO Satellite Centre, Bangalore-560 017
E-mail: sridhar@isac.gov.in & sridharmirle@yahoo.com

ABSTRACT
Digital invasion of recent years has shaken librarianship. This paper tries to look
at some important issues of information management in libraries in the light of such
invasion. The issues discussed are digital decay as against paper decay, accessibility
interpretation in digital world, utility of e-journals, gray content boom, problems of access
to excess, human dependence of information sharing and collaboration, disintermediation
and identity crises problems of librarianship, drawbacks of OPACs, etc. as a consequence
of digitisation in libraries.
Keywords: Digital resources, digitisation, librarianship, information management

1. INTRODUCTION
Library management, over the years has
got itself transformed into information
management, content management, and
knowledge management. In the process,
unfortunately, the service delivery in libraries
has taken back seat. With many developmental
changes in the information scenario, libraries
are in the crossroads.
While some changes are cosmetic and
in nomenclature, others are really significant
with lasting impact on the working of libraries.
An attempt has been made here to examine
some issues related to libraries in the present
day information management paradigm.
*

2. PAPER DECAY VERSUS
DIGITAL DECAY
A search for information management in
quotes retrieves millions of hits in the Internet
and first 20 or so hits invariably are found
to be associated with either electronic or
digital information.
Digital content is all-pervasive and invading
life and libraries. Most Indian S&T libraries
already have about 15 per cent of their content
in digital form and it is increasing at the rate
of about 5 per cent per annum. Over centuries
paper technology has remained remarkably
stable. Residual acidity and dust might have

Based on a lecture delivered in the workshop on “Information management perspectives for aerospace research in
India”, organised by AR&DB–Aerospace Information & Manpower Development Panel, at GTRE, Bangalore on December
1, 2006.

caused slow decay of paper-based important
documents, but preservation efforts of archivists
have successfully restored their contents
and slowed down decay. But, what about
digital decay? Apart from physical deterioration,
obsolescence of hardware, software and storage
medium and failure to save crucial format
information may cause digital decay and
loss of entire content of a digital document.
The tapes of 1975 Viking launch mission to
Mars were recently found to have deteriorated
despite careful storage.
The laser disc and the player used in
1986 BBC Dooms Day Project were long
obsolete and specialist team struggled for
more than an year to retrieve the data. Space
Shuttle’s obsolete software and storage media
(6” flexible floppies) have even raised question
about continuation of the present shuttle
launches. Hopefully, digital archive experts
will come out with a way to preserve and
save enormous digital content being generated
and stored today for a distant future. Think
of a time capsule in microform buried in a
deep well some 30 years ago! Who is going
to use them, and do we expect appropriate
microform readers to be available some 50
years later. Same thing may happen to our
digital archives in less than 50 years time
frame. We, yet do not have confidence to
discard or destroy palm leaves or paper
scripts after digitsing, but try to make a
photocopy to preserve and/or use them.

3. ABUSED ACCESSIBILITY
AND VISIT STATISTICS
Extensive research has shown that three
factors, namely, accessibility, ease of use,
and perceived utility, have profound effect on
use of an information source. Digital technology
has greatly facilitated and acted as catalyst
on these trio factors. The information and
communication technology (ICT) has successfully
dismantled strong fences built around information
sources. Traditionally, libraries have been
champions of access restrictions with chained
books, closed access, restricted membership
and punitive measures for using books for
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

longer than pre-decided duration. While evaluating
a service organisation, ‘input’ is often used
as a proxy measure of ‘output’. For example,
expenditure on R&D; library and welfare services
quite often serve as output measures in
assessing the respective system. Exactly
the same way, in digital environment, ‘provision
for access’ is becoming a proxy measure for
actual access, the access for use and the
use for usefulness. Use and usefulness need
to be distinguished carefully.
A library may be used, but it may not
be useful, another may be useful, but not
used. The ideal is one, which is used and
useful. The same should hold good for the
Internet and digital libraries also. In other
words, extensive visit or use of any source
of information without utility or usefulness is
futile. In this way visit and access statistics
in digital environment could be misleading
and also abused. More than 10 per cent
bogus clicks in the present ‘pay-per-click’
model of Internet search engines is a good
example of abuse.( By repeated clicking on
ones own site generates revenue to the company
and by repeated clicking on rival’s site causes
loss to them. After a prolonged legal fight,
the new ‘pay-per-action’ model is being
considered to replace the ‘pay-per-click’ model).

4. USE AND NEED FOR
CONSUMPTION SKILLS
The second factor ‘ease of use’ is a
concept, which is more subjective and persondependant in digital environment. It varies
widely from accessing specific information
to a large collection of digital documents
and databases. As such varied degrees of
consumption skills are required to effectively
access and use different sources of information.
Need for information consumption skills and
information literacy also vary widely among
users and with respect to tools and services.
Using Television does not need much of
consumption skills, but using a database or
a digital library does need.

47

5. PERCEIVED UTILITY
VERSUS REAL UTILITY

7. E-JOURNALS AND PJOURNALS

The third factor ‘perceived utility’ does
not refer to real utility of a source of information,
but what the user might guess and feel
about the source of information. Generally,
utility and accuracy of computerised services
are held very high. Whether a footpath astrologer
or a high-tech hospital, the common man
has high respect for the service delivered
through a computer. In other words, it is
widely believed that what comes out of a
computer must be true. Hence, the digital
environment is already in an advantageous
position as far as perceived utility of the
customer is concerned. Among the factors,
the accessibility and ease of use are considered
to be stronger than the perceived utility,
quality and amount of information expected
from a source of information.

While the unpublished and the semipublished (gray) literature is receiving high
attention in the digital world, the real epublishing is happening at a slower pace
than expected. The e-publishing models look
like extension of traditional book publishing
models. Only priced models of print replacements
are talked about. Like systems theory definition
of a system, anything and everything has
become a model. Growth of e-journals is
neither rapid nor significant as was initially
expected. Today’s e-journals are not real ejournals. Only paper replacements of societies
and hybrid e-journals of commercial publishers
(both require least social and cultural changes)
are flourishing without full ‘electronicity’ journals.
In case of e-journals, without backward
compatibility, libraries are at the mercy of
continually changing digital world. It has
been well established that a typical researcher
(scientist) uses 5 to 15 journals. But the
consortia deals are boasting that they provide
access to thousands of journals, usually 10
to 20 times more than the number of journals
subscribed by a library. Like information on
the Internet, this makes the useful to access
ratio of journals (and information) drastically
low when all our efforts of resource sharing
is to optimise the use of resources. As far
as libraries are concerned, access management
consisting of handling license agreement,
price negotiation, offer evaluation, usage
assessment, etc. become important. Alongside
risk, tolerance for litigation has also become
necessary. Incidentally, e-books are yet to
take off. DRM is the main issue. Having not
been able to resolve the copyright issue,
more and more gray literature like theses
and dissertations and copyright-free old books
are getting digitised.

6. CONTENT BOOM
Content boom in digital form is diminishing
the demarcation between published and
unpublished as well as published and gray
literature. More and more digital content is
pouring in public domain without subjecting
to editorial quality control or refereeing process.
Unpublished, which was once outside the
purview of libraries, has became equally important
in today’s libraries. In other words, what
was once considered as informal source of
information (the new label is ‘tacit knowledge’)
is entering organised storage and retrieval
arena. Most important is that the Web itself
has emerged as a large source of gray literature.
Unfortunately, most of gray literature (particularly
technical reports) is even today distributed
by clearing houses like NTIS in microform.
At the same time, originating agencies have
been posting many of their R & D reports
on Web for free access.
With lakhs of microfiche reports in their
collections, aerospace libraries are in a fix
and unable to resolve the issues like whether
to continue to build microfiche collection
(as hard copies are expensive) or not. Inevitably,
some are replacing microfiche reader-printers
by scanners to digitise the existing huge
collections.
48

8. ACCESS TO EXCESS
ICT has enabled instant access to enormous
information anywhere anytime. But the two
important consequences of this access to
excess are quite serious. The first one is
that the traditional sequence of selection
and then access got reversed in the new
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

digital world; traditionally libraries were first
selecting the material and then allowing their
users to access them. Now the users have
to access and retrieve a large chunk of
material and then start selecting the required
information from thousands and at times,
millions of hits. The second consequence is
that the filtering responsibility (of the retrieved)
got shifted to users, which led to the loss
of value addition of libraries. (It has been
reported that 90 per cent of clips viewed on
YouTube remain obscure and are shared
among a few friends). In addition, top search
engines have been challenged in courts for
altering the rankings of hits. Unfortunately,
common users are not bothered about the
ranking procedures followed by the search
engines and their inbuilt biases.
Information is activated by effective and
efficient communication. i.e., information and
knowledge become meaningful with their
communication and use. Communication
revolution in the recent past has tremendously
increased speed as well as frequency of
use. But the density (or value) of information
communicated is inversely proportional to
the speed of communication. The content
passing through our recent media like emails and mobiles are highly diluted.

9. SHARING AND
COLLABORATION
Sharing and collaboration are more
dependent on people than technology. ICT
has also greatly facilitated information sharing
and collaborative working. Cost of sharing
and distribution of information is low and
negligible in digital environment. But sharing
is a complex human process subjected to
psychology of individual and his professional
and cultural predisposition. According to a
recent survey, one important barrier in sharing
corporate information is lack of common
information retrieval tool (73 per cent). Extensive
sharing of information and collaboration are
ok. Hither to popular ‘technological gatekeepers’,
‘communication stars’ and ‘invisible colleges’
are loosing ground and yet another kind of
disintermediation; beyond ICT and libraries
social sharing is negligible. The forces and
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

objectives behind resource sharing among
libraries and library consortia include: unutilised
spare capacity of resources, optimum utilisation
of resource; budgetary crunch; and duplication.
In view of content boom (Web pages double
every three months), enormous unutilised
capacity of resources and duplication as
well as huge additional expenditure incurred
by agencies centrally paying towards consortia
subscriptions It is difficult to say that the
objective behind resource sharing have been
better achieved in the new digital environment.
Though ICT has enabled information sharing
and collaborative working, the collaborative
evaluation of the content in the Internet has
become a marketing tool. Amazon uses
evaluation and views of customers to rate
books and present to others to further its
commercial interest. Imitating collaborative
evaluation on Web, personalising contents
and product customisation based on usage
and observed user behaviour are being attempted.
What information management community
require is that technology learn users’ likes
and dislikes over time in order to dynamically
and consistently deliver the right content.

10. DUBIOUS DISINTERMEDIATION AND IDENTITY CRISES
Libraries are inherently not mission-critical
and do not deal with esoteric or essential
aspects of life. Hence, disintermediation and
identity crises, at the outset, are spurious,
not real and should not be taken seriously.
With this changed scenario of technology
causing a power shift and computers becoming
household appliances, all kinds of information
is in the reach of common man. Also, end
of libraries is another question often being
raised. Information is everywhere and everybody
needs information. But as usual, libraries
are being used by a small subset of the
population. Yet, people are fond of comparing
libraries with Google! With invasion of the
Internet, the number of reference queries to
libraries have declined and the innovative
personalised service like ‘Ask a librarian’ on
the Web has also been made redundant by
auto answering services of the popular search
engines.
49

One prediction is that libraries, particularly
public libraries, may stay and become ‘intellectual
commons’ or community centres in future.
Another survey revealed that libraries continue
to be graded as top among community services.
Yet another study showed that there is no
change in the number of construction projects
of library buildings over the years. Then why
suddenly the profession faces the voidness
and identity crises in the digital environment!
It may be due to the excessive obsession
of the profession with one tool or the other
without long term holistic view, complete
implementation, improvement and evaluation.
To cite a few obsessions, handicraft-like
classification and cataloguing of 60s, prohibitively
costly online trial access experiments and
intricate indexing systems of 70s, prolonged
library automation projects of 80s, sudden
explosion of CD-ROM databases of 90s followed
by much talked resource sharing, vendorfavoured consortia and grand digital library
initiatives have all immensely preoccupied
librarianship one by one blocking the vision
for service management, the real core concern
of the profession. To quote an editorial of
The Economist (18-24 Nov 2006): ‘Displays
of excessive enthusiasm for particular new
technology often end in tears’. Library automation
and development of commercial software for
library management in this country were
successfully delayed over a decade for obsession
of free CDS/ISIS software.

11. ONLINE PUBLIC ACCESS
CATALOGUES
The good old card catalogues have given
way to online catalogues. Unfortunately so
called OPACs, in spirit, are card catalogue
replacements with closed, rigid and intricate
outlooks. Like card catalogues, they are
also used mostly to access specific items
rather than information retrieval. Severe subject
search problems remain unattended. To list
a few, partial match, relevance ranking, feedbackbased alert, auto suggestion of keywords,
auto correction of spelling errors, intelligent
stemming, term weighing, ‘find similar search’,
etc. are still not found. Even Wikipedia has
‘disambiguation’ provision in searching. Library
50

automation in general and OPAC in particular
should have continued to receive serious
attention of the profession and users alike.
As a matter of fact, the current surge of
digital library initiatives should have been
logical extensions of OPACs.

12. CONCLUSION
In early as 1970s, experts have predicted
that there will be a paperless society by
1990s. Now, there are a few wishfully predicting
that libraries will die soon. Neither paperless
society arrived nor libraries are going to
extinct. The ‘kick’ given by the technology
is so strong that occasionally it overpowers
experience and maturity so that people jump
to pronounce such predictions. Every technology
has to become old and has to be modified
or occasionally replaced by some better
newer technology. But basic issues remain
same with need for some refinement.
Unfortunately change of nomenclature is
happening much faster than the technological
advancement. There appears to be no need
to panic about the situation if one is a real
user of libraries and a true professional.

BIBLIOGRAPHIC
1.

Antelman, Kristin et. al. Toward a twenty
first
century
library
catalogue.
Inf. Technol. Lib., Sept 2006, 128-38.

2. Gibney, Alison. Mind the gap: Digital
preservation and why you should be worried.
Inf. Manage. Technol., 2005, 39(3), 10809.
3. Hovov, Anat & Gray, Paul. Academic electronic
journals: Past, present and future.
In Advances in Computers, Academic
press, California, 2006. 67, pp 131-35.
4.

Malhotra, Shyam. Beyond Google. Data
Quest, 2005, 23(24),12.

5.

Miller, Ron. RSS: Rights and wrongs.
E Content, 2006, 29(7), 24-28.

6.

Ratnam, Varda Raja Kumar. Tapping the
e-word: E-pages. Business Line, Monday,
October 09, 2006.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

7.

8.

9.

Sharma, Hari Prasad. Download counts:
A new indicator to measure the efficiency
of S&T libraries. Current Science, 2006,
91(8), 995.
Sridhar, M.S. OPAC vs card catalogue:
A comparative study of user behaviour.
The Electronic Library, 2004, 22(2), 17583.
Sridhar, M.S. Subject searching in the
OPAC of a special library: Problems
and issues. OCLC Systems and Services:
International Digital Library Perspectives,
2004, 20(4), 183-91.

10. A new way to stop digital decay. The
Economist, September 15, 2006.
11. Internet commerce: Truth in advertising.
The Economist, November 25, December
01, 2006, 13-14.
12. Internet video: We try harder. The
Economist, November 11-17, 2006, 68,
70.
13. Online advertising: Trouble clicks. The
Economist, November 25 December 01,
2006, 72, 74.

Contributor
Dr M.S.Sridhar is a postgraduate in mathematics and business
management and a doctorate in library and information science.
He is in the profession for last 35 years. Since 1978, he is heading
the Library and Documentation Division of ISRO Satellite Centre,
Bangalore. Earlier, he has worked in the libraries of the National
Aeronautical Laboratory, and Indian Institute of Management, both
at Bangalore, and University of Mysore. He has published four
books, 74 research papers, has written 19 course material for BLIS
and MLIS, presented over 22 papers in conferences and seminars.

DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2007, 27(4)

51

