DESIDOC  Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 25, No.1, January 2005, pp. 13-18 
© 2005, DESIDOC 
Wireless Network Security Issues 
Ashwani Kush & Ram Kumar 
Abstract 
In the time span of just a few years, wireless networking has emerged from a novelty to revolution. The speed with which wireless networking has caught on is not surprising owing to large bandwidth and range of several hundred feet. Moreover multiple wireless access points can be easily installed on same network to cover more areas. Our main challenge in design of these networks is their exposure to security attacks. Routing protocols for wireless networks are still an active research area. There is no single standard routing protocol. Therefore we aim to consider common security threats into account to provide guidelines to secure routing protocols. In this paper a study has been carried out for the threats on wireless networks and security goals to be achieved.  
1. INTRODUCTION 
The advent of wireless networking has raised some very compelling issues. Most important are security issues.1,2  Other issues can be legal and social. Since their emergence in the 1970s, wireless networks have become increasingly popular in the computing industry. This is particularly true within the past decade which has seen wireless networks being adapted to enable mobility. Wireless networks are emerging fast as latest technology to allow users to access information and services via electronic media,  without taking geographic position in account. Mobile hosts and wireless networking hardware are becoming widely available, and extensive work has been done recently in integrating these elements into traditional networks such as the internet. Wireless networks have taken the world by storm. Enterprises and people using computer at home are avoiding the expenses and delays associated with installing wired networks. High speed internet facility is enjoyed by travellers all over the places worldwide. Along  with increases in throughput, wireless networks remain unlicensed and affordable. 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005, 25(1) 
This has further helped their exponential growth in businesses, homes, communities and open spaces. There are currently two variations of mobile wireless networks. The first is known as infrastructured networks, i.e.,  those networks with fixed and wired gateways. The bridges for these networks are  known as base stations. A mobile unit within these networks connects to, and communicates with, the nearest base station that is within its communication radius. Typical applications of this type of network include office wireless local area networks (WLANs). The second type of mobile wireless  network is the infrastructure less mobile network, commonly known as an ad-hoc network. A ‘mobile adhoc network’3  is an autonomous system of mobile hosts which are free to move around randomly and organise themselves arbitrarily. 
2. NEED OF SECURITY 
Over a decade or so there has been tremendous changes in the way people communicate. Description of computing device has changed from PC to communication systems, PDAs, smart phones  
13 

========1========

and so on. Moreover there are over one billion subscribers using mobile phone technology as opposed to the number of PCs installed. The new computing devices have the capacity to transmit data in its varying forms, not only to similar devices, but also to different devices across a network. Mobile internet and mobile network are reality now. The convergence of technologies has made the devices and the network upon which they operate, more interchangeable than ever before with their overlapping applications. The  market is also using latest technology as in E-Commerce which uses B2B (Business to Business), B2C (Business to Consumer), G2G (Government to Government) and G2C (Government to Citizen) all requiring data exchanges. Also some private communication  systems like VPN (virtual private network) and  VPA (virtual private access) uses a lot of communication between two networks.  
According to IDC sources, Global internet commerce is expected to hit US$ 1 trillion by the end of 2004. With so much abundance of networking, it is becoming more and more needful to have a secured transmission and so security has become a major element in both hardware and the application software. It  is being argued that, though a high degree of transmission is already in process, the number would be much greater if data security could be guaranteed. To ensure future growth of markets and their applications, a high degree of security is required, due to potentially high commercial value of both the business and private data is being submitted. The need for security arises due to: 
³ Growth of mobile internet access and 
applications,  
³ Individual user requirements, and ³ Corporations (business or governmental) 
who both require internal and external 
contact and data transfer through remote 
places. 
3. SECURITY ISSUES 
Security is an important issue for wireless networks, especially for those security sensitive applications. Many users of data 
14 
transmission devices (such as laptops, PDAs,  PCs, phones, etc.) demand for Protecting data residing within devices, protecting the transmission network, protecting transfer of data, and ensuring proper transfer. One of the  goals of current wireless standard was to provide security and privacy that was ‘Wired equivalent’ and to meet this goal, several security mechanism were provided for confidentiality, authentication, and access control.4,5,6  Unfortunately all of these can be easily broken.7,8  Points to consider as security  parameters are:  
(a) Identity: An essential element in any 
security system is reliable, robust 
non-malleable identity.  
(b) Access control: Access control is the 
constraint that limits those who can utilize 
system resources. Two approaches are 
used, one is called ‘access control list 
(ACL)’ and other as ‘closed network’. (c) Authentication: It ensures that 
communication from one node to other is 
genuine. Only legitimate users can access 
the system and services. Two used 
systems are ‘open system’ and ‘shared 
key’.  
(d) Availability: Availability ensures the service 
offered by node will be available to its users 
when expected, in spite of attacks. Also 
only legitimate users can access data 
anytime. 
(e) Integrity: It protects nodes from maliciously 
altered messages.The receiver wants to be  
sure that the source is genuine. It assures 
the data, system or platform has not been 
tampered with.  
(f) Non repudiation: It ensures that the origin of  
the message cannot deny having sent the 
message.  
(g) Confidentiality: It ensures that certain 
information is never disclosed to 
unauthorized entities. Personal or sensitive  
data is protected. 
4. ATTACKS 
There are two types of attacks toward security protocols: (a) External and (b) Internal. 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005, 25(1) 

========2========

4.1 External Attacks 
External attacks can be passive and active. Passive attacks are unauthorized interruption of the routing packets and active attack is from outside sources to degrade or damage message flow between nodes.  
4.2 Internal Attacks 
A compromised node is categorized as internal attack. This is most severe threat for adhoc networks. This may broadcast wrong routing information to other nodes  
The inheritance feature of wireless networks poses opportunities for attacks from passive eavesdropping to active impersonations, and message distortion. As is  often the case, proper security may not be built in at the beginning.  
Active external attacks on the wireless routing protocol can be described as denial-of-service attacks, complete break in communication between nodes or degrading. One type of attack involves insertion of extraneous packets into the network which in turn causes congestion. Another attack involves intercepting a routing packet, modifying its contents, and sending it back into the network or to replay it back to the network at different times, introducing outdated routing information to the nodes. One of the attack is called ‘man in the middle’ means intervention of a third party within communication path without knowledge of source and receiver. Another is ‘woman in the  middle’ means one of the parties (source or receiver) is replaced by attacker.  
5. SECURITY MODELS 
5.1 Virtual Private Network (VPN) 
This offers a solid solution to many security issues, where an authenticated key provides confidentiality and integrity for IP (internet protocol) data grams. Software are available to implement VPNs on just about every platform. Authentication depends upon three factors which are password, fingerprints, and a security token. Using two factors is desirable and using all three is most  
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005, 25(1) 
secured. VPN only supports IP so it cannot be solution for all environments.  
5.2 
Encryption 
Encryption is a technique used for many years for passing information from one place to other in a secured manner. A message in its original shape is referred to as a plaintext (or text) and a message used to conceal original message is called ciphertext (or Cipher). The process of changing plaintext into ciphertext is called encryption and the reverse process is called decryption. There are many algorithm available for these processes. Some of them are Data Encryption Standard (DES),9  International Data Encryption Algorithm (IDEA)9  and Public  Key Algorithm (RSA).10  These are based on key based algorithms. There is one popular key algorithm known as Digital Signature11 
algorithm.  In Digital signature, signer encrypts the message with key, this is sent to recipient, the message is then decrypted with sender’s public key. In case of ad hoc networks this may not be the best method as it uses a lot of space and is also slow.  
5.2.1 One Way Hash Function 
There is another algorithm called ‘One Way Hash Function’.12  It is like checksum of a  block of text and is secure because it is impossible to generate the same hash function value without knowing the correct algorithm and key. It accepts a variable size message and produces an affixed size tag as output. This algorithm can be combined with encryption to provide an efficient and effective  digital signature.  
5.2.2 Digital Signature 
External attacks can be checked using confidentiality of the routing information and also by authentication and integrity assurance  features. Encryption can be solution to this. Digital signatures and one way functions can be applied.13  Perlman 
14 
 used complex robustness to protect routing data from compromised nodes. It is ability to continue correct operation in presence of arbitrary nodes with complex failures.  
15 

========3========

5.3 Mobile Security Solutions 
In mobile security, the solutions which are in use are: PKI system (Cryptographic Key System), Silicon-based Security (as hardware  security), SIM Card Security, UICC (Universal  Integrated Circuit Card), RFID (Radio Frequency Identification), Secure Mobile media on mobile devices, WAP portals, Dual slot phone, Blue tooth, and Biometrics. Authentication can be done using biometric security, external tokens, cryptographic co-processors, firewalls and software security  programs.  
Most security models only secure one of the four elements, rather than all which are: secure authentication, confidentiality-privacy, integrity, and data availability . 
Security lapses lead to collection, exploitation, falsification, and destruction of data or transactions.  
6. RELATED WORK 
6.1 Secure Routing 
Secure routing in networks such as internet has been very widely studied.15-20 These routing protocols proposed, cope well with dynamically changing topology. However none of them, to the best of our knowledge, have mechanisms to guard against malicious attacks. To deal with external attacks, standard schemes like digital signatures are used to protect authenticity and integrity. Kumar16  considers problem of compromised route as a hard problem, but suggests no solution to it. Also Sirios and Kent19  gave idea  of one-way hash function with windowed sequence number for data integrity and also14 
use of digital signatures. Perlman  gives idea  of how to protect routing information from compromised routers in the context of Byzantine robustness. It only analyses theoretical feasibility under some assumptions. Murphy and Garcia,17  Sirios and  Kent19  and Smith and Murphy 
20 
 gave only partial solutions to the problem. They give the  basic idea to detect inconsistency using redundant information and to isolate compromised routers. Smith and Murphy also  gave the idea to secure distance vector 
16 
routing protocol for ad hoc networks, the method suggested is to add extra information of a predecessor in path to destination in the routing table. They suggest using this information, correctness of path can be verified by path traversal technique. Though it  adds cost factor and is mostly avoided.  
6.2 Security in Wireless Networks 
An authentication architecture for mobile ad hoc networks is proposed by Jacobs and Corson.21  This architecture can accommodate  different schemes. Another authentication architectures include X.509 standard,22 Kerberos.23  These are based on certificate authority (CA) but these are not very suitable for ad hoc networks because of infrastructure less support by ad hoc networks, dynamic topologies, frequent route changes. Another model, a slight variation of these models called Hierarchical exist but it also does not address issues like robustness and service availability.  
PGP trust model follows a ‘web of trust’ authentication model. This also is not successful, because it is difficult for each node to maintain a long list of trusted friends. 
6.3 Threshold Secret Sharing 
Threshold secret sharing serves as primitive in many security function areas in literature of security functions. Much literature  is available in this area25-29  Threshold sharing leads to need of defending against compromised servers. Fox and Gribble30 propose a Kerberos-based authentication. Zhou and Haas31  proposed “securing ad hoc networks“ applies the threshold secret sharing  and proactive secret share update schemes in a fixed group of special nodes. Another paper from Luo, Zerfos Kong, Zhang from UCLA, Los Angeles, CA proposed a “self securing ad hoc wireless network“ which claims the model to be almost perfect in assumed conditions. They highlight the features as: system does not expose to any single point of compromise, single point of denial of service attack, or single point of failure. The model sales to large network size and is robust against wireless channel errors. Though the model handles only node 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005, 25(1) 

========4========

authentication but can be applied to user authentication as well. It uses cryptographic primitives RSA . 
6.4 Complex Robustness 
Perlman 
14 
 used complex robustness to protect routing data from compromised nodes. It has ability to continue correct operation in presence of arbitrary nodes with complex failures.  
6.5 Distributed Key Management 
It involves designation of a set of ‘Trustworthy’ nodes that share sections of the public key of the management system. Each trusted node keeps a record of all public keys in the network. The number of nodes needed to generate a valid signature is less than the total number of trusted nodes. The solution is called ‘Threshold Cryptography’.  
7. CONCLUSION 
As wireless networks are becoming more sophisticated and also offering more applications, number of security sensitive areas will appear depending on number of interfaces. There are a number of security efforts underway currently from both manufacturers and users, but still none of the individual security feature can encompass the  meaning of security as a whole. Security measures should be categorized as: Technical, logical, organizational, procedural and physical by tactics which are preventive, detective, repressive and corrective. Active attacks can be checked via authentication and integrity assurance services. External attacks can be checked via confidentiality or routing information and encryption. Also digital signatures or one way function can be solutions. The security services required to combat these active attacks are authentication and integrity assurance. Authentication of routing messages allows nodes to disregard any information that does not come from a trusted source. The integrity of a message will avoid a node from using any information that has been modified in transit. External attacks can be checked using  Confidentiality of the routing information and also by authentication and integrity assurance  
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005, 25(1) 
features. Encryption can be solution to this. Digital Signatures and One Way Hash Functions can be applied.  
What is needed is a variety of security elements with external security tokens and embedded features in IC to create secured platforms.  
REFERENCES 
1.  Stajano, F.; & Anderson R. The 
resurrecting duckling: Security issues for   
adhoc wireless networks. 
www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~fms27/duckling/duckli 
ng.html, April 1, 2000. 
2. Smith, B.R.; & Garcia-Luna-Aceves, J.J. 
Securing the border gateway routing 
protocol. Proceedings of Global Internet 
’96, November 1996. 
3. National Science Foundation. Research 
priorities in wireless and mobile 
networking. 
www.cise.nsf.gov. 
4. Arbaugh, W.A. An inductive plaintext 
attack against IEEE 802.11. Working 
Group, 2001. 
5. Arbaugh, W.A.; & Shankar, N. Your 
wireless network has no clothes.  In  First 
International Conference on Wireless 
LANs, Singapore, 2001, pp. 131-44. 6. Borisov, N.; & Wagner, D. Intercepting 
mobile communications. In  Proceedings 
of International Conference on Mobile 
Computing and Networking, July 2001, 
pp. 180-89. 
7. Fluhere, S.; & Shamir, A. Weakness in 
key schedule algorithm.  In  Proceedings 
of Workshop on Selected Areas of 
Cryptography, 2001. 
8. Frankel, S. Demystifying the Ipsec 
puzzle. Artech House, Boston MA, 2001. 9. Stallings, W. Data and computer 
communications. Prentice-Hall, New 
Jersey, 1997. pp. 623-64. 
10. Gennaro, R.; Jarecki, S.; Krawczyk, H.; &  
Rabin, T. Robust and efficient sharing of 
RSA functions. Advances in Cryptology 
Crypto ’96, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1996,  
pp.157-72. 
17 

========5========

11. Chen, D.; Perez, A.; Sasanus, S.; & 
Verma, S. Encryption: Technical and 
policy issues. 
http://128.138.105.73/capstoneTest/Proc 
eedings.asp, Fall 1999. 
12. Savard, J. One-way hash functions: A 
cryptographic compendium. 
http://fn2.freenet.edmonton.ab.ca/~jsavar 
d/mi0605.htm, April 1, 2000. 
13. Smith, B.R.; Murphy, S.; & 
Garcia-Luna-Aceves, J.J. Securing 
distance-vector routing protocols. Proc. 
Symposium Network and Dist. System 
Security, Los Alamitos, CA, Feb. 1997, 
pp. 85-92. 
14. Perlman, R. Network layer protocols with 
byzantine robustness. Department of 
Electrical Engineering and Computer 
Science, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, 1988. PhD thesis, 
15. Rover, E.M.; & Toh, C.K. A review of 
current routing protocols for ad hoc 
networks.  IEEE Communications,  1999, 
6, 46-55. 
16. Hauser, R.; Przygienda, T.; & Tsudik, G. 
Lowering security overhead in link state 
routing.  Computer Networks,  April 1999, 
31(8), 885-94. 
17. Kumar, B. Integration of security in 
network routing protocols. SIGSAC 
Reviews,  1993,  11(2),18-25. 
18. Murphy, S. & Garcia-Luna-Aceves, J.J. 
An efficient routing algorithm for mobile 
wireless networks. MONET,  October 
1996, 1(2), 183-97. 
19. Sirois, K.E.; & Kent, S.T. Securing the 
Nimrod routing architecture. In 
Proceedings of Symposium on Network 
and Distributed System Security, Los 
Alamitos, CA, February 1997. The 
Internet Society, IEEE Computer Society 
Press. pp. 74-84. 
20. Smith, B.R.; Murphy, S.; & 
Garcia-Luna-Aceves, J.J. Securing  Contributors: 
distance-vector routing protocols. In 
Proceedings of Symposium on Network 
and Distributed System Security, Los 
Alamitos, CA, February 1997. The 
Internet Society, IEEE Computer Society 
Press. pp. 85-92. 
21. Jacobs, S.; & Corson, M.S. MANET 
authentication architecture. Internet Draft 
(draft-jacobs-imepauth-arch-01.txt), 
February 1999. 
22. Aresenault, A., & Turner, S. Internet 
X.509 public key infrastructure. 
draft-ietf-pkix-roadmap-06.txt, 2000. 23. Kohl, J., & Neuman, B. The Kerberos 
network authentication service (ver 5). 
RFC-1510. 
24. Perlman, B. An overview of PKI trust 
models.  IEEE Network,  1999 , 13(6), 
38-43. 
25. Gong, L. Increasing availability and 
security of an authentication service. 
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in 
Communications, June 1993, 11(5).  26. Frankel, Y.; Gemmel, P.; & MacKenzie, P.  
Proactive RSA.  CRYPTO,  1997. 27. Frankel, Y.; Gemmel, P.; & MacKenzie, P.  
Optimal resilience proactive public–key 
cryptosystems. FOCS’97, 1997.  28. Gennaro, R.; Jarecki, S.; & Rabin, T. 
Robust and efficient sharing of RSA 
functions. Journal of Cryptology, 1996.  29. Frankel, Y.; & Desmedt, Y. Parallel 
reliable threshold multi signature. 
Technical Report TR-92-04-02, Dept of 
EECS,  University  of      Wisconsin- 
Milwaukee, 1992. 
30. Fox, A.; & Gribble, S. Security on the 
move: Indirect authentication using 
Kerberos.  ACM MOBICOM, 1996.  31. Zhou, L.; & Haas, Z.J. Securing ad hoc 
networks.  IEEE Networks, 1999, 13(6), 
24-30. 
Sh. Ashwani Kush, Department of Computer Science, University College, Kurukshetra, Kurukshetra, 132119. e-mail: akush20@rediffmail.com Sh. Ram Kumar, Department of Computer Science & Applications, Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, 132119. e-mail: rkckuk@rediffmail.com 
18 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005, 25(1) 

========6========

