DESIDOC  Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 25, No. 4, July 2005, pp. 19-30 
© 2005, DESIDOC 
DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Tehnology: Success Story with Content Coverage During 
2000-2004 
Alka Bansal, Vinod Kumari, Ashok Kumar, Dr. Mohinder Singh 
Abstract 
Publishers reflect a high-level commitment to their readers by providing high quality scientific, technical, social, and educational content to billions of readers all over the world and in a way bring them together. They provide effortless access to that content, continuously improving their service levels, and enable worldwide distribution for contributors. The DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology  (DBIT) is a bi-monthly Indian bulletin that endeavours to bring recent developments in information technology, as applicable to library and information centres, to the notice of librarians, documentation and information professionals, students and others interested in the field. It is being published by Defence Scientific Information and Documentation Centre (DESIDOC) since 1980. A small  study has been carried out regarding its content during last five years i.e., 2000-2004. Observations and findings are presented in this paper. It is found that  it is very useful for long-life literacy and professional education. It acts as a forum  for innovative ideas and as a place for exchange of best practices. The process of publishing, use of journals and their publishing are also discussed in brief. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In previous paper Ms Usha P. Tigga, Ms Shalini R. Lihitkar, and Ms D. Rajyalakshmi have done the content analysis of DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology (DBIT) for 1998-2002, and it was felt that in continuation of that study, as members of the editorial team, we should also analyse the contents of DBIT further for remaining period i.e., 2000-2004 and share our experiences as a mark of celebration of the 25th year of publishing of DBIT.  
The DBIT was started in 1980 by DESIDOC as a four page newsletter under the title DESIDOC Bulletin which mainly to publish activities of DESIDOC. In 1985, the bulletin started publishing articles on IT applications on a regular basis with its commitment towards fellow professionals and  
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005, 25(4) 
students in library and information community to provide a definitive source of information for the application of technology in information environments. In 1992, it was renamed as DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology to reflect the effect of IT tools on the profession of library and information science. 
2. WHY PUBLISH LIS JOURNALS 
Keeping abreast of the latest developments in information resources can be an endless task that is why a library and information science journal aims to be the definitive source of information for the application of technology in information environments. In addition to providing an independent and unbiased assessment of today’s automated library and information centre, these journals offer practical advice, 
19 

========1========

useful information and specific application recommendations. All of this supports high quality papers by skilled industry experts and users on all aspects of library and information science. 
As the library and information service community seeks to cope with new patterns of information provisions, new technology and  new financial circumstances, the latest research, innovative theory and organisational best practice are all combined in the library and information science (LIS) journals. These information resources offer international perspectives on the critical issues faced by libraries by publishing articles  which report contemporary thought whilst also  exploring practical implications for those involved in teaching and practice. They provide knowledge and practical perspectives  on different aspects of libraries and information services by drawing contributions from distinguished international figures. An informative, refereed LIS journal is invaluable tool to manage a library or information service  and teaching to students. 
The LIS journals ensure that readers keep informed, and act as a communication link between researchers, educators and library professionals. Libraries from all over the world  put their experiences, views and reports through these journals. This allows information professionals to gain a wide perspective on developments in their profession and distil useful facts for their own use. LIS publication can create an archive allowing researchers to test hypotheses and confirm results. If LIS journals are not published then the only medium of communication will be conferences, seminars,  etc. But it is not possible to conduct conferences/seminars/workshop very frequently and also at places suitable for all librarians. Librarians may not have enough time to attend the conferences. May be the whole concept of librarianship will vanish. 2.1 DESIDOC Bulletin of 
Information Technology 
The Defence Scientific Information and Documentation Centre (DESIDOC) is 
20 
committed to provide information professionals with knowledge products that match their exacting needs. The DBIT brings together information professionals, providing a forum for discussions with others on critical issues of the day along with their thoughts on LIS products. It strives to be the publisher of choice for academics, researchers and professionals in the fields of library and information science. 
It encourages the library and information professionals, information scientists, information specialists, computer personnel or  researchers with a vision for developments in information technology for libraries/documentation centres, including software, storage media, devices, and optical media having an impact on library and information systems and services to submit papers for DBIT. Some of the special features  of the journal are: 
t All papers are peer-reviewed by the Editorial  
Board of DBIT 
t All papers are evaluated by information 
experts/peers in their respective fields t The journal is published using modern 
publishing techniques 
t The journal is covered in major indexing and 
abstracting services like LISA, Informed 
Librarian, and INSPEC database. t Full-text of the journal is covered in Wilson 
databases namely-Omnifile full text select 
and Omnifile full text mega. 
It keeps track of new developments, by identifying current IT, forthcoming events, news, books, websites, and so on to enable readers to anticipate the future, embrace it with confidence and utilize new IT resources as soon as they become available. It also helps make the best use of current technology. 
The journal combines theory with practice and is  meant for those who need to be kept up to date with everything happening in a dynamic and increasingly influential field of IT. 
The bibliographical details along with the abstracts of papers included the DBIT issues since 1998 are available on internet (www.drdo.org). As a policy, the full-text of 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005, 25(4) 

========2========

one issue is made available on Internet for readers to have an insight of the journal (in pdf format).  
3. ROLE OF PUBLISHERS 
Publishers have a high-level commitment to their readers by providing high quality scientific, technical, social, and educational content to billions of readers all over the world  and in a way bring them together. They provide access to that content, continuously improving their service levels, and enable world-wide distribution for contributors. 
They interact with users and authors, to constantly improve their service and to deliver  real value, making information available worldwide in both academic and corporate institutions. They provide scholarly and professional literature in the fields of science, technology, social science, and humanities. They are committed to offer high quality, valuable products thus enabling the widest possible dissemination of information through traditional media (print version) and non-traditional (electronic version) distribution  channels. 
Publishers provide helpful resources, advice, and guidance to contributors and editors till the final camera ready copy is prepared. They provide high standards for writing and research; ensuring published literature and database products are world-class and useful. 
3.1 Role of DESIDOC as Publisher 
The process of publishing includes development, authoring, refereeing, editing and validation, design and production, marketing, and distribution of information which can be technical, non technical, professional, scholarly or of any other type. 
In a typical publishing house these functions may be distributed among several areas, such as editorial/production, legal/financial/operations and marketing. DESIDOC as publisher is involved in following  activities: 
Editorial/Production 
t Selection and refereeing of manuscripts to 
provide quality contents 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005, 25(4) 
t Content development by organising and 
enhancing meaning, and providing 
information by grouping different types of 
materials into one package through different 
sections namely IT Scan, IT Events, Current 
Literature Survey, Book Reviews, and 
Recommended Websites. 
t Editing of content, language/style and 
format ensures quality control in 
communicating ideas and supports the 
creative process. 
t Applying standards and style guides to 
material, including citations and formatting, 
for an orderly structure for the 
communication of knowledge. 
t Peer and internal reviewing, editing, 
proofreading and making author corrections 
and revisions for accuracy of information. t Effective visual design to enhance 
readability 
t Effective printing and binding processes for 
quality control 
t Inclusion in indexing and abstracting 
sources help researchers learn what is 
available in their fields 
t Editors’ regular scanning and selection help 
identify emerging IT leading to more use and  
research in the new fields. 
Financial Operations 
t Efficient financial management provides the 
investment necessary to complete the work 
and reduction in the cost of information t Provides funds and infrastructure necessary  
for marketing 
Marketing 
t Publisher’s fame and specialisation helps 
readers select and use information. t Marketing and selling activities provide wide 
distribution of information, reaching a 
broader audience that also helps authors to 
get recognition. 
3.2 Value Added by DESIDOC 
The value added  to professional and scholarly information by DESIDOC lies in: t Special issues of DBIT focus on special 
topics/emerging fields 
t Quality control through editorial committee 
and refereeing 
21 

========3========

t Editorial assistance and format 
standardisation leads to easy access  t High production standards ensure high 
quality information. 
4. CONTENT ANALYSIS OF DBIT 
A small study has been carried out to analyse the content coverage of DBIT during 2000-2005 to understand the growth of the journal. 
4.1 Papers 
The DBIT covers original research and review papers relating to information technology as applied to library activities, services and products. Table 1 and figure 1 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
Year 
Fig 1. Year-wise distribution of papers 
show the year-wise coverage of papers included in DBIT issues during 2000-2004.  Table 1. Year-wise distribution of 
               papers 
Year Vol. No. Total No. of 
Issues Contribution 2000 20 5 13 
2001 21 5 10 
2002 22 5 15 
2003 23 6 19 
2004 24 6 14 
Total                                              71 
Table 2 (appendix 1) shows the topics covered     through  different       contributions/ research/review papers. It can be seen that the papers included are selected both from the academic world of debate and theory, and  the practitioner world of action, decision and practicality. 
It can be deduced from table 3 (appendix 2) that topics from new and emerging fields were covered. 
Table 4 and figure 2 show the distribution of general issues and thematic issues. During  the period covered in this study four theme-based issues on current topics were brought out. 
Table 4. Distribution of general issues and thematic issues 
Theme 
Communication Network Web Page Designing 
Year 2000 2001 2002 2003 
Issue 1 & 2 3 3 2 
Marketing of Information Products & Services Future Publishing Technologies 
5 
9 
27 
Guest editor Sh Y S Rajan Dr Mohinder Singh Sh O N Chaddha Dr Aluri Rao 
30 
On e Author 
Two Authors 
Thre eAuthors 
> th anthre eAuthors 
Fig 2. Authorship pattern of contributions 
22 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005, 25(4) 

========4========

Table 5 shows geographical distribution of guest editors which emphasises that the guest editorship is of international level. Table 5. Geographical distribution of 
               guest editors 
No. Guest Editor Place  1 Sh Y S Rajan Delhi 2 Dr Mohinder Singh Delhi 3 Sh O N Chaddha Delhi 4 Dr Aluri Rao USA 
Table 6 shows the authorship pattern of contributions. It can be seen that maximum number of contributions were from single author followed by contributions from two authors with marginal percentage difference. Table 6. Authorship pattern of 
              contributions 
No. of authors No. of % 
contributions One author 30 42.2 Two authors 27 38.0 Three authors 9 12.6 > three authors 5 7.04 
Table 7 and figure 3 cover the volume-wise  authorship pattern of contributions which shows that the trend towards collaborative research is on increase during the period covered. 
Table 7. Year-wise authorship pattern 
               of contributions 
Year One Two Three > Three 
author authors authors authors 2000 9 3 1 
2001 6 3 1 
2002 4 6 2 3 2003 8 8 3 
2004 3 7 2 2 
4.2 Information Technology 
Events Section  
The Information Technology Events section of DBIT covers information regarding the forthcoming conferences to be held nationally and internationally. Table 8 and figure 4 cover the volume-wise coverage in IT  Events section of DBIT. The coverage has consistently grown from 34 in 2000 to 39 in 2004. An emphasis has been given on coverage of national events. 
4.3 Information Technology Scan 
Section 
The Information Technology Scan section of DBIT covers information regarding latest information technology which can be used in libraries and information centres to provide services to the patrons. By analysing table 6, it was found that the coverage in this section has grown from 41 in 2000 to 66 in 2004. Efforts have been made to also include 
Fig 3. Year-wise authorship pattern of contributions 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005, 25(4) 
23 

========5========

Table 8. Volume-wise coverage in sections of DBIT 
Year Vol. No. No. of IT Events No. of Scan No. of Book Reviews No. of Literature Survey 
2000 20 2001 21 2002 22 2003 23 2004 24 
34 26 36 32 39 
41 43 48 64 66 
250 
200 
48 
59 
4 5 
150 
100 
18 
2 3 
23 
41 
4 8 
48 
50 
3 4 
31 
3 6 
0 
2000 
2001 
2002 
Year 
18 19 23 32 27 
59 28 48 61 81 
62 
81 
32 
27 
66 
Lit. Survey BookReviews IT Scan IT Events 
64 
3 9 
32 
2003 
2004 
Fig 4. Year-wise distribution of coverages in different sections 
national and international news which can be useful for readers. 
4.4 Current Literature Survey 
This Current Literature Survey (CLS) section covers the bibliographical details along with abstracts about recent published papers in leading library and information science journals which can be a useful and selected reading for DBIT readers. 
The DBIT has included information regarding 59 papers in 2000 and 81 in 2004. An emphasis has been given on cover more and more journals. Table 7 (appendix 1) shows the subject-wise coverage in CLS section. 
4.5 Book Reviews 
This section covers a brief summary of latest library and information science and computer science books which can be useful 
24 
for LIS professionals for updation of their knowledge and expertise. The number of book reviews have increased from 18 in 2000 to 27 in 2004. 
4.6 Recommended Website 
This new section covers information about sources and services which major LIS publishers, libraries  and online vendors are providing to enable the LIS professionals what sources and services are available to satisfy the information needs of their users. CONCLUSIONS 
Keeping abreast of the ever-changing factors that effect a library can be difficult and time consuming. Through its papers, the DBIT  presents new ideas and theories, which have been tested through practical application and deliver real insight of any topic. They provide readers information, each article sets the context for a particular topic, informs current 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005, 25(4) 

========6========

thinking, and adds to the body of knowledge; introduce new ideas, usually with recommendations as to how the ideas may be  successfully applied to stimulate further thinking; generate insight by linking new ideas  with experience, knowledge and objectives, to  promote insight into area of interest.  
It keeps pace with the plethora of current and developing techniques and applications about the logistics of information management so that readers can gain access   to a wealth of relevant and practical information. In addition, regular guest editors identified innovations and emerging trends through special theme issues of the journal. 
The DBIT is important in terms that it gives  lot of information regarding new products and technologies useful for librarians as tools to serve their patrons better. Information like forthcoming conferences in LIS, is considered  as an interesting feature. Apart the experience gained from work of contributors, there is a lot to learn about what is happening  
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005, 25(4) 
in other libraries/documentation centres and it  helps in starting new services also or help in resources sharing with other libraries. 
We hope that in future also journals will keep on reporting contemporary thoughts whilst exploring practical implications for those involved in practising, teaching and learning library and information science, systems, sources and services. 
REFERENCES 
1. DESIDOC Bul  le tin  of In  for ma tion 
Tech nol ogy,  2000,  20(1-6). 
2. DESIDOC Bul  le tin  of In  for ma tion 
Tech nol ogy,  2001,  21(1-6). 
3. DESIDOC Bul  le tin  of In  for ma tion 
Tech nol ogy,  2002,  22(1-6). 
4. DESIDOC Bul  le tin  of In  for ma tion 
Tech nol ogy, 2003, 23(1-6). 
5. DESIDOC Bul  le tin  of In  for ma tion 
Tech nol ogy,  2004,  24(1-6). 
6. www.emeraldinsight.com 
25 

========7========

