DESIDOC  Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 25, No.  5 & 6, September & November 2005, pp. 3-9 
© 2005, DESIDOC 
Integrated Library System: Selection and Design 
Indira Koneru 
Abstract 
The wide use of computer and communicating systems in the recent past facilitated the design and development of ‘integrated library (information) systems’.  Dr Ralph Halsted Parker, pioneer in library mechanization coined the term `Library Information Systems (LIS)' around 1968, envisioned LIS as not only  ‘automating’ existing library procedures, such as circulation, cataloguing, etc., but  also providing access to materials held electronically even by other libraries and information centers across the globe. Currently, the systems librarians have been  endeavouring to develop ‘Integrated Library Systems’  (ILS), by creating the technologic landscape for supporting and enhancing end-user access to digitally recorded document surrogates and content. Analysing and designing an LIS aims at enhancing patron satisfaction by providing just-in-time access to appropriate information. Survey findings across North America and Europe reveal that the rationale for migrating from one system to another is for increased  functionality of library’s information system for the benefit of end-user, sidelining the cost issues. This article describes system selection processes and procedures, and other planning and decision-making issues and factors associated with the design and development of an ILS. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In duc tion of com put ing sys tems in li brar ies and in  for ma tion  sys  tems  has en  hanced  the ef fi ciency  of var  i ous  li  brary  op  er a tions  for more than 65 years. In the re  cent past, li brary  in for ma tion  sys  tems  (LIS) have been de vel oped into ‘in te grated li brary (in for ma tion)  sys tems’,  with the ubiq  ui tous  na  ture  of com puter and com mu ni cat ing sys tems.  
It was Dr Ralph Halsted Parker, pi  o neer in li brary mech a ni za tion coined the term `Li brary  In for ma tion  Sys  tems'  around 1968, while de vel op ing  a grad  u ate  level class in the Mas ters  De  gree  Pro  gramme at the Uni ver sity of Mis  souri  en  ti tled  'Li  brary  In  for ma tion Sys tems.'  He en  vi sioned  LIS as not only ‘au to mat ing’  ex  ist ing  li  brary  pro  ce dures,  such as cir  cu la tion,  cat  a logu ing,  etc., but also pro vid ing  ac  cess  to ma  te ri als  held elec tron i cally  even by other li  brar ies  and 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005, 25(5 & 6) 
in for ma tion  cen ters across the globe. By then,  the NLM (Na  tional  Li  brary  of Med  i cine)  was ex per i ment ing the on line da ta base MEDLINE.  While se  lect ing  the three words to coin LIS, he en  vis aged  both the cur  rent  and fu  ture ap pli ca tions  of tech  nol ogy  within li  brar ies; which is still ap  pro pri ate  in de  scribing  the con tem po rary  tech  no log i cal  ap  pli ca tions  in the li brary’s in for ma tion sys tem. Cur rently, the  sys tems  li  brar i ans  have been endeavouring to de velop an ILS by cre at ing the tech no logic land scape  for sup  port ing  and en  hanc ing end-user ac  cess  to dig  i tally  re  corded doc u ment sur ro gates and con tent.  
2. LIBRARY PROCESSES AND 
SERVICES 
In selecting and installing an ILS, the librarian or decision maker has to get acquaintance with various library operations and functions, which need the support of the 
3 

========1========

technology. Generally, the library procedures and services encompass ‘housekeeping operations’, ‘public services,’ and/or administrative planning and decision-making.  
2.1 Housekeeping Activities 
Housekeeping activities include: acquisition, cataloguing and classification, inventory control, circulation control, serials control, inter library loan (ILL), etc. Among these, circulation systems solutions can be considered as the first technological applications that led to the library systems.  
2.2 Public Services 
Public services encompass providing access to the collection held by the local library and other libraries, as well as e-resources available on the world wide web (WWW). Initially, online public access catalogue (OPAC) intended to provide access  to the union catalogues of an institutional library system, however, OPACs now extended end-user’s access to the collection around the world. Even online databases are made available directly to the users with appropriate links and information through library consortia. 
Libraries need to offer all these services collectively through an integrated system, and  not as independent information systems with different operating systems and user interfaces, since end users want to access all these heterogeneous data via a single interface, without having to know the structure  of each information system or the different retrieval methods used by the systems. For which, they need to render web-based information content, which differs with earlier discussed web-enabled services, viz. online catalogues and online databases, in which web is an access and delivery tool, not a conduit for content. Since WWW holds enormous information content, libraries and information centres in the quest to satisfy users’ needs, need to organise the Internet resources through HTML links, distinguishing the licensed, library owned, and freely available, both full-text and abstracts. Even the digitalized library collections are to be made available via the Web, which needs to 
4 
be authenticated with user PIN, for information access and retrieval. 
2.3 Administrative Planning and 
Decision Making 
Tech ni cal  ser  vices  are sig  nif i cant  to the li brar i ans  and other in  for ma tion  pro fes sion als,  whereas, pub  lic  ser  vices  are for the end-users. How  ever,  ad  min is tra tive  plan  ning and de  ci sion  mak  ing  play a vi  tal  role in se lect ing  and de  sign ing an  LIS. Man  age ment is re spon si ble for draft ing ser vice goals for the  li brar ies,  which in  clude  an  a lys ing  and de sign ing  the LIS, for not only en  hanc ing pa tron  sat  is fac tion  by pro  vid ing  just-in-time ac cess  to ap  pro pri ate  in  for ma tion,  but also keep ing  pace with the tech  no log i cal in no va tions.  
In or  der  to keep track whether the set goals are met or not, the req ui site data can be  de rived  from the var  i ous  sub  sys tems de signed  to pro  vide  in  for ma tion  ser  vices  that sup port  pro  cesses  within the li  brary.  Li  brary ad min is tra tors  and/or pol  icy  and de  ci sion mak ers  make use of the by  prod uct  of the var i ous  ap  pli ca tions  un  der  tech  ni cal  and pub lic  ser  vices,  which re  veal  pa  tron  us  age, col lec tion us age, val u a tion  of spe  cific ser vices  and so forth. The data gath  ered  from the sub sys tems  of the LIS aid the ad  min is tra tors in an a lysing and im prov ing  the sys  tem and its  ser vices  for the op  ti mal  ben  e fit  of the end user. Fur  ther,  man  age ment  can en  sure  to in stall  or up  grade  in  fra struc ture  in sup  port  of the LIS. The in fra struc ture in cludes hard ware,  soft ware,  ca  bling  with suf  fi cient  band  width that ought to sup  port  the vary  ing  in  for ma tion needs of di  ver gent us ers.  
3. SYSTEM SELECTION 
Selection of a system and its installation generally, involves the following steps:  
(a) Identifying library’s needs; 
(b) Documenting the library’s needs; 
(c) Evaluating alternatives;  
(d) Preparing written agreements; and 
(e) Implementation. 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005,  25(5 & 6) 

========2========

3.1 Identify Library’s Needs 
In India, several academic and research institutions have automated  (either partially or fully) their libraries and information centers.  Many are still to adapt ILS. These libraries need to assess and identify their libraries' needs (users’ information needs) for upgrading (moving from one system to another), or migrating from manual to automated system.  
Survey findings of North America and Europe reveal that the primary reason for migrating from one system to another is for increased functionality. And other reasons include the scalability issues, problems with the vendor i.e., lack of after-sales support. Surprisingly, cost issues were given the least importance for migrating to a new system. 
Library’s current operations should be analysed to identify needs of the user community it serves, and ways in which improvements might be made, for which five general issues need to be considered, viz. time, costs, control, service, and communication. 
Another beneficial activity that a library must pursue is to identify the systems that the  peer libraries installed for their purpose and  functioning. For this, concerned staff or systems librarian should visit other libraries to  get acquaintance with the pros and cons. Their visits may give a comprehensive idea about how to migrate from manual to automated system or what all the new levels of service one can introduce with the adaptation.  
3.2 Document the Library’s Needs 
Analysis of user needs and consequent library needs should be documented, so as to  list the priorities for installing new LIS. The list  of the needs should be organised into different functional areas, depicting significant  features and functions that library needs to integrate. Rather than listing extensively, this document should focus on 10 to 15 functions that will really make productive impact on staff  activities, alongside, improving the level of information services to a greater extent. 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005, 25(5 & 6) 
Along with library functions and other information activities, it should also enlighten the hardware, software requirements, stating the minimum requirement in terms of system reliability, response times for different types of  transactions, etc. 
3.3  Evaluate Alternatives 
Once the library’s needs are determined, the next step is considering several alternatives and evaluating these, for choosing the best alternative that meets the challenges and needs.  
The available options are: 
³ 
Stand-alone or in-house system;  
³ Shared system; and 
³ 
ASP service. 
3.3.1 Stand-alone 
A stand-alone sys  tem  is owned and main tained ex clu sively, by an in di vid ual li brary  for its func  tion ing.  It is the best sys  tem pur chased  from a pre  ferred  LIS ven  dor  that meets the spe  cific  needs of a li  brary.  The li brary  it  self  needs to ex  er cise  ab  so lute con trol  over op  er at ing  the sys  tem,  af  ter in stal la tion and train ing of the staff. For which,  the li brary should have the nec es sary bud get,  as upfront cap i tal costs are in volved. 3.3.2 Shared System 
Shared system means sharing an LIS with  already existing, or creating a consortium as a  co-operative and sharing venture. Consortia are primarily set up with an economic motive of reducing and sharing the costs, both installation and maintenance. Deciding to join the existing system, rather creating a new co-operative association may be a wise decision. However, the selected system may not best meet the library’s needs (as the library’s needs vary according to their user community) and the library does not exercise absolute control over the system parameters. 3.3.3 ASP Service 
ASP stands for ‘Ap  pli ca tion  Ser  vice Pro vider’,  which is rel  a tively  new al  ter na tive un der  which a li  brary  rents ac  cess  to  a ser vice  i.e., ac  cess  to LIS. ASP is  a 
5 

========3========

third-party en tity that  man  ages and dis trib utes  soft ware-based  ser  vices  and so  lu tions  to cus tom ers across a wide area net work from a  cen tral  data cen  tre. 
By utilising this alternative, a library can: ³ Transfer the total ownership responsibility 
to a vendor, who has to design, implement,  
and host the services tailored to meet its 
user needs; 
³ Reduce the total cost of ownership 
considerably by 25% or more; 
³ Start using the ASP service in days rather 
than months, as in earlier options; ³ Eliminate the need to recruit, train, and 
retain ‘technology savvy’ staff; 
³ Avoid the tasks of performing routine 
system maintenance, and data backups; ³ Transfer the responsibility for installing, 
upgrading, and maintaining operating 
system, database, and application 
software on the central server;  
³ Eliminate up-front capital expenditure for 
library automation; and  
³ Retain ownership of its own data. 3.3.4 Process to Evaluate Alternatives 
To evaluate each of the available alternatives, one has to prepare a cost analysis statement, comparing each alternative with one another. Finally, all the possible cost  components for each of the major alternatives should be tabulated. Both the initial costs (purchase and installation), and ongoing maintenance charges should also be determined for each option. Determining the total five-year costs means first year costs plus the maintenance cost over the five years, which is imperative, since one vendor may offer with low initial pricing but high ongoing maintenance charges or vice versa. The cost components to be considered for cost analysis are: 
(a)Consultant, if any; 
(b)Client hardware – new and/or upgrade; (c)Server hardware – new and/or upgrade; (d)Operating system software; 
(e)Library application software; 
6 
(f) Third party software (e.g. Oracle, MS SQL 
Server licenses); 
(g) Security software; 
(h) ASP service; 
(i) Cabling and telecommunications; (j) Databases conversion; 
(k) External databases and systems; (l) Training; and  
(m) System manager and computer support 
staff. 
This cost anal  y sis  es  sen tially,  aids in shar ing the ac tual costs in curred with fund ing de ci sion  mak  ers,  li  brary  com  mit tees,  and other fund ing agen cies. 
3.3.5 Factors for Choosing an LIS 
According to Peggy Johnson5, a more recent survey identified the top ten factors for choosing an LIS: 
(a) Ease of use by patrons; 
(b) Availability of application modules and 
subsystems; 
(c) Completeness of modules and 
subsystems; 
(d)  Cost of system; 
(e) Cost of hardware; 
(f) Need for local programming staff; 
(g) Service reputation of vendor; 
(h) Ease of use by staff; 
(i) Comparable installed site; and  (j) Previous experience with the vendor. 
In ad  di tion,  a li  brary  can have ac  cess  to other sources, such as re  view  lit er a ture,  and pub lished  ar  ti cles  about li  brary  au  to ma tion prod ucts  in pro  fes sional jour nals.  These may pro vide  sig  nif i cant  in  for ma tion  re  gard ing  the ven dors,  their prod  ucts,  and cus  tom ers. More over,  the li  brary  staff may visit the nearby li  brar ies,  to get re  li able  in  for ma tion from their peers, and to get their doubts clar i fied,  re  gard ing  a par  tic u lar  in  for ma tion sys tem they want to in stall. 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005,  25(5 & 6) 

========4========

3.4 Preparing Written Agreements 
Once the se  lected  au  to mated  sys  tem  and the cor  re spond ing  ven  dor get the  ap  proval  of the li  brary  au  thor i ties,  then the ne  go ti a tions with the ven  dor  about the terms and con di tions,  em  brac ing  the pur  chase  of the prod uct  is to be com menced. Now-a-days, for  the sys  tems  that cost more, ven  dors  are will ing  to ne  go ti ate  a Pur  chase  Agree  ment and a Main  te nance  Agree  ment,  how  e ver, cer tain  ven  dors still ad here to their Stan dard Agree ment.  Nev  er the less,  in ne  go ti at ing  the cost of the sys  tem, the in ter est and ob jec tives  of the li  brary  should be served better; and it must be a fair ad  van tage  to the li  brary.  The li brary  should have a clear un  der stand ing  of what it ex  pects  of a sys  tem  in terms of re li abil ity,  re  sponse  times, scalability, and soft ware  func  tion al ity.  The agree  ment  should pro vide  a frame  work  for mal  func tion ing  of the sys tem,  fu  ture  con  flicts,  mis  un der stand ings, or dis agree ments, if arise.  
The System Purchase Agreement and Maintenance Agreement should address the following points: 
Deliverables:  Precisely, what is to be delivered to the library should be specified. It should encompass the hardware (if part of the  agreement), software modules, training of the staff, and so forth. 
Pricing:  The agreement should address issues relating to pricing policy of the vendor i.e., system purchase price, and ongoing maintenance charges in detail to avoid disagreement after purchasing the system. Payment Schedule:  The number of progressive payments is to be specified. Normally, libraries opt for three such payments: while signing the contract; installation period; and acceptance of the system. Though, the vendors wish to get maximum amount as soon as possible, libraries need to delay huge sum, until the system gets final acceptance, which involves some negotiation. 
Delivery and Installation:  Even the delivery schedules for various components of a system should be stated precisely, to control the delays. 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005, 25(5 & 6) 
Training and Documentation:  Staff training is significant for the efficacy of the system to be used. The agreement should state the amount of training to be provided, and user manuals to be supplied. Such documentation should be in machine-readable form, so that the library staff can incorporate necessary changes. 
Acceptance Tests:  If acceptance tests are part of the agreement, library staff should perform software functional acceptance test - the software should be compared with the vendor’s brochure or written proposal; system  reliability test – whether the system meets the  stated reliability performance standard; response time acceptance test – staff should follow a script to perform prescribed transactions at stated intervals of time  (e.g. discharging an item every 10 seconds with a maximum response of three seconds). Warranty: The agreement should specify the warranty period, during which the library need  not pay a single penny for vendor’s support. Warranty period varies with the vendors, which may be as short as 90 days, and as long as a year. During negotiations the issue to be resolved regarding the warranty is, ‘when does the warranty period begin?’ Whether it begins at the time of installation or when the library receives the system. Termination:  Terms and conditions for the termination should be specified. The conditions may arise out of the failure of the vendor: to deliver the software as scheduled; to deliver the software with accepted performance levels; and if the library wishes to install a new system. 
Once the library has accepted the system, terms and conditions of the System Purchase  and Maintenance Agreement, and then the system becomes operative. 
3.5 Implementation Process 
After having the user acceptance of the new system developed, the implementation phase begins. The conversion to the new system is made according to a plan developed in the detailed design phase. Implementation is the stage of a project during which theory is turned into practice.  
7 

========5========

During this phase, all the programs of the system are loaded onto the user’s computer. After loading the system, training of the library  staff starts. Training should be given to the staff to:  
(a)Execute the package; 
(b)Migrate the data into new LIS package; (c)Process the data (processing details); and (d)Retrieve the requisite records, and other 
reports. 
During training, each staff member should be provided with his/her separate workstation,  and ample time for hands-on practice. Usually, the vendor representative responsible for training assumes that the library staff attending the training are computer savvy. If the staff without technical background take part in the training, they may  gain nothing from it. The quality of the training  offered by the vendor shows the biggest impact on staff's functional and operating skills, ultimately, on the efficiency of the ILS. Henceforth, the staff should be apprised of the automation project from the outset, and supplied with the vendor’s training modules before hand, whether it be      on-site or net-based training. After the staff got trained about and adopted to the computerised system, manual working has to shift from manual to computerised working, or current library information system to new LIS. While migrating the data from an existing system into the new, library staff may seek the assistance of vendor’s implementation team, so as to ensure that a field of data in the current system is moved to the appropriate data field in the new system.  
Before actually implementing the new system into library operations, a test run of the system is done. It is an important phase of  a successful system. After codifying the whole  programs of the system, a test plan should be  developed and run on a given set of test data.  The output of the test run should match the expected results. Once it is ensured that the system designed is running error-free, then the library staff can feed the actual data into the system, as per the libraries and/or information centers requirements. 
8 
The following two strategies are followed for running the system:  
Parallel run:  In a parallel run, both the systems   i.e., computerized and manual are executed in parallel, for a certain defined period. This strategy is helpful because of the following reasons: 
(a) Manual results can be compared with the 
results of the computerised system; and (b) Failure of the computerised system at the 
early stage, does not affect the working of 
the library, since the manual system 
continues to work, as it used to do.  Pi lot  run:  In this type of run, the new sys  tem is in  stalled  in parts. Some part of the new sys tem  is in  stalled  first and ex  e cuted suc cess fully for con sid er able time pe riod, say for in  stance,  ac  qui si tion  mod ule or cir cu la tion mod ule.  When the re  sults  are found sat is fac tory  then only other parts are im ple mented.  This strat  egy  builds the con fi dence  in the li  brary  staff and the er  rors can be traced eas ily.  
CONCLUSION AND SUGGESTIONS 
Since the scope of information services has been widening with the integration of ICTs, it is imperative for libraries to design and develop an ILS that meets not only the present but also future demands and challenges. While designing systems and services, the primary factor to ponder over is users - their information needs and wants. Before designing a user-centered system, library staff should undertake the system study, which involves identifying the scope of the system and identification of user’s requirements in a library and information centre and the limitations and problems of the  present system. This study helps the systems  librarian in presenting a system proposal to the library authorities for its approval and fund  raising. 
Additionally, the competencies of the library staff are critical in adapting a new information system or upgrading an existing system. The staff should update their functional and technical skills in order to cope with the advancements in the system. As a 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005,  25(5 & 6) 

========6========

systems librarian, one must continually learn new skills, new tools, and new approaches to manage and provide access to information. To be the part and parcel of library information system development process, library staff should respond to the developments in technology at a number of levels - they must keep current with what technologies are available (often from outside  the traditional library sector), they must evaluate technologies, so that they can make informed decisions about using those technologies, and they must develop practical  plans for implementing those technologies. Upgrading the core competencies of staff, alongside library’s automation system not only enhances the professional competencies  of the staff, but also thwarts the intrusion of alternative information providers into the information profession.  
REFERENCES 
1. Cohn, John M.; Kelsey, Ann L. & Fiels, 
Keith Mi chael. Planning for au to ma tion: A  
how-to-do-it man  ual  for li  brar ians.  Ed. 2. 
Neal Schuman, New York, 1997. 
  Contributors: 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
Matthews, Jo  seph  R. Internet outsourcing using an ap  pli ca tion  ser  vice pro vider:  A how-to-do man  ual. Neal-Schuman, New York, 2001. Kochtanek, Thomas R.  & Matthews, Jo seph  R.  Li brary  in  for ma tion  sys  tems: From li  brary  au  to ma tion  to dis  trib uted in for ma tion  ac  cess  so  lu tions.  Li  braries Un lim ited, Westport, Con nect i cut, 2004. Fang, Lin. A de  veloping  search ser  vice: Het er o ge neous  re  source  in  te gra tion  and re trieval  sys  tem.  D-Lib Mag  a zine,  2004, 10(3). 
http://www.dlib.org/dlib/march04/fang/03f ang.html 
John son,  Peggy. Au to ma tion  and or ga ni sa tion  change in li  braries.  G.K. Hall, Boston, 1991. 
From anal y sis to de sign. 
http://gee.cs.oswego.edu/dl/oosdw3/ch 15.html 
Thi Phien. Sys tem anal y sis and de sign. http://www.netnam.vn/unescocourse/sys_ ana_des/system.htm 
Smt Indira Koneru, Faculty Associate, Dept. of Library Science, ICFAI University, 25, Nagarjuna Hills, Hyderabad – 500 082.  
e-mail: indk68@yahoo.com; indk68@hotmail.com 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005, 25(5 & 6) 
9 

========7========

