DESIDOC  Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 25, No. 5, September & November 2005, pp. 11-16 
© 2005, DESIDOC 
A Model Curriculum for Security Aspects in IT 
Education 
Ashwani  Kush &  Sawtantar  Singh 
Abstract 
Security has become a primary concern in order to provide protected data transfer in all networking environments. An internetwork security-teaching laboratory course, which includes both defensive and offensive security laboratory experimentation, is proposed here. This proposed laboratory will be oriented towards an introductory internetworking  security class and is intended to  complement more theoretical network security classes while motivating student interests and industry needs. The laboratory will be unique in that it uses an isolated laboratory network that attempts to represent the internet  as closely as possible to typical educational laboratories which use only a few physical computers with virtual machines. It is also suggested that all of the laboratory assignments should be made available on internet  for general community use and modification. General community expects solution from trained IT-professionals with respect to planning, configuration, implementation and maintenance of secure system for data transmission. Proposed study is an 
attempt in that direction.  
1. INTRODUCTION 
 In the modern era of interconnected world, secured communications are needed for business (e-commerce activities), government (e-government activities) organisations and customers or citizens (e-services) to benefit from the advancements  that the internet  (networking) is empowering. The information security is important as the Government and business are now increasingly becoming dependent on information technology (IT). Secured information and protected infrastructure from malicious interventions is need of the hour. The organisations have access to sensitive and sometimes even secret business/government information. One of the first things to do is to build an organisation security policy to ensure that safe transactions are conducted in routine business1. Information assurance and 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005, 25(5 & 6) 
infrastructure protection is a national priority as well as a complex and critical challenge. 
The possibility of having organisation’s data exposed to a malicious attacker is increasing exponentially. The main reason for this is the high number of `security illiterate' users. Many of the end users are not even aware of what is the meaning of network-security.  Even qualified IT professionals from universities, engineering colleges and technical institutes are paying little attention to information security. The educational institutions should start security awareness programme2  to define and outline the specific role of each of the employees in an effort to secure critical organisation assets,  as well as covering each of the core elements  pointed in a good security policy. In order to complement the highly theoretical security courses in various disciplines that exist in professional computer diploma, degree and 
3 

========1========

postgraduate courses, a new scheme has been proposed for a laboratory based class. The proposed scheme allows student to be exposed to the real world challenges of network security. The academic institutes have conducted several seminars on information security but there have not been concrete suggestions to implement information security course in academic institutions. There is need to setup laboratories and develop associated laboratory materials, where the students could learn penetration testing techniques, hardening networks against attacks, and logging/audit controls for the purpose of convicting hackers. In international scenario many groups have explored methods of teaching information security. The pedagogical issues related to designing and implementing a cyber  warfare laboratory for a computer security course have already been put into exercise3   on virtual machines.  
4, 5 
In this paper the proposed teaching laboratory model builds on the previously discussed methods of teaching and also adds  unique elements that help build a teaching environment that approaches a real world laboratory that is both fun and inspiring students. In order to strengthen laboratory design, it is important to understand the industry’s best practices and latest developments. There are several organisations that are making important contributions to the network security community and are useful resources in identifying network security laboratory components and teaching.6,7,8  These organisations contribute to the community in various ways from informing security professionals of the latest alerts to offering free material on information security related topics. 
2. NEED FOR COMPUTER 
SECURITY COURSE 
In universities and technical institutes around India, most of the computer science/application graduates go directly to workplace after completion of their degrees/diploma courses. The academic 
4 
syndicates of the educational bodies try their best to include practical topics to supplement the traditional computer science curriculum. But in these professional courses maximum stress is laid on general education and the practical approach is less used. As the demand for qualified IT security personnel (having certified trainings) is growing, most of the time, these IT professionals need to enroll  for certified security training courses or the organisations hiring these professionals need to train them which involve efforts, time and money. With increasing trend in use of e-resources, this trend is getting upwards day  by day.   
3. PROPOSED SCHEME 
In this article a scheme has been proposed to take care of security needs of the  industry in general and student curriculum in particular. The scheme is a blend of theoretical and practical course work and tries  to achieve the goal of supplying trained security professionals in IT. The proposed scheme intends to prepare certified trained security professional for network solutions. Proposed scheme has been divided into 4 layer structure as shown in Table 1. 
Table 1.  4 Layered Structure  Hardware support requirements  Software support requirements Testing and certification Application in market 
3.1 Hardware Requirements  
A general hardware setup is required for lab set up. High powered server and 15 to 20 nodes should suffice the purpose for a group of 20 students. Server needs to support all platforms in terms of operating system and all  protocols to connect it via LAN or internet.  
3.2 Software Requirements 
Table 2 shows the goals, and tools used in  some example laboratory assignments. The laboratory exercises should be made available online which can be taken after modification. 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005,  25(5 & 6) 

========2========

3.3 Testing and Certification 
The course curriculum for internet work security course includes almost all relevant topics. Some background in system administration and computer network is necessary. A basic knowledge of computer security features like firewall, intrusion detection, Trojan horse, Denial of service, Authenticity, Cryptography9,10,11  should be prerequisite requirement for entry level to such a course.  
The trainees can use the Computer Oracle  and Password System (COPS), Netcracker and Network Security Scanner (NESSUS) tools12  to locate opportunities for mischief on other people’s systems, it is important that they understand why breaking into computers  and disrupting computer operation is both illegal and unethical. The laboratory exercises  will be developed where students work in teams to secure a computer system and then try to gain access to other systems present in the network, including the systems used by 
Table 2. Goals and objectives and the tools used in some example laboratory 
              assignments 
Laboratory Goals (including detection and Exercises  countermeasures) 
1 
Software (used to support these goals) 
Operating system installation, network  VmWare, CheopsNG, nmap, nessus, reconnaissance, network mapping, 
and vulnerability assessment 
2 
Password cracking, sniff network connection between computers, 
Man-in-Middle attacks 
3 
SuperScan, Sam Spade 
L0phtCrack, John the Ripper, ethereal, nmap, hunt 
DNSspoof and dsniff, arpwatch, datapool 
4 
Falsifying identity on a network, 
Denial of service, detection spoofing 
Buffer overflows vulnerabilities in Programs in C/C++ language 
software 
5 
Irk4, Knark, Kern_check, chkrootkit, 
Rootkit methodologies for regaining 
access to systems once compromised  sterace, rootkit Hunter, Hacker 
and methods of detecting rootkits 
Defender 
6 
Back doors and Trojans for Netcat, icmp-backdoor, Virtual Network 
7 
compromising systems Honeynets and forensics 
8 
Firewalls 
9 
Worm fundamentals, proliferation 
techniques, and spreading rates 
10 11 
Wireless security, cracking WEP keys 
Virtual private network security 
12 13 
World wide web vulnerabilities 
Capture flag network security exercise 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005, 25(5 & 6) 
Computing, Back Office 
AIDE, Scan of the month Challenge, FIRE, Coroner’s Toolkit, Autopsy, Sleuth Kit 
Linux firewall iptables, Zone Alarm, Cisco PIX Firewall 
Self written worm, annakurikova 
Kismet, airsnort 
SSH VPN in Linux, IPSec VPN using a Cisco VPN Concentrator 
WGET, Nikto 
Attack & defend using all tools & techniques 
5 

========3========

other teams.  In the first part of the course, the students should be able to handle exercises to demonstrate cumulative understanding of various security issues, strategies and tools.  
Some of the tools to be used are: General information gathering (ping, traceroute, finger,  whois, nslookup/dig, arp, netstat, etc.), Packet  sniffing (tcpdump, ethereal), Password cracking (johntheripper, 10phtcrack), Cryptography (PGP), Port scanning (nmap), Vulnerability assessment (nessus, chkrootkit) and Intrusion detection (snort), etc. It is expected that by the end of the course students will be fairly well aware of the issues and representative tools used in security scenario. The main reason for realistic network architecture is to provide the infrastructure for challenging complex security  issues. Though it is possible to accomplish the laboratory assignments with few (less than 10) machines but studies show that using more complex network enables many more possibilities and interesting exercises. 
The purpose of the course, the lab exercises during the course, and the cyber war exercises at end of the course is for the better understanding of defence and design of  computer systems and networks through the study of both attack and defence strategies. It  is also ethically important to stress that attack strategies are important to understand from a defensive standpoint. The goal of the cyber war lab exercise is to give students further experience with the major issues, strategies and tools involved in computer security and to  see how they synthesized the information presented earlier in the course. 
Figure 1 represents existing course work based on four major scales in four areas as shown on right side panel. Figure 2 shows the  proposed theme which is more practical oriented.  
Specifically achievements should cater to the following: 
q 
Real-world team based experience with 
system defence in a live environment q Exposure to attack in order to better 
understand the strategies, tactics and 
6 
mindset of the attacker, and to be able to 
respond defensively in a real time 
environment 
q Experience with technological, physical and  
social engineering security. 
3.4 Application in Market 
The computer security course itself is a combination of lecture and laboratory exercises developed to build exercises in both  security concepts and particular tools. The benefits of a laboratory component for a computer security course have been noted repeatedly from SIGCSE bulletins (vol nos. 32, 33, 34 and 35). The benefits of this certifications course will include: expertise and competency recognised by the industry, government and academia if adopted by the university, engineering colleges along with benefit to profession, organisational gain and personal gain. In the society where networking is increasing in an exponential phase, the need for security professionals will  rise in abundance. The only trained professionals can suffice the need of the networking solutions. So the proposed 
Market issue s 
Application iss ues 
Course work 
h/w & s/w 
Theo ry to pract ical 
Figure 1. Existing course work 
Market issue s 
Applicat ion issue s 
Course work 
h/w & s/w 
Theory to pract ci al 
Figure 2. Proposed course work 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005,  25(5 & 6) 

========4========

scheme is going to have tremendous potential  in the market of IT. Department of Telecommunication aims to achieve the target  of internet subscribers from current 3-4 million  to around 90-100 million by 2020. Table 3 shows the targets in  years to come.14,15 
This much growth will lead to more and more security problems and need for trained security professionals.  
CONCLUSION 
Having a totally isolated information security laboratory where students are allowed to launch attacks and attempt to defend against them is highly educational and   motivating. Students hardening their machines and network and then seeing them compromised will be better prepared to understand how to prevent similar compromises in the future and in the real life scenario. The laboratory gives exposure to realistic network background traffic, access control lists, firewall rules, network address translation, etc. In a network of the complexity  presented here, system teaches valuable operational issues that theoretical and simpler  laboratory implementations never encounter. This should prepare to make the IT professionals face the challenges in information security. The universities, engineering colleges, and polytechnic colleges should take initiative to start network security courses with more than 80% of the course stress on practical exposure as being suggested in this proposal. The training curriculum for computer security course should include awareness, education, training  and certification. This course can be a part of the other professional degree/diploma course and can be started side by side as vocational training programme.  
Table 3.  Internet and broadband users' targets Year Broadband Penetration ending subscribers target 
2005 3 million 0.3 % 2010 20 million 1.7 % 2020 32-40 million 4-5% 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005, 25(5 & 6) 
REFERENCES 
1. Singh, A. Girdhar. Building and 
implementing a successful information 
security policy. In  Proceedings of 
National Seminar on e-Security at Guru 
Teg Bahadur Khalsa Institute of Engg & 
Technology, Malout, India, 26-27 May 
2004. 
2. Singh, S. & Singla, S. Building a security 
awareness program.  In  Proceedings of 
National Seminar on e-Security at Guru 
Teg Bahadur Khalsa Institute of Engg & 
Technology, Malout, India, 26-27 May   
2004. 
3. Wagner, P.; & Wudi, J. Designing and 
implementing a cyberwar laboratory 
exercise for a computer security course. 
In  Proceedings of 35 th SIGCSE 
Technical Symposium on Computer 
Science Education, Norfolk, Virginia, 
2004, pp. 402-06. 
4. Ragsdale, D.; & Dodge, R. A virtual 
environment in IA education. In 
Proceedings of 2003 IEEE Workshop on 
Information Assurance, United States 
Military Academy, West Point, NY, June 
2003, pp. 17-23.  
5. Hill, J.; Carver, C.; Humphires, J.; & 
Pooch, U. Using an isolated network 
laboratory to teach advanced networks 
and security.  In  Proceedings of 32nd 
SIGCSE Technical Symposium on 
Computer Science Education, Charlotte, 
North Carolina, 2001, pp 35-40. 6. SANS 
www.sans.org  
7. CERT Coordination Centre 
www.cert.org  
8. Insecure.org 
www.insecure.org  
Internet subscribers  target 
6 million 
40 million 
90 million 
Penetration 
0.6% 3.4% 10.0% 
7 

========5========

218-25. 
9. Stephen, N. Network intrusion detection: 
An analyst’s handbook. New Riders, 
1999. 
10. Dieter, G. Computer security. John Wiley 
& Sons, 1999. 
11. Dennis, G. & Hal, C. A firewall 
configuration strategy for the protection 
of computer networked labs in a college 
setting.  Journal of Computing in Small 
Colleges, 2001, 17(1), 181-87. 12. Frank, C. & Wells, G. Laboratory exercise  
for  a computer security course. Journal 
of Computing in Small Colleges, 2002, 17(4), 51-54. 
  Contributors: 
Sh. Ashwani Kush, Department of Computer science,  Kurukshetra University,  Kurukshetra. 
Sh. Sawtantar Singh, Punjabi University, Guru Kashi Campus, Talwandi Sabo,  Bathinda. 
8 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2005,  25(5 & 6) 

========6========

