DESIDOC  Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 26, No. 1, January 2006, pp. 17-26 
© 2005, DESIDOC 
Application of WINISIS/GENISIS Software in 
Newspapers Clippings 
Lavji N. Zala & Niraj R. Patel 
Abstract: 
The paper describes how Knowledge Exchange and Information Centre (KEIC) of Mudra Institute of Communications, Ahmedabad makes the newspapers clippings accessible for its target audiences (users). The bibliographic information (title, author, newspaper’s name, date, product category, brand name, and company name, etc.) as well as full text (down-loading from website of concerned newspaper) of the article is recorded in the newspaper module. The whole procedure is done in WINISIS software and then the data is converted/up-loaded in GENISIS software to make accessible the web-catalogue  of newspaper clippings for its end-users. Over the period of time using CDS/ISIS software (DOS, windows, GENISIS versions) which type problems were faced and resolved, the merits and demerits of every version, etc., have been discussed in this paper. In the age of information technology, the IT professionals  and other organisations are designing effective but very costly software. The small libraries don't have capacity to carry too much financial burden by purchasing these types of software. However they wish to get their libraries automated and make the resources available to their users by applying very cost-effective software. This paper describes how the CDS/ISIS software will become a boon for these types of information providers (libraries/information centres) and information receiver (users/clients). This paper focuses on every stage of evolution of CDS/ISIS and it’s successful implication in KEIC. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Library denotes itself as a well-organised information system, which enables the users to find out the required information in minimum time. The printed reading materials like manuscripts, books, etc., were useful source of information in the past. The users demanded for specific titled books. But with the passage of time the explosion of literature  resulted in users are demanding information exhaustively and pin-pointedly. Information today exists in many forms than just as printed material this led to libraries into digital era.  
Libraries started the use of computers and other technology for housekeeping operations  
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2006, 26(1) 
and information services. Digital libraries break the barriers of physical boundaries and allow to users to access the digital resources across in house or varied domains of the world. Along with journals the newspapers are  playing important role to disseminate latest information in all spheres. 
The Knowledge Exchange and Information  Centre (KEIC) run by Mudra Institute of Communications, Ahmedabad (MICA) has taken initiative to build up a newspaper module for its more than 75,500 (including 21,878 articles with full text) newspapers clippings using WINISIS/GENISIS software to  help its end-users to find out information as per requirement. 
17 

========1========

2. KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE AND 
INFORMATION CENTRE (KEIC) 
MICA is an academic institution that has been set up in 1991 to develop professional communication skills in India. The institute primarily aims at imparting relevant education to young men and women with a view to provide them with the expertise to become effective communications professionals. 
Further, the institute also aims to conduct research in communication as applied to the needs of the communications industry. Through such research, the intent is to create and share new knowledge in this fast growing  and increasingly important field. As part of its agenda, MICA also means to collaborate with other institutions, both Indian and foreign, to jointly work on expansion of the knowledge base in the field of communication and its related areas. To fulfill the goal of MICA and its human capital including students, faculty, research associates, alumni and staff, the KEIC was established in 1994 with the basic objective of harnessing the huge body of information available throughout the world on all aspects of people in their role as consumers and on all forms of communication. 
q Collection Development 
Table 1 shows the number of records of collection of different types of reading materials in databases. 
Table 1. Database of reading materials Sr. No. Name of database 
1. AAA 
2. Book 
3. Case Study 
4. Dissertations and Summer Report 5. Newspaper Clippings 
6. Periodical 
7. Television Commercial 
8. Print Ads 
BI- Bibliographic Information        FT- Full Text 
Number of records 
18 
3. DIGITIZATION OF NEWSPAPER 
CLIPPINGS 
Digitization is a process of converting any item, it being in printed format, manuscript, image, or sound, film and video recording- from one format (print or analogue) into a digital. Basically it involves capturing images of the physical object using various types of scanners and digital cameras- and converting  to digital format that can be stored electronically and accessed via computer. 
4. EVOLUTION OF NEWSPAPER 
CLIPPING PROCESS 
The articles associated with prime subjects of MICA are stored in well organised manner in three stages using WINISIS/GENISIS software. The evolution of digitisation of newspaper database passed through following phases: 
4.1 Phase I (1994-1999) 
KEIC has adopted the automation since its  inception using DOS version of ISIS. Along with many modules, the newspaper module was also created using this software at the beginning. The newspaper module covered following fields or access elements in the field  definition table (FDT) to store bibliographic information of selected news articles from selected major Indian newspapers. The FDT provides information on the contents of the master records in a given database. Each field has its own tag so that software knows only the tag of concern field and shows a 
1478 5121 947 1233 75500 12200 16915 1539 
Mode of database BI 
BI 
BI 
BI(728), FT(505) BI(53622), FT (21878) BI 
Movies 
Images 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2006, 26(1) 

========2========

result of a query accordingly. Tag is a unique number of a field/an access element in a given database. For example tag no. 10 has been allotted for author, tag no. 20 for title, tag no. 30 for newspaper name and so on. q Author(s) 
Name of author who is responsible for the 
express of concept, ideas and writings of 
the article 
q Title 
Title of news article 
q Newspaper’s Name 
Name of the newspaper in which the news  
article is appeared 
q Date 
Date of publication of the newspaper. e.g. 
yyyymmdd (20050605) 
q Edition 
Edition of newspaper e.g. Times of India 
(Ahmedabad, Mumbai), Telegraph 
(Calcutta) 
q Page No. 
This is the page number in MBS (monthly 
brief service) where the news article is 
appeared. 
q Subject 
Subject of news article. e.g. advertising, 
service marketing, branding, etc. q 
Product 
If particular product is discussed in news 
article it’s name is mentioned in this field. 
e.g., soaps, biscuits, apparels, footwears q Company’s Name 
Name of company that may be 
manufacture, consultant, service provider, 
marketer of a product whose name 
appeared in the article. E.g. Hindustan 
liver limited (HL) 
q Keywords 
Important words of news article. e.g. ad 
spend, turn over 
q Agency Name 
Suppose the news article is related to 
advertising campaign, the ad agency’s 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2006, 26(1) 
name is mentioned in this field which is 
taken responsibility to create print ad for 
specific brand. E.g. Mudra advertising 
agency, O & M 
4.1.1 Procedure of Article Selection 
The news articles are selected on the basis of institution’s curriculum and users’ requirements so that the users (students and faculty of the institute) may get information about happenings in the various fields like advertising, marketing, media, branding, management, retailing, business etc. Industry point of view is also considered at the time of selecting articles from concern newspapers. q Cutting/Pasting 
Once article was selected, it was cut and 
pasted on A-4 size paper. 
q Numbering 
All loose pages (A-4 sized papers) 
containing news article were arranged by 
dd/mm/yy. Thus every page went through 
the numbering process. 
q Indexing 
Indexing follows the numbering process. 
Each article  was indexed as per the fields 
(author, title, newspaper name, brand 
name, product category, note, date, 
edition, page number, key words, etc). In 
this stage only bibliographic information 
was entered into the newspaper module. q Photocopying 
After completion of numbering according 
to date the process of photocopying 
begins. 
q Binding 
All these articles were compiled date-wise 
and were bound monthly. This is called the  
monthly briefing service (MBS). This 
process is done every month. 
4.1.2 Procedure of Article Retrieval 
All MBS (printed form) are arranged according to months of appropriate year to make accessible of them to users while searching through newspaper database, the users have to take reference of article like the  date and the page no. and refer to MBS. 
19 

========3========

It means only bibliographic information was accessed through the newspaper database in the first stage. 
q Demerits 
§ Users could get the access of only 
bibliographic information. 
§ Users had to refer the MBS for printed 
articles. 
§ All articles from selected Indian business 
newspapers were complied and prepared 
in the form of MBS. So the procedure of 
cutting, pasting, numbering, indexing (in all  
fields), photocopying, binding and retrieval 
etc., effected to the cost effectiveness 
factor. 
4.2 Phase II (1999-2003) 
In the second phase selected articles went  through the entire process of first stage as mentioned above but one more step was added, which is scanning of the original articles. Scanned articles (JPG format) were linked to a newly created field called ‘image’. By clicking on the link, the scanned page was displayed on the screen. The users could find both options of their choice of getting articles in scanned form and bibliographic form. The scanned articles are also available as print copies. The user could also use ‘expert search' in case of exhaustive search and ‘guided search‘ in case of specific search 
Fig 1. View of bibliographic details 
20 
(e.g. specific brand, product, company, agency,  subject) 
The second stage was a little hope for the user to view the scanned article(s) of his interest. The digitisation process started from this stage. Figure 1 & 2 show bibliographic details and the scanned article.  
q 
Merits 
§ Users could get the access of bibliographic  
information as well as full image of (JPG 
Format) of the concerned article. § It saved the time of information seekers 
from referring to hard copies  for articles. q Demerits 
§ Search was not possible within JPG form § Storage of JPG files needed much storage 
capacity in server. 
4.3 Phase III (2003 onwards) 
The third stage of evolution of digitisation has changed the outlook of services. Another field called full text (the entire text of article except charts, illustration, images, and tables)  has been introduced in the newspaper database. Selected articles have directly been  downloaded from the concerned newspaper’s  website and they have been pasted in the field of ‘full text’. User enables to see the full text of required articles from any computer of MICA premises because the database is 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2006, 26(1) 

========4========

Fig 2. View of scanned article 
placed on intranet. Figure 3 shows the full text  view of article.  
Those articles with images or tables, illustrations, charts (indexer feels these physical components are very important for information seekers) and some of articles are not found on website, they are gone through the process of cutting, pasting, numbering, indexing and binding (which was seen in first stage) in the form of hard copy. 
q Merits 
§ Those articles which were indexed in first 
and second stage of evolution of this 
database can be accessed through each of  
the fields or access elements. 
§ 
Those articles which covered pure text as 
well as some other physical components 
like illustration, tables, charts and images 
(these components are not supported by 
this software), and indexer feels the all 
components are very important for 
end-users to understand a higher level of 
authenticity, the impression of the whole 
page attraction, and covered important 
tabulated data and the pi-chart, these 
articles were indexed as whole (along with 
full text) and complied the printed form of 
the concerned article. So that user can get 
both option of viewing full text as well as 
other physical components e.g., images, 
charts, illustration, table, etc., within the 
article(s) in hard copy. 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2006, 26(1) 
§ 
If users wish to search article with full text, 
the search through 'guided search' 
selecting 'full text' field can be retrieved as 
well search within full text is also possible. § If users wish to search any information in 
whole database that is possible through 
'expert search'. 
q Demerits 
§ 
The WINISIS does not support to physical 
components like images, charts, tables, 
illustration, etc. so these components are 
not covered in 'full text' field. 
§ The JPG files were removed in this stage 
so the users could not see the scanned 
articles (JPG Files). In that case if users 
need to go through the particular article, 
they have to get reference form database 
and has to refer hard copy of clippings.  § The important fields like brand name, 
product category, company name, agency 
name, etc., can not be accessed through 
'guided search' because no one field 
covers any information or data in it. 
However users can search or access the 
information in same article through 'expert 
search'. 
4.4 Phase IV 
n Web Cataloguing/GENISIS 
Since end of 2003, KEIC has been using GENISIS version 3.0.0. Selected fields which 
21 

========5========

Fig 3. View of full text article 
have been used in previous stages of implementation of CDS/ISIS software in newspaper module have been used in newspaper module in GENISIS version. Converting/up-loading of all data is taken place from WINISIS to GENISIS in the newspaper database. In this phase search is possible by all fields like author, title, newspaper’s name, date, subject, product, company name, brand name, keywords, note,  agency name and full text, etc. Figure 4 shows the search database. 
Figure 5 mentions search result which shows that the word ‘advertising’ is appeared in 3707 full text articles in newspaper database.  
q 
Merits 
§ Web query form (with field selection and 
index access) 
§ Display of query results 
§ Display of particular record’s results § Speedily search and accessible anywhere 
because web-based technology used 
§ Searching 'full text' and within 'full text is 
possible 
q Demerits 
§ Search is not possible within PDF files 
22 
§ 
Physical components like images, charts, illustration, tables are not supported within articles 
5. RETRIEVAL INTERFACE IN 
WINISIS/GENISIS 
The important feature of any database in any library is fast and accurate retrieval of information. If the database has not facility to retrieve the data or information of users’ query, it is considered no value of the same database.  
The WINISIS has facility to extract one or more elements from master file record using field select table (FST). Depending on the context in which a FST is being used, these elements may then be used to create inverted  file entries for the record from which they were extracted, for sorting records in the desired sequence before producing a printed report, or to reformat records during an import  or export operation.  
An element can be generally defined as a fragment of a record resulting from particular process. Although in many cases elements will be actual data elements, i.e., a field or subfield, in other cases they may be words, phrases, or any other piece of data which has  a particular meaning to a specific application. 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2006, 26(1) 

========6========

Fig 4. View of newspaper database in Genisis 
Fig 5.  View of search result 
Any field or access element can be made available for retrieval by selecting tag (field identifier) and techniques (indexing technique) option given in the FST. Techniques means how the access elements can be retrieved by accepting code numbers.  
E.g. 0-by line, 1-by subfield of line, 2-by <term>, 3-by term, 4-by word, 5-by (prefix)subf/line, 6-by (prefix)<term>, 7-by (prefix)/term/, 8-by (prefix)word. 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2006, 26(1) 
6. IMPLEMENTATION OF CDS/ISIS 
PACKAGE IN KEIC 
6.1 CDS/ISIS and WINISIS 
In 1985, UNESCO found a solution to the software problem by developing the Computerised Development System/ Integrated Set of Information Systems (CDS/ISIS). Designed for small libraries and corporate libraries, as well as sections of 
23 

========7========

large academic libraries, the CDS/ISIS is non-numerical bibliographic information storage and retrieval software package. Most of the support for and the development of this package was provided by Del Bigio who adapted it from the mainframe version, developed in late 1960s. 
In late 1985, version 1.0 was released. This version took into account the fact that many personal computers (PCs) had no hard disk. The data and programme were put on the same diskette so that they could run on such machines. The main focus of this version was the exchange of bibliographic data while its major shortcoming was that it could contain  only 32000 records.  
While version 2.0 was released in 1987, it was not widely circulated till march 1989. The next public release was version 2.3 which included improvements in the speed of the indexing and in the space used by the indexes. This was achieved in part by setting up two indexes, one for short and one for long  terms. In May 1992, version 3.0 was released.  
The main feature of this version is the support of local area network (LAN). Although  it was possible to run a network by specifying certain parameters of with version of 2.3, there was a danger of file corruption if two users tried to update or make changes on a particular record at the same time. The addition of record locking and database looking feature has resolved this problem. The 3.07 version was released soon after, with some improvements.  
The 1.0 version for Windows was released  in 1998, it is designed to run in Windows environment. 
6.2 GENISIS 
GENISIS is an authoring software (for Win32) for visually producing web forms to query CDS/ISIS databases. There are two versions of the tool: GenisisWeb, for web publishing and GENISISCD for developing CD—ROM interfaces for CDS/ISIS database. GENISIS was originally developed by the former INISCUS Association (France) for UNESCO and it is now available free of 
24 
charge on the UNESCO FTP site. The software is written in Microsoft Visual Basic.  
For more details see: 
http://www.unesco.org/isis/files/winisis/gen 
isis/web/genisisweb.exe 
All the software designed by UNESCO are  very cost effective. MICA, KEIC has used different versions of ISIS software in three phases. 
7. HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE 
REQUIREMENTS 
The minimum and recommended hardware and software requirements for running CDS/ISIS and GENISIS are following: § CPU: 486 processor at 40 MHZ (Pentium 
at 100MHz or Higher recommended) § RAM: 8Mb (16 Mb or more recommended) § Floppy or CD-ROM unit - 1 
§ Hard Disk (with at least 4Mb free) - 1 § 
VGA 640*480 colour screen (super VGA 
800*600 or higher recommended) - 1 § Printer - 1 
§ Scanner - 1 
§ Server (Unix, linux) - 1 
Note: Although CDS/ISIS is a Windows 3.1 based program, it runs under Window95, 98, NT4, 2000 and XP without specific problems. 
8. CONCLUSION 
The theme of the article is low cost digitisation of newspapers clippings and used most of latest version of CDS/ISIS like DOS (ISIS), windows (Winisis) and web (Genisis). Though some drawbacks (not supported to image, table, charts, reading PDF, word file etc.) are found in this software, it is very cost effective. The KEIC has been using different functions of CDS/ISIS like inter-database link,  image link, movie link, web link, full text of article, link of various files like word file, HTML file, PDF file, etc., in different modules and databases. The world is growing fast in all spheres. The library is not remained aloof from the changing environment. The revolution of information technology changed 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2006, 26(1) 

========8========

the scenario of library services. Users can access this database from hostels, computer lab., class rooms, library through MICA Intranet and the faculty can access the same database from off-campus using login and password of their own. 
REFERENCES 
1.  Bux ton,  An  drew  & Hopkinson, Alan. The 
CDS/ISIS for win  dows  hand  book. 
UNESCO/CI, Paris, 2001. 
2. Parekh, Harsha. Digitization: An overview  
of issues. In  CALIBER-2001: Creation 
and Management of Digital resources, 
edited by  M.K.R. Naidu; Ashok 
Jambhekar; S.M. Salgar; & T.S. Kumbar. 
Paper presented at the Eighth National 
Convention for Automation of Libraries in 
Education and Research Institutes, 15-16  
  Contributors: 
3. 
4. 
March 2001, Pune. Information and Library Network Centre, (INFLIBNET), Ahmedabad, 2001. pp. 1-11. 
Talagala, Deepali. Web in  ter face  for CDS/ISIS GENISIS web version 3.0.0 (Man ual).  Sri Lanka Li  brary  As  so ci a tion, Co lombo.  2004. 
Yagnik, Shailesh; Thomas, ABY K; & Patel, Niraj. Digitization of the MICA Library. In CALIBER-2001: Creation and Management of Digital Resources, edited  by  M.K.R. Naidu; Ashok Jambhekar; S.M. Salgar; & T.S. Kumbar. Paper presented at the Eighth National Convention for Automation of Libraries in Education and Research Institutes, 15-16  March 2001, Pune. Information and Library Network Centre, (INFLIBNET), Ahmedabad, 2001. pp. 91-99. 
MsLavji N. Zala, Library Officer, Knowledge Exchange & Information Centre (KEIC), Mudra Institute of Communications, Ahmedabad (MICA), Shela Village, 
Ahmedabad - 380058, Gujarat. 
Sh. Niraj R. Patel, Dy. Librarian, Knowledge Exchange & Information Centre  (KEIC), Mudra Institute of Communications, Ahmedabad (MICA), Shela Village, 
Ahmedabad - 380058, Gujarat.  
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2006, 26(1) 
25 

========9========

