DESIDOC  Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 26, No. 2, March 2006, pp. 19-24 
© 2006, DESIDOC 
E-Learning Emergence 
   Dr Ram Kumar & Ashwani Kush 
Abstract 
The advancement of computers and networking has provided and is providing a new means to support learning in a more personalized, flexible, portable and on demand. In last decade the commercialization has occurred in the field of education, and knowledge–based economy has increased a lot. The innovative and new ways of delivering education have surfaced causing some dramatic changes in learning technology and organisations. E-learning or electronic learning is one such process that is gaining momentum at a very fast pace. In this paper analysis has been done to find the positive and negative impacts of e-learning. The days of the traditional classroom are far from over; e-learning is going to become a powerful supplement to traditional teaching methods, not 
replace it entirely.   
1. INTRODUCTION   
Learning process is said to be performed via two mediums described as 'active' and 'passive'. In active medium student and teacher/author are in direct contact, best example is class room teaching. In passive medium student and teacher/author are not in  direct contact, it is like studying through the books. More emphasis has been given on active learning and from time immemorial it has been considered the best medium of learning. Two important processes involved in  learning process are 'Law of Effect' and 'S-R Theory'. Law  of effect says that if you do something with pleasure, you would like to repeat it and things done forcefully may not be repeated. So learning process should be done by pleasure.  
The S-R theory, called Stimulus-Response  theory, deals with providing the stimulus (hint)  to get the response (result). This technique was initially more used for animals learning but is equally helpful in all learning processes.  There has been tremendous research on new  teaching methods to make learning process easier, more effective and better. One 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2006, 26(2) 
acceptable solution among all theories is the use of  computer. Learning via computers is also termed as CAI and ICAI, where CAI stand for Computer Assisted Instructions and ICAI stands for Intelligent Computer Assisted Instruction. Here computer is used as an aid to help teachers for better presentation of study material and carrying out analysis work of students' performance. 
2. E-LEARNING 
In last decade the commercialization has occurred in the field of education, knowledge–  based economy has increased a lot. The innovative and new ways of delivering education have surfaced causing some dramatic changes in learning technology and organisations. The advancement of computers and networking has provided and is providing new means to support learning in a more personalized, flexible, portable and on  demand. These changes are leading to a new  era of learning called e-learning. 
1 
In e-learning, also called electronic learning, computer acts as a teacher and more or less replaces teacher in a class room  
19 

========1========

scenario. Though the process requires the expertise of many teachers together, but for a  student it is the computer system which acts as a teacher for all purposes.  
More specifically e-learning is supposed to  increase the rate of learning for the student around 20% to 50%. The reason is because the courses are more streamlined and focussed than traditional classroom settings. Online courses allow students to work at their own pace, faster students are not held back and slower students can work along at their own pace. Need of the hour is for the corporations, government organisations and educational institutions to adopt e-learning phenomenon and make strategies to adopt e-learning techniques. The research has shown that new inventions in computer science like multimedia technologies and high  speed internet  have changed the way the knowledge is delivered and e-learning is becoming a real alternative to traditional class  room teaching. It offers students and institutions greater flexibility and access to off-site courses, workshops, research, professors, and speakers. The projector can show a computer slide show simultaneously at different locations. At any time, students can ask questions or engage in discussion, making the classes quite interactive.  Many students don't ask questions or ask for repetition in the class room even when they have some difficulty, in contrast to this in e-learning a student can select a particular portion of lecture to review until it is fully clear. 
The components of e-learning are:   
³ Contents  
Contents describe what is exactly available in terms of course nomenclature. ³ Chapter 
Chapter gives summary of the chapter to be presented with references to previous chapters and chapters ahead. 
³ Virtual  teacher 
Virtual teacher is the study material presentations for specific questions, quotes and answers to FAQs (frequently asked 
20 
questions) just like teacher does in a class room environment.  
³ Multimedia presentation  
Multimedia presentations make the most important ingredient in e-learning; this part actually gives the power of the presentations. It is very important to prepare this portion as the basis of learning depends a lot on multimedia presentations.  
³ Questionnaire  
Questionnaire takes care of exercises. It is  important to check questionnaire for different types of answers like 'Correct but misspelled answers', 'Wrong answers', 'Null entries', 'No replies', 'Delayed responses', 'Unanticipated answers,' etc.  
³ Certification 
Another important feature for learner point of view is the certification with authentic validity. In most of the cases care is taken for credit transfer facility.  
³ Security 
 In modern e-learning a major threat to the  course is security hazards. All care is taken to  keep the material in secured position and also  to take care of student identification and authorization.  
³ Administrative issues 
Administrative Issues takes care of course  information, registration, assistance library resource, etc.  
Methodology, delivery and support on the online courses are provided as: 
q Online course from the parent institution/ 
university  
q Face-to-face support   
q 
q 
q 
Printed study guides and text books  Audio and video aids including CD-ROMS  Video and audio conferencing  
q 
q 
q 
Links to library facilities  
Online tutor support  
Network with a world-wide student body. 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2006, 26(2) 

========2========

2.1 Advantages of E-Learning 
Student living in the suburbs might opt to attend class through a webcam from home rather than commuting for an hour to an institute location. The same option could exist  for somebody with a physical disability. It can also let the universities tap into international experts that might otherwise be inaccessible. Professors could conceivably be shared in an inter-university environment, freeing up knowledge resources, reducing travel time and expense, and even alleviating the need for classroom space. Some major advantages  are:  
(a) Self paced 
(b) Time and location flexible 
(c) Cost effective 
(d) Global teaching phenomenon 
(e) Large knowledge domain to choose (f) Life time learning options 
(g) More streamlined and focussed (h) Diversified field to select from 
(i) Sharing of knowledge is easier  (j) Labour savings: Save in training salaries (k)  Access to large amounts of information 
can be obtained at low incremental cost (l)  Enhance academic productivity (m) Systematic. 
2.2 Disadvantages of E-Learning  (a) Not immediate feedback 
(b) More load for  faculty to prepare 
instructions  
(c) Infrastructure requirements 
(d) More confusion due to lack of direct  
interaction  
(e) Requires more maturity and self 
discipline  
(f) Drop out rates are more; a lonely way to 
        study 
(g) Not all aspects of training can be 
covered using e-learning techniques,  
        e.g. disciplines 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2006, 26(2) 
(h) Lack of social impact of peer group in 
learning and personal development 
3. INDIAN PERSPECTIVE OF 
E-LEARNING 
There are various reasons for the increased growth of e-learning in India. In terms of the overall size of main telephone lines in operation, the country rose from 14th rank in the world in 1995 to 7th in 2004.6,7 Cellular mobile telephone subscribers in India  increased from 77,000  in 1995 to 49 million by December 2004. The survey has predicted  that at least 110 million new mobile phone subscribers will be added in India during the next three years.9  Rural and Urban predicted Teledensity8,9  has been shown in Table 1. It shows exponential growth in use of telephones and this in turn results in more usage of internet, as in India most of the internet access is via telephone lines.  Table 1. Teledensity  
Year Teledensity 
Rural Urban Total 1996 0.3 4 1.3 
2000 Dec  2004 
0.7 1.8 
8.2 19.7 
2.9 8.9 
The broadband policy 2004 sets ambitious  target of three million broadband subscribers by the year 2005. The position of internet, broadband, fixed and mobile telephone services in India is shown in Table 2 at the start of year 2005.9,10 
Table 2. Status of internet, broadband, fixed and mobile telephone services 
No. of fixed telephone lines (per  100 persons) 
No. of mobile phones (per 100 persons) 
No. of internet connections (per 100 persons) 
4.5 
4.5 
0.8 
No. of broadband connections  (per 100 persons) 
0.019 
Department of Telecommunication aims to achieve the target of internet subscribers from  
21 

========3========

current 3-4 million to around 90-100 million by  2020. Table 3 shows the targets in years to come.10,11 
India is a participant in this global process.  There is tremendous appetite to absorb new technology. The middle urbanites and rural class will increase the use of mobile phones, internet and new communication technologies. As the past trend guides, it is expected that  by 2010 India would complete transition into digital switching and transmission, VoIP (voice over internet protocol), broadband and 3G/4G systems. Mobile telecommunications and the internet are going to set the contours of further technological progress over the next five years. The recent convergence of voice and data transmissions, global satellite systems, mobile handsets and calling cards have overcome the technological barriers of distance, topography and remoteness.  
All this study boasts the basic concept of this proposal that the use of e-learning will increase multifold in coming years. More and more educational institutes are switching to online education and distance education via internet.  Some major issues in India are:  (a)  Mindset of people 
(b)  The initial costs are pretty high. This may 
discourage a lot of organisations especially 
today when cash reserves are low (c) Good content, designed with sound 
instructional design, is not easy to come by. 
Early adopters have had bad experiences 
with content 
(d)  To save costs, organisations compromise 
on content (without necessarily realising it). 
Good instructional design requires good 
content providers. One-time costs are 
Table 3. Internet and broadband user’s targets Year  Broadband 
ending  subscribers target 
2005 3 million 0.3 % 2010 20 million 1.7 % 
Penetration 
2020 
32-40 million 
4-5% 
22 
heavy in technology. Then, for each new 
program, there would be content cost. 
However, the delivery costs are negligible. 
It is through academic and government that e-learning in education can reach the masses. In India, there would be a need for vernacular content over a period of time. Rural India could benefit by establishing e-learning centres with content in local languages. The current educational programs  designed for awareness among adults on a variety of social issues can reach every individual for far lesser cost. The students who do not have the access to expertise and good educational program will not have the same benefits that an urban student has access to through e-learning. Our learners will  be able to cross cultural boundaries by collaborating with learners from a variety of cultures. 
 Some of the issues that must be taken into account while preparing course material or starting a new course are:  
q Participating students may be extra 
conscious in e-learning phase 
q Result may vary if it becomes compulsory 
for students to complete the course only via  
e-learning phase 
q 
Quality of course material may also change  
results 
q Teaching method may also bring an impact q Some researchers have suggested that 
mature and motivated students are better 
performers in e-learning, while less 
motivated tend to suffer.3 
Also personality characteristics4  may have an effect on learner. These characteristics were found as stability, openness, conscientiousness, agreeableness and 
Internet Subscribers 
    target 
6 million 
40 million 
Penetration 
0.6% 3.4% 
90 million 
10.0% 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2006, 26(2) 

========4========

extroversion as observed by Mount and Barrick5.  
Effective e-learning goes beyond publishing and distribution to offering online learning activities as integral course components. Developers and instructors familiar with instructional design principles for online learning take advantage of the power of networked computers to engage students by providing them with opportunities to interact with peers, instructors, experts, and rich online resources. Students participate in collaborative learning and knowledge building  and, throughout the learning experience, the instructor and students are supported with pedagogical and technical support. 
4. CONCLUSION 
Today, e-learning is in its early stage and there are many issues still requiring clarification and investigation. It is not the power of e-learning that brought about this achievement, but the methodology employed.  E-learning is a medium, not a methodology. Inspite of all the efforts and electronic gadgets  and gizmos, still e-learning cannot replace class room teaching, though definitely it can improve the learning standards and improvise  standards of context of lectures.  
Not every student can find e-learning suited to his or her style. Also e-learning cannot create actual campus life and environment that students enjoy in the class rooms. E-learning requires more maturity and self discipline which leads to more dropouts than class room teaching. The focus should be on using the appropriate format for the appropriate learning objectives, circumstances, budgets, etc. As an example, if a large company wants to train 1000 sales people who are spread all over India - costs and conditions might lead to a conclusion that  e-learning is more useful.  
E-learning and classroom learning are not mutually exclusive. In many situations classroom learning can be enhanced by adding e-learning as a discussion thread to continue dialogue after the session, or a series of online resources to prepare students  for classroom learning. 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2006, 26(2) 
q 
q 
q 
q 
q 
q 
q 
q 
q 
q 
q 
q 
A few web links offering e-learning are: Phoenix On line, Univ. of Massachusetts Peeas.ecs.uman.edu 
Sun-system in association with ACM, Univ. of Michigan  
dln.engin.umd.umich.edu, 
NIIT Education 
Geteducated.com 
Virtual Technical Univ. 
http://elearning.vtu.ac.in/courses.htm British Council 
http://www.britishcouncil.org/india/india-e ducation-onlinecourses-2 
Global Virtual University 
http://www.carl-abrc.ca/projects/e_learnin g/virtual_university-e.html 
www.gurukulonline.com/press 
www.w3varsity.com 
www.ncst.ernet.in/vidyakash 
www.e-aim.com/multimedia 
www.netvarsity.com 
 www.indiainfoline.com/nevi 
5. REFERENCES   
1. Shea, R.H. E-learning today. U.S. News 
& World Report, October 28, 2002. 2. Hiltz, Turoff M. What makes learning 
networks effective.  Communication ACM ,  
2002, 45 (4), 56-59. 
3. Hiltz, S. The virtual classroom: Learning 
without limits via computer network. 
Albex Publishing, Norwood, NJ, 1998. 4. Eyong, Kim & Marc, Schiederjans. Role 
of personality in web based education 
courses.  Communications ACM,  2004, 
47(3), 95-98.  
5. Mount, M. & Barrick. Five reasons why 
the big five article has been cited. 
Personnel Psychology, 1998, 51(4), 
849-57. 
6.  Annual Report, Government of India, 
Ministry of Communication and IT, 2001. 7. Annual Report, Government of India, 
Ministry of Communication and IT, 2002. 
23 

========5========

8.  Annual Report, Government of India, 
Ministry of Communication and IT, 2003. 9.  Telecom Live, New Delhi, 10-12, 2005. 10. Telecom Live, New Delhi, 1-2, 2005. 
11. Voice and Data, a trade magazine, Cyber  
Media India Ltd., Delhi, 10-12, 2004. 12. Voice and Data, a trade magazine, Cyber  
Media India Ltd., Delhi, 1-2, 2005. 
  Contributors: 
Dr Ram Kumar, Reader, Department of Computer Science and Applications, Kurukshetra University. e-mail: rkc.kuk@gmail.com 
Sh Ashwani Kush,  Lecturer in Computers Science, University College, Kurukshetra University. e-mail: akush20@rediffmail.com 
24 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2006, 26(2) 

========6========

