FOCUS

INFORMATION PROFESSIONAL AND THE NEW TECHNOLOGY
D.S. Bedi*
Defence Scientip I n f o d o n & Documentation Centre
Metcalfe House, Delhi-110 054.
ABSTRACT

High technology is forcing an qprecedented number
of changes on libraries. In the background of the recent
technological developments, highlights the impact of
automation on staff and on the administration of library
operations. Emphasizes that the library administrators
and managers must develop mechanisms for dealing
effectively with the changes caused by the introduction
of new technology in a library. Discusses the guidelines
recommended for introducing staff to the changes
caused by the new technology. Concludes that any
library set-up could benefit from implementing these
guidelines.
INTRODUCTION
Technolegy is exerting an increasing
influence over libraries. Recent advances in
the use of computers and information
technology have accentuated the importance
of technologies to libraries. Since the 1%0s,
libraries have used technology in general,
and computers in particular, to automate a
wide range of administrative, technical and
readers services. The success of any
automation project depends on the manner
in which the staff that will use the system
will respond to its implementation. One
study has estimated that over 85 per cent of
all failures in systems implementation can be
* The views expressed here are those of the author
only and not necessarily of DESIDOC.

attributed to human problems, the most
common among them being effect of the fear
of change.
Change itself is often frightening.Three
common factors can be visualized as the
immediate result of the introduction of new
information technology. First is the speed of
the technology and the volume of its
potential transactions; libraries are now
expected to use various types of technology
to provide information more quickly and in
greater volume than before. Second, the
technologies being introduced are mostly
foreign, which is evident in both the physical
appearance of these new tools and in the
terminology, or jargon, used to explain
them. Finally, the rate of change has been
greatly accelerated with the proliferation of
microcomputers and related technologies.

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY :
CHANGING SCENARIO
Information technology is a generic term
used to denote all activities connected with
computer-based processing, storage and
transfer of information. It involves
computers, electronic media, satellites,
telecommunications and reprography.

Microprocessors
The advent of microprocessors has led to
various trends in information processing : (i)
added specialized functions to the general
purpose computers; (ii) microcomputers,
compatible with large systems in
peiformance;
(iii)
distributed
responsibilities and a network of data sharing
arrangement in a single system; and (iv)
personal computer phenomenon. These
developments are of great importance to
scientific and technical communication.
In-house mini-computers are used for more
sophisticated data and text-processing,
database management, and production of a
variety of publications.

Storage and Memory Technology
Besides the processing aspects of computer,
there has been a considerable improvement
in storage and memory technology. In
addition to floppy disks and microfloppies,
there is now videodisk which can store a large
volume of information. CD-ROM has also
vast storage capacity. An erasable optical
disc named magneto-optic disc can store
6,000 Mbyte of data on a thin film of a
magnetic material.

Communication Technology
The combination of computer and
communication technologies has played an
important role in facilitating information
exchange. From switched network, the
communication technology has moved on to
packet switching, with a computer serving
as a terminal and having access to any of the
computers within the network. A computer

network is indispensable for sharing
enormous information through databases by
a large number of users in diversified
geographical locations. Advances in
communication technology has resulted in
convergence of service modes, permitting
telecommunication to handle speech, data
and visual information in a unified manner.

Reprographic and Micrographic
Technologies
Reprographic
and
micrographic
technologies, a means to provide access to
document resources to users scattered in
various locations, find application as a
communication medium, computer output
medium and storage medium. Computer
microforms systems offer high online storage
capacity.

Automation of Library Operations
Computer and communication technologies
as also reprographic and micrographic
technologies are growing at a fast rate,
bringing in new innovations for the storage,
retrieval and communication of information.
The libraries, as organizations, have been
much quicker to embrace automation. The
major facets of library automation activity
include the application of computers in six
areas of library work : circulation control,
descriptive
cataloguing,
catalogue
maintenance,
reference
services,
acquisitions, and serials control.
Though there is a little doubt that
automation has produced a quantum leap in
staff productivity in libraries, the automation
has been implemented more for economic
reason than for dealing with staff
considerations that are the result of the
changes.

IMPACT OF AUTOMATION ON STAFF &
LIBRARY OPERATIONS
Library automation is not one-time event,
but a continuing process; it is a never ending
process of &actionand reaction within the
library as an organizational unit. The major

components of this continuing cycle of
library operations may be categorized as :
operations and reporting; staffing; planning;
and computing and human factors. The
components do not constitute separate
entities, on the other hand they tend to
merge into one another. That is, the
organizational functions of operations and
reporting affect the staffing functions of the
process; the staffing functions in turn affect
the planning functions, and so on.
Operations and Reporting

One effect of automation on the operations
and reporting structure of libraries is the
blurring of traditional lines of responsibility
and authority. In this regard, a-large number
of recommendations have appeared in the
literature for using automation as a
mechanism to decentralize large central
libraries and for redefining the nature of
organizational structure in libraries.
The reporting function of automated
library systems is usually thought of in terms
of operations management. Most automated
systems in libraries generate a variety of
statistical reports that can be used- in
planning library operations. Management
information system (MIS) aims at putting
resources, such as computers and staff
together to achieve better productivity. The
bright side of MIS is that it affords the
opportunity to better utilize available
resources in a rational way. The dark side is
that it can allow managers to individually
track the' productivity of a given staff
member.

The second component in the qutomation
cycle is the impact of computerization on the
staff of the library. Staffing is the beginning
and the end of all automation projects. The
literature on the subject indicates that
automation can be either a positive or
negative force on employees, depending on
how the automation activity is implemented.

The positive effects of automation on
staff can be characterized as :

* Automation can be designed to reduce
repetitive work like typing and retyping
letters from scratch by using word
prwessing.
* Automation can be used to upgrade the
skilb of the supervisory staff, who can
utilize more time on decision- making,
planning, and supervision of subordinate
staff rather than doing routine jobs.
* Automation increases the chances of
getting variety of outputs from single
input and generate data whenever
required. Thus there is flexibility in
~ r i o u tasks
s
performed.
The negative effects of automation on
staffing can be outlined as :
* The effect of automating library technical
services may 'deskill' many technical
services positions through the use of
computers, e.g., the cataloguers now
spend the majority of their time over
screen modifications on the online
cataloguing systems.
* Automation can eliminate jobs or force
the complete retraining of personnel.
* Automation can reduce the level and the
quality of interpersonal communication.
Planning

Whether automation will have a positive
or negative impact on the staff is largely
determined by how well the system is
planned. However, much of the planning
process in libraries has t~aditionallytaken
place at the middle manager level. Whereas
there has been stronger consensus in the
literature that upper-level administrators or
the para-professional staff have a greater
impact on the success of automation than
middle level managers. The participation of
former is important as they control project
funding and support, whereas the paraprofessional staff does staff interaction with
the system.

Computing and Human Factors

The term 'Ergonomics' describes the study
of any aspect of human-machineinteraction.
The purpose of ergonomic research is to
explore the effect of physiological factors on
staff utilizing computerized systems. As
library staff is increasingly exposed to
automation, physiological considerations
will have a direct effect on staff productivity.
Generally, the emphasis is made on the
purchase of machinery rather than adapting
the machinery to fit the staff and the
operational circumstances, that is, the
machinery and furniture utilized by the staff
should be adjustable to. fit them. Some of
the basic ergonomicconsiderationsinclude :
* The chair should be adjustable in terms
of height, back support, and arm-rests.
* Staff should be protected from recurring
sources of loud noise associated with
automation.
* The table supporting the microcomputer
should be adjustable in terms of height
and should be large enough to hold both
computer and work material.
* Inexpensive glare screens are available
for the video display terminal, which
reduce the eye strain to a considerable
extent.
* The VDT should be placed at a 90 degree
angle to room windows to reduce glare.
The library managers should consider
these points while planning for new
workstations and they should be aware that
ergonomically designed systems allow staff
to be more productive. Experiments have
demonstrated that ergonomic techniques
have helped the staff work longer, faster and
with fewer entry errors.
INTRODUCING LIBRARY STAFF TO
NEW TECHNOLOGY

The technology is there, but without human
support it cannot be utilized efficiently.
While none of the individual changes caused
by introducing a new technology are typically
beyond the capabilities of a library staff, the

enforced inter-relationships between new
technologies can cause an impression of
confusion. This can limit any positive
outcome from the introduction of the new
technology. Library administraters and
managers must develop mechanisms for
dealing effectively with the changes caused
by the introduction of automation or
technology projects within a library. A great
deal of thought and concern has been
expended on finding a practical approach for
implementing change in any library
situation, which becomes clear through any
extensive review of the literature. Some of
the steps recommended for introducing staff
to the changes caused by the new technology
are:
Proper Planning

High technology can be frightening without
proper planning. Planning is the first and the
essential step in any successful project.
Although it may not be necessary to have a
formal planning process, some type of
organized plan must be developed. While
there are many situations when outside
consultancy may be appropriate, it is not
always necessary to hire an outside
consultant to manage the introduction of
high-tech into the library. In most cases, an ,
internally directed planning process may
produce the best results. Regardless the time
required to undertake the planning process,
it is an essential element when introducing
change into an organization.
Staff Participation

Planning guarantees participation and it is
especially important when introducing
high-tech productslmethods that involve
staff with the project. Involvement with the
project can only be established by ensuring
active participation by every concerned
person. Many libraries pay a price for
selecting an automated system without staff
participation. While a unilateral decision by
the management to go with a system without
the participation of staff in the review
process may expedite its installation, it may
not necessarily have the support of the staff.

'

Preparing the Staff
This step includes behind-the-scenes
activities to ensure proper planning and
participation. It is essential that staff be
adequately prepared in advance before the
implementation of new technology. Several
new technologies ranging from microform
readerlprinters
to
new
CD-ROM
workstations, have been implemented in
libraries without proper training. It cannot
be overemphasized that proper use of the
new technologies in libraries and
information services is only possible with
skilled personnel. In most cases, however,
skilled personnel do not exist and must be
trained. Skilled personnel are able not only
to derive appropriate and original solutions
to difficult problems but also to train other
specialists, thus producing a very valuable
multiplier effect.
Providing Opportunities for Practice
One highly recommended suggestion is to
have a 'preview' period for each new
technology, as a way to lessen the pressure
on the staff to perform expertly the first day
a new product is available. The staff will not
only welcome an opportunity to participate
in the process, but they will also appreciate
a
demonstration
that
appropriate
preparations have been made to ensure the
successful use of the equipment.
Patience
Even with good planning, total staff
participation, excellent preparation, and a
scheduled preview period, the one
unalterable law of high technology seems to
be that nothing is ever .accomplished on
schedule. This leads to the most important
recommendation : patience. One frequently
overlooked solution is to simply and publicly
change a previously announced date.
Eventually, the system will become
operational on schedule, since that will be

the latest date one predicted. One solution
recommended to such situations is to build
'holds' into any long-term schedule, i.e., the
final part of the countdown doesn't begin
until certain basic steps are accomplished.
Prudence
It is one thing to initiate a programme; it is
something else to prudently ensure its future
development and growth. This is especially
true gjven the unknown nature of future
technological developments and their costs.
Therefore, it is prudent to consider not only
initial costs, but also on-going expenses and
possible changes in technology. In planning
and preparing for new services, it is essential
to avoid making commitments, either to
staffing levels, certain models or brands, or
specific technologies without looking closely
at the long-term ramifications. This is
especially true of decisions that commit
future expenditure.
Before investing heavily in new
technologies that will require sizeable annual
and on-going costs, a library must consider
the impact of these future expenses on the
overall provision of library services.

CONCLUSION
Changes, often sudden and unanticipated,
will continue to affect library staff. High
technology, as currently exemplified by
microprocessors and CD-ROMs, will
continue to evolve many more such changes.
Library staff will continue to alternatively
embrace and resist these changes. In this
changing scenario, it becomes important for
the library managers to develop mechanisms
for introducing these changes in the most
positive manner possible. The guidelines
discussed above are suggested as first step.
Virtually, any library situation, from
system-wide
automation
to
staff
reorganization in branch libraries, could
benefit from applying these guidelines.

FURTHER READING
1. Lipow, AG. Training for change: staff
development in a new age. Jour Libr
Admin 10(4), 1989; 87-95.
2. Saffady, W. Library automation: an
overview. Libr Trends 37(3), 1989;
269-81.
3. Jones, DE. Library support staff and
technology: perceptions and opinions.
Libr Trends 37(4), 1989; 432-56.
4. Olsgaard, JN. The physiological and
managerial impact of automation on
libraries. Libr Trends 37(4), 1989;
484-94.

5. Byerly, G. Introducing staff to change.
Computers Libr 10(11), 1990; 39-40.
6. Prasher, RG. Information technology
and Indian university libraries. CLZS
Observer 7(1-2), 1990; 5-15.
7. Yves, C. Information technology:
training needs, strategies and objectives
for developing countries. Int Forum
Inform Docum 12(3), 1987; 32-37.
8. Guy, RF. Inhouse training for
information technology. Educ Inform
7(1), 1989; 17-27.

"The true source of right is duty. If we all discharge our duties, rights will not be far
to seek."
-Mahatma Gandhi

"He who is to be a good ruler must have first been ruled, as the saying is."

"Necessity and opportunity may make a coward valiant."
-Thomas Fuller

"He seeks t o produce not smoke from light, but light from smoke."

