MACINTOSH'S SYSTEM 7Q
. -MACS'
SYSTEM SOFTWARE
Desktop Publishing for Information
Services
One of the benefits of Desktop Publishing
(DTP) is that it offers potentially enhanced
presentation of information as a low cost
alternative to traditional typesetting. Given
this opportunity presented by DTP, it could
be utilised by information services for three
reasons, viz., (i) to reduce the production
costs; (ii) to enhance the quality of
publications; and (iii) to make it feasible to
produce quality publications that could not
be afforded by traditional techniques.

What is DTP ?
The mainstream DTP products are ptimafily
page-layout tools, and are basically meant
for page layout, where one prepares text in
a word processor, graphics in a drawing
package, and charts and tables in CAD or
spreadsheet software. The page-layout
software is then used to place the pieces so
they look good on the page, with the layout
software handling the columns, text
wrapping, and typography. The result is a
page that is better-looking than what many
people can do by hand, and one that is
prepared faster and easier than when using
a dedicated typesetter One can make minor
changes directly from the layout software.
Then, there are also document publishing
programs, which encompasses all the tools
that a workgroup might, need to manage a
$ethnical
reasonably
sophisticated
document.

LATEST

Macintosh in the DTP Environment
Apple's Macintosh series of DTP system,
popularly known as 'Mac' series, is the
pioneer in the field of DTP and incorporates
features that have made possible the
production of quality documents an easy and
inexpensive task. Following a trend in the
computing industry, Macintosh system
software kept getting richer in features apd
more complex-the primary goal being that
they should make the page look pretty. T h t
latest in the series of developments is the
release of Macintosh's System 7.0, with
many improved features.

Macintosh's System 7.0-a
step
towards ease of use & functionality
Several new features provided in this yersion
of Macintosh's system software have
contributed to its improved power. Some of
its important new features are:

No FontlDA Mover
This feature has helped the users to just drag
a new font or desk accessory into the Mac's
system folder and immediately begin using it.

Find
The Find command has been greatly
improved, allowing for very specific or
general searches. One can specify whether
the item containddoes not contain, ends
withlstarts with a particular word o r set of

words. One also can search by name, size,
label, comments, etc. The best part of Find,
however, is the fact that it takes the user
directly to any item matching the search
specification.

Interapplication Communication
Interapplication Com~rlunication (IAC)
provides a new set of communication
capabilities that allows for unique
cooperation between applications. The two
main features of IAC are:

Publish & Subscribe: Allows for network
links between documents.

A limes

An Alias can be thought of as a proxy for
any item that is accessible on Macintosh-a
file, server, etc. One of the ways in which
an Alias can be used is to make an Alias of
an application that one uses frequently. The
Alias is inputted into Apple Menu Folder
(within the System folder). Every time one
selects that Alias from the Apple Menu, one
will launch the application without having to
open all the folders to reach it.

File Sharing
File sharing allows on6 t u make folders
available to any user within a network
environment, with or without password
access.

True Type Outline Fonts
TrueType Outjine fonts are sharp, highquality, fast screen display fonts that also
print beautifully. No matter what size,
TrueType fonts quickly calculate and
beautifully scale to the correct size on the
screen and printed page.

Open FileISave File
In previous versions of Macintosh system
software, if one needed to open or save a
document, and it involved a drive other than
active drive, one had to click on the Drive
button to cycle through the available drives.
With System 7.0, the Drive button has been
replaced with a Desktop button that quickly
displays all the available drives for fast
selection.

0

AppleEvents: Allows for even greater
control between programs. It is designed
to let a program control one or moreother
programs in the network.

Other Features
e Views of desktop now can be customized.

Fonts used in windows and for icons are
user-selectable, and the way icons are
positioned on the desktop can be modified
as well. When one views the contents of
a window in a list, the contents also can
be seen simultaneously within each folder
if desired.
The Applications Menu, found at the Far
right of the Menu Bar, allows to move
easily from one open application to
another. The application that is active is
signified in several ways, including the
check mark next to it in the.menu.
A new menu called Label allows any item
on the desktop to be given a specific
label--even a colour.

Upgradation-Need

& Problems

The System 7.0 does not make versions o f
6.0 X' system software obsolete; only those
users who are interested in its new features
need to change. Software compatibility is the
greatest problem and worry. Currently,
some Apple and third-party products are not
compatible with 7.0. One might experience
some minor problems or serious incompatibility issues with specific products. One
should be therefore cautious about
upgrading until evaluating the Macintosh's
set-up with Apple's Compatibility Checker.

System Requirement
System 7.0 requires a minimum of 2 MB of
RAM and a hard drive. If a Macintosh Plus,
Classic, SE, SEl30, Portable, LC, II IIcx,
IIci, or IIfx is available with the minimum
configuration mentioned, one can run
System 7.0. If a Macintosh 128 K, 512 K, or
512 K Enhanced is available, one need to
upgrade to- at least Macintosh Plus
(a Macintosh Plus Logic Board Kit and
Macintosh Disk Drive Kit need to be added).
Although 2 MB of RAM is the minimum
configuration necessary, one can experience

better performance with 4 MB of RAM or
more. This is because System 7.0 will use
most of the 2 MB, leaving very little room
for applica"~lons.

Further Reading
I . Vrantny-Watts, J. An introduction to
Macintosh's system 7.0. Computers in
Libraries, 1991, 11(8), 14-20.
2. Diehl, S. 81 Eglowstein, H. Is the
typesetter obsolete ? Byfe, 1990. 15(10),
152-68.

