FOCUS

COLOUR PRINTING---TODAY AND TOMORROW
DS M i and KR A g g w a l
Defence Scientific Information & Documentation Centre
Metcalfe House, Delhi-110 054.

Abstract
Printing high quality colour at a low cost on plain paper
may seem like a pipe-dream, but it is not. Over the past
several years, a lot of R&D effort has been put in by
various companies into colour printer technologies, and
the next few years will certainly see some of these come
to fruition as products. Colour printing is available now
and will be commonplace tomorrow. The challenges and
problems inherent in colour printing are discussed. The
basic colour printing technologies, viz., dot matrix, ink-jet,
thermal transfer, and laser are elaborated. The advent of
ink-jet and thermal transfer printers are considered as
instrumental in increasing the quality and at the same rate
lowering the cost. The predominance of true colour laser
printers and other technologies, giving photographic
quality printing at desktop, is predicted.

Colour-m Exciting
Printers Technology

Trend

in

Though the conventional laser printers
have changed the quality of documents
office,
the
produced
in
today's
high-resolution black-and-white (B&W)
output of these printers still lacks the critical
dimension that is so highly coveted in
presentation-oriented documents: colour. A
sharp and well-designed B&W laser
print-out quickly pales in comparison to a

similar document in full colour. Colour is
naturally appeahg to the human eye; it is
the most exding trend in printer technology
today.
Colour printers have been available for
a few years, but highquality, highly capable
colour printers are a very recent
phenomenon. Highquality Post!hipt
-compatible colour printers priced as low as
$7000, introduction of Tektronix's Phase I11
printer technology, Hewlett-Packard's 300
dpi ink-jet printer, and a number of other.
developing technologies, have made quality

colour printers practical for many offices.
Although their increased complexity will
keep colour printers from achieving price
parity with their monochrome counterparts,
lower prices will put colour printers on an
increasing number of desktops.
Bringing colour printing to the desktop
is not an easy task. There exist numerous
challenges and problems inherent in colour
printing.

Colonr PrintinMhallenges
Problems

and

The use of colour introduces many
complex issues that do not apply to B&W
printers. In each of a variety of applications,
colour printers must meet different needs.
When used for working copy, the prints must
be easy to interpret, but high image quality
is not critical. In contrast, for presentations
employing transparencies, image quality is a
key requirement. Finally, the use of colour
prints as archival record dictates that the
colours not fade with time.
Many factors influence the suitability of
colour printers for these different
applications. Among the key ones are:
printer cost and speed, the cost of supplies,
flexibility-the range of media that a printer
can accept and whether it can produce
graphiq only or both graphics and text, and
reliability. In addition, user-convenience
features have a significant impact on the
long-term acceptance of a colour output
device. The most important factor however
is the image quality. Today printers are
capable of producing millions of colours on
command, but the problem lies in matching
these colours with what one sees on the
screen or with the output ofmthe printers.

Primary Subtractive Colours
The printing industry uses primary
subtractive colours-CMY (cyan, magenta,
yellow) for colour printing. The subtractive

primaries are created by subtracting a
particular colour from the light reflected off
a white page (i.e., cyan in the. absence of
red, magenta in the absence of green, and
yellow in the absence of blue). The
subtractive primaries combine to form the
other colours in the printer's colour gamut.
For example, a printer can combine the
primary subtractive colours in equal amounts
to generate the primary additive colours
(i.e., magenta plus yellow gives red, yellow
plus cyan forms green, and cyan plus
magenta produces blue). Equal amounts of
the subtractive colours combine to form
black. When combined with other primary
colouis, this forms the CMYK (cyan,
magenta, yellow, black) colour models, the
standard four-colour model in the printing
industry. Thus, under the CMYK colour
model, these printers are capable of
producing only seven colours (cyan,
magenta, yellow, red, green, blue and
black), not counting the paper background
colour.
To create other dot colours, a printer
must be able to mix varying amount of the
primary colours to create each dot, Because
most designs do not allow this, most colour
printers use dithering to generate a wider
spectrum of colours.

Dithering Around
At a distance, the human eye tends to
combine the tiny printed dots in a given area
into a composite image. Dithering takes
advantage of this, and it tricks the eye into
perceiving a single colour from a pattern of
coloyred dots. Conventional B&W laser
printers use dithering to generate
half*tones-images having a grey scale.
Varying the ratio of black dots to the white
paper background results in shades of grey.
The dithering process breaks a printout into
pixels made up of a matrix of dots. At a
distance of a few inches, the eye cannot
distinguish the dots; it merely preceives a
level of grey.

This concept applies to colour printers
as well. A colour pixel consists of an array
of colour dots, ranging from a single dot to
64 (an 8 by 8 matrix) dots. The more dots
there are, the greater the number of colour
combinations that the printer can create.
Because each dot can be any of the" eight
colours (including the white background),
the colour gamut grows rapidly with increase
in the number of dots per pixel. In a simple
2 by 2 -matrix, each primary subtractive
colour can have from 0 to 4 dots turned on,
for a Etal of five-dot combinations. Because
printers can overlay the mat& pattern of
the primary colours on top of one another,
the three primary subtractive colours
combined can produce 125 (5 x 5 x 5) colour
shades. This quickly increases to produce
nearly 375,000 colours for an 8 by 8 dot
matrix.

Colour Matching

I

Controlling the colours produced by
colour printers is a growing concern. For
low-end dot-matrix units, the colours follow
no industry standards, and the printers
stimulate the desired colours as best they
can. Other colour printers attempt to follow
colour standards established in the printing
industry, but they still allow variation in the
output. Because colours vary from monitor
to monitor, it is not easy for a colour printer
to support a wide variety of monitors. Theproblem is compounded by other issues. The
colours on a given monitor can vary
depending on the age of the monitor, the
brightness and contrast settings, and even
the amount of time the monitor has been
used. A number of colour-printer
manufacturers, most notably Tektronix and
HP, put a lot of emphasis on monitortprinter
colour matching. One can specify the type
of monitor one has, and the printer will
adjust all subsequent colour printouts
according to the characteristics of the
selected monitor.

Because colbur printers combine or
dither primary colours (using the CMYK
colour model) to create their colour gamut,
instead of using pure spot colours, printers
use colour simulations*to generate colours
that match international standards. Even
with colour standards in place, one can still
get great variations in the accuracy of colour
printers due to the numerous variables that
remain, including paper colour and quality,
equipment condition, screen-tint values and
angles, , ink quality, ink flow, colour
registration, and the order in which the
printer applies the primary colours to the
page.

Colour Printing Technologies
Before colour computer terminals
became generally available, pen plotters,
which use computer--controlled motors to
direct ink pens across a sheet of paper, were
the primary vehicle for obtaining hard copy
in colour. But with the introduction of
affordable colour terminals, the users
wanted to have colour prints of what they
could display on their screen. Because pen
plotters are slow and because the range of
colours and shades they can generate is so
limited, the printer manufacturers turned to
other printing technologies to satisfy their
needs. Today, there are dot-matrix printers,
electostatic printers, laser printers, ink-jet
printers and thermal transfer printers.

Colour Dot-matrix Printing
In a dot-matrix printer, the print head
typically contains nine or 24 pins that strike
a ribbon to create ink dots on the paper. The
pattern of the dots defines characters or
graphical images. Colour dot matrix printers
work the same way, with the addition of a
multicolour ribbon up or down to select .a
particular coiour.
Unlike other colour printers, colour
dot-matrix printers use four-colour

ribbons, which incorporate red, blue,
yelldu, and black ink. The red, blue, and
yellow colours are primary colours and they
combine to f o m secondary c o b m (e.g .,red
plus blue yielded purple, yellow plus blue
produced green, and red plus yellow resulted
in orange). This is basically the approach
used in w l m r dot-matrix printers, limiting
their colour gamut to a few basic colours.
Colour dot-matrix printers represent
the low end in dolour printers, and they are
often characterized by slow, noisy operation
and often mediocre output quality. Some of
the newer 24-pin models .provide better
output quality than earlier models, but their
resdutionand colour saturation remain poor
in cornparism with those of other
wlour-printer technologies. Still, there are
a lot of colour dot-matrix printers in use
because they are often adequate for
generating economical in-house colour
presentation materials. Some printer
aanufacturers,like Star Micronics, make all
their new printers colour-capable, letting the
user select eitber a Mack ribbon for standard
momcbmme output or a four-colour
ribbon for wlour printing.

ElectrostPtic Printing
The primary advantages of electrostatic
printing over pen plotting are its improved
speed, quiet operation, and suitability for
unattended operation. Electrostatic plotters
operate by passing dielectric paper under a
fixed-page-width electrostatic head that
consists of a line of individual styli. Voltage
is selectively applied to the individual styli,
placing a charge on the dielectric paper and
creating a latest image. Then the paper
passes through a bath of liquid toner, and
the charged areas attract toner particles. This
charging and toning process takes place
several times; the toner bath is different for
each colour. One advantage of electrostatic
plotters is their high resolution output up to

400 dpi. Some plotters also have a
lower-resolution mode for proof-reading.

colour Laser Printing
At the high end of the colour-printing
spectrum is colour lase; printing-* plain
paper tecnnology. The printing process is
conceptually similar to that of a BCW
copier. Exposure to light creates an
attraction on certain areas of photosensitive
surface, which then attracts the toner. When
the toner is transferred to paper and heated,
the image is formed.
With monochrome laser printing, once
the image meets the paper, the job is done;
there is only one image to transfer. With
colour laser printing, however, the process
is more complicated. The printer must lay
down each of the subtractive colours
separately, and it must carefully align them
to create the clean, crisp images that laser
printing is known for.
In this process, a photo-conductor belt
is charged and exposed to the laser. This
electrostatic map of the image passes
beneath each toner module. The toner,
which is a charged powder, is attracted to
some areas and repelled from areas of
opposite charges, creating a powder image.
ln the copier, the original is 'imaged' through
filters that are the complementary colours
of the toners. The data enters the printer as
colour planes, with the conversion to the
subtractive primaries performed elsewhere.
The primary colour images are developed
sequentially on the photo-conductor belt aqd
overlaid on the transfer belt to make one
image. In one step, the assembled image is
\printed directly from the transfer belt to the
paper. After the transfer, the belt engages
a cleaning station to remove residual toner.
The Canon's CLC 500 exists as a colour
copier only. To use it as a printer, one must
add an optimal Intelligent Processing Unit
(IPU) The IPU expands the copier's

memory capacity by 12 MB to 24 MB,,
provides it with more complex image-editing
capabilities, and allows interfacing with
other electronic devices.
The Colorocs CP 4007, on the other
hand, already contains everything required
to interface with the computer. It a h has a
Postscript-compatible colour controller.
The method of laying down colours is
similar between these two p r i n t e d r y
toner forms a latent image to a surface where
the colours are built u p - b u t the means of
putting the image to paper is very different.
In addition, laser printing has come to stand
for print quality, speed and low cost-at least
on a per copy basis. But, the colour laser
printers are big-time expensive, priced at any
way between $30,000 and $65,000.

Ink-Jet Cdour Printing
Dot-matrix and laser printing represent
the two ends of the colour-printing spectrum.
Between them are the ink-jet and
thermal-transfer printing, which represent a
compromise between the inferior output of
dot matrix and the steep price of laser.
Ink-jet technology provides the middle
ground for colour output, with a
low-to-moderate price tag, good colour
rendition, and medium-to-high-resolution
output. Ink-jet printers use the CMYK
(cyan, magenta, yellow, black) or the CMY
colour model to generate their output
colours, with four liquid-ink cartridges to
hold the coloured inks. Units cost from
under $1000 to about $2500.
Most ink-jet printers print at a
resolution of 180 dpi. Conventional ink-jet
printers employ a technique known as
drop-on-demand operation, whereby ink
droplets are propelled from a nozzle when
an electrical signal initiates the action. There
are two different approaches in use for
propelling the ink droplets: thermal and
piezoelectric. Thermal ink-jet printers (or
bubble jets) are the most common of the two
approaches.

In the operation of a thermal ink-jet
printer, a small amount of ink is present in
each nozzle and is in contact with a resistive
heating element near the outlet of the nozzle.
When an electrical signal is applied to the
heating element, a small amount of ink boils
and begins to vapourize, creating an ink
bubble. As the bubble expands; it pushes
ink out of the nozzle and the ink is propelled
onto ,the paper. The resistive heating
element heats up quickly, expelling the ink
droplet within one millisecond. As the ink
droplet exits the nozzle, new ink from the
cartridge replace's it.
Piezoelectric Iok Jet

The operation of the piezoelectric ink
jet is similar to that of the thermal ink-jet.
A small piezoelectric crystal is present in
each nozzle outlei. An electrical signal
applied to the crystal results in a smell
dimensional change that creates a
pump-like action, pushing an ink droplet
out of the nozzle and propelling it towards
the paper. When the electrical signal is
removed and the cryst:~l rclaxes,
replacement ink enters in preparation for the
next print--droplet operaiion.
Coatinuous Ink Jet

Another ink-jet technology is the
continuous ink-jet technology, in which the
printer generates a continuous stream of
each primary colour, producing about one
million microdots per second. Dots that are
not intended for the paper are
electrostatically charged and deflected into
a gutter. The microdots are only about 15
micrometers in diameter, so multiple
microdots are combined to form one dot of
the printer's standard resolution (300.dpi).
As the printer is able to vary the number of
microdots of each primary colour applied to
a dot, it can generate its entire colour gamut
on each dot without dithering. At 300 dpi,

the result is a near-photographic quality
printout.
The Tektronix's new Phaser 111 PXi
printer is a 300 dpi colour printer that
incorporates Postscript level 2 and supports
printouts of up to 11 by 17 inches. It prints
not only on plain paper but on virtually any
medium from thin tissue to heavy cover
stock. Because the ink-jet technology does
not require specially finished or coated
paper, the Phaser I11 can print on various
features of paper as well. It is priced at $9995.

Thermal-Transfer Colour Printing
Thermal-transfer technology-is behind
most high-end colour Postscript printers.
It uses heat to transfer ink from a special ink
sheet directly to a paper or a transparency
film. These special ink sheets come in large
rolls and have multiple-panels one for each
. of the three subtractive primary colours and
sometimes for black-laid out in serial
fashion. One of each of the colours is
required to create a single full-colourimage.
The ink-sheet fits between the thermal
print head and the paper. The thermal print
head typically has 300 heating elemsnts per
inch (depending on the printer's resolution).
As an electric current fires these elements,
they heat the ink sheets and melt the ink
onto the paper. The serial order of the
ink-sheet panel requires the paper to be
passed at least three times beneath the
for each ink
heating element-nce
panel-to create a full-colour image.
The factors that affect the quality of the
colour rendering in this process are: (i) the
alignment of the dot patterns on the paper,
the registration; (ii) control over the heating
elements; (iii) the ordered placement of dots
in a pattern called halftoning; and (iv) the
resolution of the bitmap image that the print
head creates.
Seiko recently introduced the
ColourPrint PSX, a Postscript-compatible

thermal-transfer printer that features a fast
25-MHz 960 processor; up to 34 MB of
RAM-to-buffer input; and seeal, parallel
and AppleTalk ports. The fast processor and
large buffer let the printer download and
store data from the k s t very quickly,
releasing the host for other tasks.

Dye-Diffusion Colour Printing
Unlike the colour-printing technologies
that dither colours on the page to produce
more than seven colours, dye-diffusion
printing lets one print millions of different
colours. The result is a near-photographic
colour quality. A 300-dpi dye-diffusion
thermal-transfer printer gives the same
visual results as the 2500-dpi halftone
printing process used in many glossy
magazines.
In dye-diffusion printing, the dot is
equivalent to a pixel. The printer controller
applies variable voltages to each of the
approximately 300 tiny resistors per inch in
the print head (depending on the resolution
of the printer). Each resistor, in turn,
produces varying amounts of heat.
Dye-diffusion technology uses a type of ink
different from the ink used in thermal
transfer. This ink (or dye) converts directly
from a solid to a gas when heated-dye
sublimation. The various intensities of heat
regulate how much ink turns into gas and is
applied to the paper, varying the density of
the printed dot.
Dye-diffusion printers also use a
specially coated paper that takes an active
part in the printing process. This paper is
much like photographic paper. It is treated
with a base chemical agent that reacts with
the gcidic colourants to ,actually develop the
image, as the colourant diffuses into the
paper. An image created in this way has an
enhanced durability as it physically resides
in the paper, and not on it. The mechanism
and design of a dye-diffusion printer are
similar to those of a thermal-transfer printer.

But the cost of the dye-diffusion printing,
the transfer medium, and the paper are
considerably higher.
A variety of dye-sublimation printers
are now available, including the 300-dpi 4
Cast from Du Pont Imaging Systems, the
UW)-dpi XL 700 from Eastman Kod'ak, the
300-dpi CHC-5445 from Mitsubishi
International, and the 300-dpi CH6104
Professional Color Print from Seiko
Instruments.

Towads Photographic
Printed Output

Quality

Colour printer technology has come a
long way in the past few years, and the
continuing development efforts will ensure
greater progress in the future. Last year, the
big news was the introduction of a number
of sub-$ 10,000 PostScript-compatible
thermal-&der printers. This year has
witnessed 'the introduction of HP's 300-dpi
Deskwriter C Ink-jet Printer and
TekZronixas =pi
plain paper Pkaser I11
PXi Printer. The next two years will see
progress toward near-photographicquality
printed output, as well as continually
decreasing
prices.
Technological
improvements
will
also
bring
high-resolutions, near-photographic-quality
output below ths critical $10,000 price
barrier in the not-too-distant future.
The result of such advantages is that
desktop colour printing is fast becoming a
mainstream technology. The user is the big

winner; he has the access to the power of
colour to enhance his communication, both
on the screen and on paper.

References
1. Watkings, Harry S & Moore, John S. A
survey of colour graphics printing. IEEE
Spectrum, 1984,21(7), 26-37.
2. Parker, Andrew. A colourful revolution
in printing. New Scientist, 1985,
107(1475), 52-55.
3. Luft, Naomi M. Colour printing. Byte,
1987,12(10), 163-75.
4. Guardado,
Julio.
Colour
thermal--transfer printing. Byte, 1987,
12(10), 221-22.
5. Shandle, Jack. Colour printer hits 200
lines in a minute. Electronics, 1987,
6Q(13), 110-11.
6. Bond, John. ~ a & engine
r
prints colour
in one pass. Electronic Design, 1988,
36(17), 38-40.
7. Smith, Ben. Printing with electronics.
Byte, i w i , 16(10), 185-92.
8. Nelson, Michael D. Hot colours. Byte,
1991, l6(10), 177-82.
9. Rogers, AJ.Ink Jet takes off. Byte, 1991,
l q l o ) , 163-68.
10. Alford, Roger C. Colour printing. Byte,
1991, 16(10), 149-58.
11. Thompson, Tom. The Phaser 111 fires
dazzling colours. 1992, Byte, 17(1),
285-86.

