FOCUS

CURRENT COMMUNICATION TECHNQLOGIES-AN OVERVIEW
Ashok Wmar and L Udaya Sankar
Defence Scientlflc Infwmation S Documentcrtfon Centre
M M f e House,Defhi-110 054

~~

Like most of the current
technologies,
advamxsincomputerandcommunbtimareinfluencingmany
&fI"t arecrs such as printing, photography and mass
communication. As a reeult of tlme developments, in future, one
may read newspaper on computer screen using electronic mail,
lace highddhitkm or digM TV, fihnless cameras, and
telecommute to work.

introduction
is a basic human
need. The need to communicate more
quickly and more efflcientiy has become
a central focus in our technological
society. Communication is central to the
human experience. Personal comm-en
is an interchange of idand
inVOgestures, body ]language, and speech patterns. The existence of a n everexpanding information base play a
dramatic role in our need to develop
better communication technologies.

-*,

Technolo@ permits us to extend the
'human potential' to almost unlimited

possibfflties in dealing ath Information
between people and machines. Today,
we have enormous capability for communication because of the advancements in technology. Communication is
the accurate transfer of information
from a sender to a receiver it is a two-way
procea- To achieve good coIllIlluntcaUon with some one else, one must be
Sure that the
trammftted has
beenreceivedandclearl~understoodat
the other end. We live in the information
technology era. As the trend goes, in
future more and more jobs will require
the ability to manipulate and process
information. The economy, industry,
education, and security of the in-

dustrialised nations are going to depend
heavily on the use of latest means of
communication for rapid exchange of
information.

Electronic Bublishing
Electronic publishing does everything
which has traditionally been done in the
image assembly operation up to pasteup stage. It combines typesetting with
the electranic creation and manipulation
of line art and half-tones in one system.
This term in a broader context includes
other communication techniques such
as E-mail, videotext, teletext, electronic
journal, etc. The trend is towards quick
publishing where the document Is
created using computer and disseminated electronically over networks in
the final form. Since the dependence on
paper is still a habit, these have to be
supplemented by hard copy production
using computer printers and conventional printing processes for mass distribution for quite some time.

DTP
The term DTP indicates that entire
publishing is done on one's desk top
which is quite possible a t present. But
generally this is used for the production
of documents at the working place itself,
using c o m p u t e r s a n d publishing
softwares such as Ventura and PageMaker. The author creates the documents
on
computer
using
wordprocessing software, edits and
makes pages, adds graphics, designs
cover and pages, on a single desk and
the document is produced on laser
printer which may then be used a s
camera-ready copy for printing large
number of copies through conventional
means.
Publishers are searching for ways to
produce printed material faster and

more economically, and they are linking
the authors and editors directly to the
phototypesetters. Authors submit their
work oq floppy disks which can be edited
and coded for phototypesetting by the
editor. The editor can telecommunicate
the text via modem to the phototypesetting house. This procedure can reduce
the time for producing galleys from
original manuscript to about one third.
The job can be distributed to different
places and the workers can telecommunicate the text back to the home/office computers by facsimile machines
and satellite. Facsimile machines can
transmit a page of text in five or six
seconds. Thus an entire book can be
transmitted in less than an hour.

Computer Printers
New varieties of printers are constantly being developed for hard copy
output from the computers. One such
latest device is called an ion printer, the
technology of which is similar to that
used by laser printers, but is more
durable and less expensive. The ion
printer is a small flat cartridge, having
three layers. The top two layers are made
of electrical wires at right angles to each
other, forming an electrical grid. The
bottom layer is a metal screen containing
over 2.000 tiny holes, each positioned
under one of the intersections of the wire
grid. When electricity flows through the
wires, it ionises the air around the wires.
The negatively charged ions speed
through the holes in the screen onto a
printing drum. Toner is attracted to the
ions and adheres to the drum and gets
transferred to paper, a s the drum
rotates.
Due to the developments in the DTP
software which can mix text. illustrations and colour images, the demand for
DESIDOC Bulletin, May 1992

high resolution printers is being felt
badly. Already laser printers with resolution upto 1200 dpi &e readily available
in the market. To achieve the quality of
typesetters for printing, imagesetters
which use special photopaper or film for
output, are being developed. These imagestetters give resolution upto 3600 dpi
with colour separatfon for multicolour
printing. The trend is towards integration of high quality colour scanners with
DTP to have complete p r e - p r e s s
capability on desk top.

Electronic Photography
Latest electronic still cameras (ESCs)
are similar to camcorders in their operation. Like camcorders a n d video
cameras, these cameras also use chargecoupled devices (CCDs)as light sensors.
The output of the CCD is stored on a two
square inch size video floppy disk.
These disks spin at a speed of 1800 rpm
and can store between 25 and 50 images.
The disk can either be played back
directly from the camera, or can be inserted in a player. The image can then be
seen on a TV screen, or outputted to a
colour printer to give an instant print.
ESCs will have capabilities beyond those
of ordinary cameras. For example, the
shooting speed can be fast enough (20
images per second) to enable the camera
to be used for time-and-motion studies.
As the photographs will be in digital
form., these can be transmitted over
telephone lines almost instantaneously
to remote locations using ulevices called
'transceivers,' which are similar to computer modems. Another possibility offered by these electronic cameras is the
ability to store an image, alter it, and
print the new version. Since the image
is available in digital bits, the information can be fed to a computer and

DESIDOC Bulletin, May 1992

manipulated. Artists would be able to
easily change the colour, or modify parts
of a photograph. But this new technology
also raises certain ethical implications
which are considered seriously. Because
there are no film records, it would be
easy to manipulate an image and so it
would be difficult to identify the original.
Digital security code technology has
been proposed as a way of providing
'proof of originality' of digital
photographs produced by ESCs.

Camera Developements
Advances in material science and
electronic technology have been influencing camera designs. The new
quartz shutters would use a thin slice of
quartz a s a window in front of the film.
When electricity is applied to the quartz
plate, itwould change from transparent
to opaque. Thus enormously fast shutter
speeds, up to one millionth of a second
could be attained, since there will be no
moving part in these shutters. A follow
focus feature provided by these artificially intelligent cameras would allow the
photographing of a rapidly moving object. The picture will be taken only when
the object is in sharp focus. Optically
pure glass which is produced in zero
gravity of outer space. will be used to
produce lenses of near perfect quality.
Another new feature will be image size
selection where the photographer will
be able to automatically select a fullheight, waist-up, or head-and-shoulders
image.

Film Developments
The new colour films of future will be
marvelous. Colours will be even more
vibrant, and the sharpness of prints and
slides will be fantastic. Companies like
Kodak, Agfa, etc are developing films
with T-Grain' technology. These films

position parttcles of photosensitive
material parallel to the fflm surface. In
this way, light absorption during exposure is mmtmised. An exrzllyr% of this
new film L the Ektar fttm produced by
Kodak. The Ektar film has very low
image gratnness providing excellent
image quality. The film wlll be made up
of nine layers of plastic, five of which will
be image-recording. The new films can
be push-pr-d
to get four-fold increase in the film speed.

Chip

Y

Wafer sads integration, a new chip
technology, hcd& the promise of greatly
increasing chtp capabilities. At present,
many inkgpa&d circuits are made on
thin, semicmductor wafers that are
several inches in diameter. Each integrated ch.cntt b cut out of the wafer,
and mounted in a protective package
that grea* increases the size of the chip
and slows down its operation. In wafer
scale integration, the individual circuits
would be left on the wafer and interconnected. Semral wafers could then be
stacked up before being mounted on a
printed circuitboard. One application of
this technology is to shrfnk billions of
bytes (Gbytes) of computer memory that
currently occupies ten cubic feet into a
few cubic inches of expensive semtconductor material. Interesting things will
happpen in the computer warld as we
move into the decade ahead. Because so
many technological processes involve
computers, a great deal of research is
devoted to improving the& capabMtles.
Both computer hardware and computer
software will become much more powerful. New Wnds of computer programming
will greatly change the computer
capability. Parallel processing allows
computers to work faster on problems
that require the same calculations over
6

and over again. Insbad of perfarming
stxteen, thirty-two, or more calculations
one after the other, parallel processors
perform them at the same time, CfMng
the result in a h c t i o n of the m e . Future computers will be structured with
more parallel parts, &ten comected by
special netwarks. These machines will
use parallel processing hardware and
software.

Artificial Intelligence ,
In addition, artificial intelligence (All
programming ghres computers inference
rules to arrive at conclusions. These conclusions, just as with human intelligence, are not always right, but expert
systems have the ability to learn from
their mistakes, once the mistakes have
been pointed out. Artificial intelligence
systems will become more d e s p r e a d in
some ldnd of occupations. Computers
are now able to reco-e
vocabularies of
several hundred words routfnely. The
IBM Corporation has develaped an experimental voice recognition system that
has a vocabulary of 20,000 words which
is about 38 per cent of the average
berson's spoken vocabulary. Voice
recognition technology wiU change the
way people work and live. Spoken commands will control machines in the factory a n d appliances a t home.
Typewriters and word processors will be
spoken to, rather than keyed. Using
special interfaces, computers will be
able to recogntse human gestures. With
sensors that monitor head position, the
image on a computer screen can be made
to shift as the observer changes the viewing 4 e . NASA has devdoped a new
helmet that astronauts could wear. It
would project a visual picture of a scene
outside t h e spacecraft. A s t h e
astronaut's eyes move, a robotic camera
DESIDOC Bulletin, May 1992

outside the spacecraft moves in the same
direction.
Hand movements can also be interfaced to the computers. Wearing a glove,
made with special tactile-feedback sensors, a user can do a set of mechanical
operattons that can be duplicated by a
robotic device at a remote location.
Fibre-optic cables, carrylng light, run
through the glove. When the fingers
bend, llght escapes from the cables. The
more the fingers move, the more light
escapes. Light sensors detect the
amount of light and thus monitor the
hand position.
For financial transactions or security
applications, sensors which can recognise a person's fingerprints or the pattern of blood vessels in a person's eye
(xetina sc
have been developed.
These are more positive forms of idenMcation than code words or numbers
that can be forgotten or stolen. This field
of computer measurement of personal
characteristics 3 s called 'biometrics*.

Cellular Telephones
Telephones and telephone lines will
play a much more important role in the
future of cmunications. Telephone
lines will be used to support online communication of all types. New telephone
services will be commonplace, as well.
Among these will be an increase in the
use\ of cellular telephone technology.
Cellular telephones are now found mainly in cars. These telephones are really
radio transmitters that broadcast a signal to a receivex in a geographic area
called a 'cell'. The signal, once received.
is connected directly into the telephone
network. Thus, cellular telephones can
be used to communicate wlth any other
telephone in the world.
DESIDOC Bulletin, May 1992

The new trend in cell*
phones is to
use small portable telephones that can
be hand-held. Portable phones give
pawer outputs of about half a watt, compared to mobile phones which produce
about 3 watts of power output. Portable
phones are rather expensive. In
England, a new system Is under development that will be made up of tens of
thousands of small tr-rlreceiver
units located in public -b
and
along 'roadways. These will be used as
base stations for even smaller. lower
power, and less expensive telephones
that will easily flt in pockets or pocketbooks. Because the telephone system
will be used for so many types of communication. the sales of portable
telephones will most likely rise steadily.
With a po-le
computer and a portable
telephone, users will be able to access
online
data bases
from almost
anywhere. It means thatwhenever there
is a need for information, it is mailable
on demand. The new era of telephones
will be able to provide video as well as
audio signals to users. A vldeo camera
built into the telephone will send video
pictures as people talk to each other on
the phone. In future. this two-way
video telephone systemwillbecome common. Some proposed systems transmit
black-and-white slow scan video. This
means that the video camera scans the
person to be televised at a slow rate. A
still picture of the person at the other
end, which takes about five seconds to
create, is displayed. Other systems can
transmit full-motion video.
Telephone companies are experimenting with new technologies that wlll expand services to customers. One service
allows many different callers to talk to
each other on a conference call. This
conference service has been in usage by

business users for some time. Using
these new services, strangers are able to
simply call a local number and join a
telephone conference where the discussions may centre on any topic of interest
to the partlcipants. Another new service
can trace calls made to one's telephone
number. Using a device already available to telephone customers in some
parts of the countries, the number of the
calling party is displayed before one
picks up the telephone, so as to know
who is calling before answering the
phone. This service has raised objections from groups who think that personal privacy may be sacrificed by the
system. Soon, telephones that translate
one's voice into other languages will be
available. The moment one speaks Into
the telephone, a computerized voice synthesizer will digitize the voice, store it,
and be able to translate it into any number of foreign languages on command.

,

Digital recording is going to be the
technology in future. Already digital
audio tape is being introduced for commercial and home applications. It is possible to access compact disk in home
audio and video recorders. These will be
used in personal computers for large
memory. Developments in integrated circuit memory will make it possible to
replace tape and disk for computer applications, audio and video recording
equipment. Small integrated circuit
memory packs may replace tapes and
disks for storing music.

Television Technology
Because of changing technology, the
television industry is undergoing many
changes. In its formative period, it was
dominated by major networks of stations
that carry a relatively small selection of
programs at any one time. The spread of

cable TV systems and satellite broadcasting in the 80s have resulted in a
much wider choice of programs for
viewers. and in some cities, more than
100 channels are available.
Direct broadcast satellite (DBS) systems were introduced with the launching of satellites for this service. A DBS
broadcasts programs directly to home
receivers that are connected to small
satellite antennas mounted on roofs or
chimneys. These special satelllte antennas are now upto less than three feet in
diameter.
In stereo TV transmission, two different audio channels are sent with the
picture. The receiver decodes the two
separate channels and produces the
audio in two speakers. The sound is
more natural than conventional TV wlth
monaural, or single-speaker sound.
High-definition TV (HDTVJ has been
demonstrated by several manufacturers,
and transmission standards are being
developed so that it can be universally
available. As compared to a conventional
TV set which uses 525 scan lines to
produce a picture, HDTV uses 1125
scan h e s , producing a much smoother
and more detailed picture. As the picture
is enlarged to fill a large screen, the
individual lines become visible, giving a
grainy look to the picture. Bigger TV
screen having larger width-to-height
ratio and higher resoluion like a 35 mm
movie enhances the viewer's sense of
reality. These high resolution pictures
carry about %ve times the data than
conventional TV picture. HDTV broadcast is being demonstrated for the
European Community countries for the
Olympics Games of 1992 and its commercial broadcast is planned to begin in
1994.
DESIDOC Bulletin, May 1992

Teiecommunication
The usage of newer technologies in
the telecommunication has reduced the
distances have reduced and mAde the
world smaller. The people in f u k e will
no longer be required to live near their
workplace for easy commutation. They
will be able to live in the place of their
choice and telecommute to work, 1.e..
exchanging information and conducting
b u s i n e s s via computer, modem.
telephone, fax, etc. Thus an author can
still submit his book to the publisher
through telecommunication while living
in a remote place. In Britain, some companies are already e n c o u r e their
workers to telecommute from home.
The developments in flbre-optics and
local area networks (LANs) will g¶verise
to telecommunities. The residents will
have access to complete telecommunlcation capabilities. Such communities
have already come up in USA. Another
plan is for an electronic village, a carefully planned community inside a
beautiful forest, designed for the information age. Each home here will be a
centre of an electronic network. This
network will control appliances, lighting,
electrical and alarm systems. A
household management and communication centre wlll provide for
teleshopping, financial planning, bill
paying and electronic mail. The
electronic network will provide leisure
actMties and entertainment, educational activities and a computer station for
work-related actfvlty.

Data Compression
For the ever growing amount of
graphic and textual data, a new data
compression technique based on fractals holds great promise. It would provide a whole new generation of image
DESIDOC Bulletin, May 1992

compression methods. The fractals are
based on compression algorithms that
describe a pattern. Data compression
us& the reverse of this called fractal
transform which identifies the fractals
that make up an Image, and finding the
fractal formula that can create it. Using
this technique a grey scale image can be
compressed to only 3 KB size; colour
Image to 10 KB and video frame to 800
byte size achieving a compression ratio
of 77:1. Even further compression ratios
can be achieved without loss of quality.
Fractal transform technique can be
combined with the existing data compression techniques.
This technique finds appliction in
fascimile machines, scanners, DTP,
graphics, as well as multimedia appllcations such as games and entertainment
systems. Analysis of seismic data and
satellite imagery. video phones and fast
gaphic modems have lot of scope for this
technique. It is possible to transmit
voice, full motion video and other data
wer the existing telephone lines. Already
the &st 'Floppy Book' on a 3.5 inch
floppy disk with 100 page text with 100
colour illustratio~ls,was published in
September 1991 which can be accessed
on a 286 or better PC with VGA display.
The future is going to be the information age wlth the developments in communicatioq technologies. The
information is going to be recognfsed as
a major resource and the economy of
many nations wlll depend upon the use
of advanced information.
The advantages of these developments have a darker side too, the ability
to control information and telecommunication by a select few and the total
dependence of society on those few has
its own dangers. Let us hope that these

developments will bring the people of
this world &aer and will be used for the
betterment of the society.

Additional Reading

3. Spring, M.B. Electronic printing and

publishing: the document processing
revolution. Marcel Dekker, New
York, 1991.

1. Fractals transform lmage compression. Electronics & Wireless World,
1992, 208-1 1.

4. Barden, R. & Hacker, M. Caarnunfca-

2. Corcoran, Elizabeth. Picture perfect.
Sclentijc American, 1992,286(2),95-

5. Chowdary, T. H. The cellular sizele for
mobile phones. Computers Today,

103.

tion Technology. Dclman Publishers,
Inc., New York, 1990.

8(87),52-58.

Freedom is nothing else but a e

m to be better
-A/MCamus

Fortune gives too much to mny,emugh to nobody
-Martial

When patterns are broken, new worlds can emerge
-Tuli Kupferberg

10

DESIDOC Bulletin, May 1992

