FOCUS

I

DESKTOP PUBLISHING
A Lakshmana Moorthy and Manoj Kumar Pant
Defence ScientifcInformation & Documentation Centre
Metcave House. Delhi-1 1 0 054

Abstract
Information centres (ICs) cater to a multitude of needs of their
users. For quite some time now, ICs are depending heavily on
information technology to serve their clientele better, faster and
in a professional way. Like CD-ROM and video disc technologies,
which are being widely accepted as a part of modem information
centres, desktop publishing (DTP) also entered the scene with a
bang to provide a professional image to the information services.
ICs with their diverse nature of functions can make use of DTP
as a tool to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of document
production in information services. This article briefly overviews
various aspects of DTP to provide the user an idea about what it
is and where the technology can be used.

1. INTRODUCTION
Publishing is the activity that involves
selection, preparation and marketing of
printed matter. This has grown into a
major industry responsible for the dissemination of knowledge. The history of
publishing is closely interconnected with
two aspects, namely innovations and inventions in the technology, and the inherent desire for social change. Three

major inventions (writing. paper and
printing) and one social development
aspect (literacy)are involved in publish-

ingThough book publishing goes back to
3000 BC, when in Egypt papyrus rolls
were used as paper to record knowledge,
it was the invention of printing which
transformed the communication and the
laborlous writing processes (some of the

Milestones in Publishing
: From time immemorial
: 3000 BC in Egyp
: 105 AD in China
: 5th century in China
: Johann Gutenberg ( 1455)
: Henry Mill ( 17 14)
: Aloys Senefelder ( 1796)
: Beginning of 19th century
: CL Scholes, Samuel W,Soule & Carlose Glidden ( 1867)
Offset litho : R Barclay (1875)
Linotype composing : 1885
First generation PTS : After Second Worl&War (late 19309)
Monotype composing : 1887
Computer as a medium for composing : 1955
Computer phototypesetting : 1960 (NLM for Index Medicus)
Word processing : 1964
M~oprocessors/microcomputers : Late 1970s
DTP with laser printers : Early 1980s

Writing, language
Usage of papytus
Paper usage
Wood carving for printing
Printing using metal (movable type)
Typewriter concept
Lithography
Iron press invented
Commercial typewriter

important events in publishing are listed
in Box). Breakthroughs in computer
technology in the second half of the
twentieth century, brought about a new
information revolution. The versatility,
multifunctionality and the low-cost of
computers have penetrated almost all
fields of human knowledge: and publishing is no exception to this phenomenon.
There is no other event or process or
invention that had such an influence on
the publishing industry in recent times.
Introduced in the late 1970s. the
microcomputers became important tools
both as input and phototypesetting (PTS)
devices, and a publication system. Computers shifted the inputting phase of
typesetting from the printer to the
author thereby reducing the costs of
typesetting, the overall time-lagin publication and at the same time increasing
the accuracy of the document. Even dis-

tribution of the final copy can be done by
making use of computers.
Introduction of laser printers with personal computers (PCs) in the 1980s
enabled good quality printed matter at
cheaper rates and in a lesser time. This
allows the production of all types of
documents including figures and
graphs, in whatever format one wants.
All the matter to be printed can be inputted, edited upto the needed level, formatted and printed with in a short time.
And all this can be done from a s i e e
place like one's office room. without
moving from the computer console.

2. DESKTOP PUBLISHING
The word 'desktop publishing (DTP)
was coined by Paul Brainerd, President
of Aldus Corporation, and was introduced on 28 January 1985at the Apple's
Annual Stockholder's Meeting. One of
the most important uses of PCs so far
has been in DTP. Apart from saving
DESIDOC Bull Znf Tech,July 1992

money, this simple and easy process
allows anyone to communicate directly
with others without involving any printer
or publisher In between.

2.1 What is DTB ?
DTP is a process by which a user (or

an author) can produce a full document
or camera-ready originals without the
need for successive intermediary
prepress operations. The main function
of DTP is to produce a document on a
desktop, that is, in a minimum space
environment a s compared to the conventional publishing. The concept of DTP
originated from a convergence of advances in the computer, information and
printing technologies.
A typical DTP system includes a bitmapped lhgh resolution screen and the
WIMP-windows, ikons, mouse and
pull-dowrl or pop-up menus-technique.
The latter is a graphics-based interface
between a user and the operating system
of a computer and is a part of most of the
DTP systems.
Windows are localised sections within
the screen that can be accessed at will
and used independently withfn the main
Image. Ikons are pictograms or symbols
(for example, tool box in PageMaker, and
box file in Ventura) depicted on the
screen indicating possible courses of actlon. An appropriate ikon can be selected
by means of a key, cursor or mouse to
initiate a particular action.

A mouse Is a rolling indicator which
can be moved freely around the desktop
to control the cursor on the screen. This
can be used to select ikons or menus or
to select one of the options offered in the
menu and to perform other tasks
without using a keyboard. Pull-down (or
pop-up) menus are located around the
screen and can be pulled on to the screen

DESIDOC Bull Znj Tech, July 1992

and opened up by the action of
mouse.

the

3COMPONENTS OF A DTP SYSTEM
Any DTP system is a comblnation of
both hardware and software components. The requirement of hardware
and software varies depending upon the
nature of the document to be published.
Factors to be considered while going for
a DTP system include: total volume of
work, page size, typographic style and
quality, graphics (line. halftone.
monochrome, colour, etc), and cost.
The following list includes both essentlal and optional components.
Hardware Components
Personal computer (workstation)
Input devices such a s keyboard.
graphic tablet, light pen,
mouse.
joystick, scanners, and dlgitisers
Output devices such as laser, Ink-jet,
impact
and dot matrix printers.
phototypesetters (PTS)
Storage devices s u c h a s floppy.
winchester and optical discs, magnetic tapes

+
+

+
+

Software Components
Page layout control software such as
PageMaker, Ventura Publisher, etc
Word processing software such as
Wordstar, M S Word, Wordperfect, etc
Graphics processing software such as
MacDraw. GEMdrasw, etc
Image p r o c e s s i n g software to
manipulate scanned images (Windows software available for IBM systems and C-Scan and the like for
Apple Macintosh)
Special purpose software for automatic index generation, text extractlon from databases, etc and project
management software like Mac
project

+
+
+
+
+

5

Features of some of the hardware and
software components a r e briefly
described below:

3.1 The Hardware
Computer Workstation
These are microcomputers which provide capabilities (matching those of the
earlier minicomputers) such a s high
resolution display on VDU, faster
processing, networking and multitasking. Though Apple's Macintosh has been
synonymous with DTP, any personal
computer, PBM PC-ACT or compatible, can
be used a s a workstation.
Graphic Aids
Figures and illustrations are inseparable parts of any document. The
capabilities of the DTP software cah be
enhanced by the use of peripherals like
graphic tablets, light pens, scanners and
digitbers to facilitate incorporation of
graphics.
Graphic tablet is a flat plate with a fine
network of contact points. It is the best
way to produce freehand drawing with a
computer. When connected to the
monitor, the images traced or drawn on
the tablet with the help of a pencil or a
stylus or a puck are projected on the
screen. The projected images can be
manipulated in the same manner a s
other information for integration into the
text.
Lightpens can be used to draw directly
on the screen. As the screen of a computer is vertical, it is very difficult for
freehand drawing.
Scanners u s e two types of technologies, optical (image scanners) and
video (digitisers),for converting an image
into computer -readable form. Both
transform the continuous tones into a
grid of discrete numbers, each representing the shade of gray (gray scale)

measured by the scanner for a particular
picture element (pixel). Scanners differ
in the number of gray levels used to
produce an image-from b levels to as
many as 256. As processing of pictures
takes a lot of memory, scanners have to
be used in conjunction with mass
storage devices.
Image scanners use the optical character recognition technique for transferring the information from a document to
the computer. A beam of light is used to
read the text as well as the illustrations.
A photosensor assigns values on a gray
scale depending on the amount of light
being reflected from t h e scanned
material and reproduces on the screen.
Processing time depends on the quality
of scanners and ranges from as less as
20 seconds to as high as 30 minutes per
page. The costlier the scanner, the lesser
the time it takes for processing an image.
In some cases their price is comparable
to laser printers. The output quality of
the halftone and continuous tone
photographs depends on the resolution
of the laser printer used. Scanners can
also be used to transfer printed text into
the standard ASCII format usable by
word processor for editing. But there are
limitations too. The typefaces recognised
by a scanner are limited and accuracy
varies, calling for a careful checking of
the scanned copy. Corrections scribbled
with pen or pencil result in confusion.
Though expensive, optical (image)
scanners offer easier operation and high
resolution over their video (digitisers)
counterparts but can only record twodimensional images while the latter can
digitise three-dimensional images.
Diglasers a r e u s e d to c a p t u r e
photographs. They use a video camera to
capture images from a TV or video recorder or laser disc player. The captured
DESZDOC Bull Znf Tech, July 1992

figure can be manipulated with text. The
digitisin& time varies with digitiser to
digitiser. The digitised image is stored as
a picture composed of pixels. The resolution of digitised image nearly equals to
that of a photograph, which can be improved but for the prohibitive cost of the
equipment. However, the contrast and
brightness of the digitised image can be
altered as per the requirements.
Printers
Printing technolojp is changing at a
faster pace. Apart from typesetters. we
have laser, dot matrix. ink-jet, daisy
wheel, ion-deposition, CRT, thermalmagnetic-optical (electro-erosion),LCS,
LED, magnetographic, thermal printing
techniques. These were developed at one
time or other in the process of developing
a cheaper printer or as an alternative to
an already existing technique.
A dot matrix printer, usually with 90
dpi, can produce acceptable results and
in the bit-mapped mode takes 5 minutes
or more to print a page. A dot matrix
printer can be used for getting page
proofs, as usage of laser printers for this
purpose is far more expensive. A wide
variety of dot matrix printers, now with
240 dpi also. are available in the market
which c a n h a n d l e both text a n d
graphics. As they are cheaper than other
printers, they are most widely used. They
are versatile in providing different styles
of print-NLQ, condensed, bold, italic.
sans-serif, etc.

Thermal printers contain wires in a
'printer head'. These wires when heated
and pressed on a special ribbon, melt
the ink on the ribbon and leave an impression on the paper. Some thermal
printers heat the ribbon itself. Thermal
colour printers use a four -colour ribbon
and a special paper. There is one DTP
package (Savtek's ETG Integrated Word
DESZDOC Bull Znf Tech, July 1 992
/

Processing a n d Graphics Desktop
Publishing System) for IBM PCs which
allows the use of daisy wheels,but its
speed is very slow. Ink-jet printers work
very quietly and produce same quality as
dot matrix printers. They also facilitate
colour printing (see March 1992 issue for
more details).
Printers based on liquid crystal shutter (LCS), and light emitting diode (LED)
technologies are also available. Though
these have fewer moving parts, a single
failed LCS or LED' causes problems in
printing. In the magnetogrmphfcprinters,
magnetic charge is written on the drum
much the same way as writing heads
write on disc drives. Tlie magneticallycharqed portions pick up the toner and
the image is transferred on to the paper.
Ion-deposition printers bombard the
drum kith c,mrged particles instead of
light. Here, even a steel drum, which Is
more durable than the traditional light
sensitive selenium drum. can be used
but the printer L priced too high. The
qutput quality is lower compared to the
laser printer output.
Laser Printers
Laser printers have revolutionised
the publishing world by providing near
typeset quality of the output. Printing is
the weakest part of the DTP both in
terms of quality and speed of the output.
The quality af output from even the best
laser printer was only 300 dpi and was
not so good as conventional typesetting
where the minimum resolution is 1200
dpi. Now laser printers with resolutions
of 1000-1200 dpi and imagesetters wlth
higher resolutions are available. In the
near future. this may further improve
and the laser printer output quality may
match with that of typesetters.
Laser printers are page printers which
print one page at a time. The advent of

laser printers in 1985 made the DTP
systems a run away success. There are
several brands
and makes. Laser
printers work on the same principle as
Xerox m
~The image
~ is created
. by
a raster image processor (RIP). TMs is
transferred by a laser beam to a
photosensitive drum, which gets
charged wherever the laser beam
touches it. When the charged drum
comes into contact with an electrostatic
toner, the toner particles are adhered to
the charged portions of the drum creating the image. When the paper passes
under the dnun, the image is f i n a l l y
transferred on to the paper which gets
fixed when the paper passes through the
heat roUecs. A laser printer needs about
one Mbyte memory to process an A4 size
page of graphics. An additional 1.5
Mbyte is n&
for the manipulation of
fonts and typefaces. The type size in
many laser printers vary &om 4 points
to 72 points, although a few can print
upto 720 points (10 inches hight).
Over the years, there has been a
tremendous improvement in terms of the
output quality (300-1200 dpi),verstaltty
(from text to a combination of text and
graphics), speed (from a few minutes for
a page to a few pages per minute), and
the most important. (cheaper day by
day). The fastest laser printer can
manage around 15 pages per minute
which may be too slow to publish a long
document. If the pages contain graphics,
the speed comes down further. When
multiple coples of the publication are
needed, one has to link the laser printer
to a xeroxing machine. There is one laser
printer--Canon-which also can be used
as a duplicating machine. Alternately,
the computer can be linked directly to a
PTS machine. Software like PageMaker
and Ventura Publisher can drive typesetting machines like Linotronics 100 or

300 with resolutions of 1270 and 2540
dpi, respectively. AU DTP software compatible with Postscript can be linked to
typesetters. Due to the rapid advances
in the laser printer technology, relinements in resolution, and the falling
prices, it is very unUkely that any other
printer technology would shadow laser
printers.

Page Description Languages
Laser printers and Qpesetters achieve
excellent results when they are driven by
a page description language (PDL), of
which PostSnipt is the best example. A
PDL receives instructions from an application (say, word processing or page
make-up)and generates a stream of bits
that controls the imaging mechanism of
a printer. It is the most critical component of a printing system. PDLs accurately define the arrangement of the
text and other graphic elements on the
final printed page. These translate some
or all of the text and figures including
halftones into a common language for
outputting as a page image. AU the elements are recorded digitally. This information is then used to instruct the
output device which may be a laser
printer or a PTS. As the PDL translated
(Postscript)files are encoded simply as
ASCII character strings, these can be
transmitted over the telephone lines in a
network or through electronic mail.
There is a wide variation in the abilities
of PDLs in handling text, graphics,
halftone images, character sizes. orientation, etc. Many languages are device
independent (for example, Postscript).
They run on a variety of printers of different manufacturers. Due to its licensing to a variety of manufacturers
PostScript, undoubtedly the leading PDL
in the world, allows anyone to combine
DESZDOC Bull Inf Tech, July 1992

and match the best software and
hardware for any type of needs.
Examples of PDLs include Interpress,
DDL, HP Printer Command Language,
Laser Graphics Package, ImPRESS, etc.

3.2 The Software
DTP Software

The software used in DTP should be
flexible, user-friendly and easy to use.
A n ideal DTP software should combine
most of the facilities of a word processor
with those of a good graphics program.
True DTP software includes WYSIWYG
(what you see I s what you get) display,
the ability to mix text with graphics (both
colour, and black and white), and better
control of page layout with-typographical
capabilities. The final layout of the pages
on the screen should resemble the
prlnted page. Many software are not
strictly WYSIWYG because of a number
of windows to be used at a m e . The size
of the screen does not match the standard A4 sheet. This can be overcome by
having a n enlarged view of the text. DTP
packages allow users, destgners and artists a flexibility for layout purposes.
An ideal DTP program should have
compatibility with all dot matrix and
laser printers and also with Postscript
so that it could easily be linked with
typesetters. In addition, like a word
processor, it should also have text editing facility to accommodate last minute
changes; search and replace capability;
cut and paste; delete, copy and automatic page numbering; facilities to create
a u t o m a t i c folios; a n d indexing
capabilities. While formatting text, the
program should allow the text to be
centred and allow margins on four sides,
automatic hyphenation and to run text
around graphics, etc. The program
should also contain decorative features
DESZDOC Bull Znf Tech. July 1992

such as outlines, borders, geometric
shapes, spraying with airbrush, etc
which can be added as and when needed.
Page Layout
The number of photographs, tables,
charts, graphs and their precise position
makes the page layoutlmake-up work
an important aspect in the publication
process. The size of figures, number of
columns, and format, are interdependent. The post-proof-reading processes,
(incorporation of the corrections and
changes) need recomposing and repasteup. In conventional publishing, not only
these steps are inevitable and involve
large time schedules, but also result in
a poor quality camera-ready copy.
Page layout programs of a DTP system
relate to the arrangement of text matter
on a page. Different aspects of page
layout are predefined using a style sheet
which is in-built in the DTP system.
Using the style sheet one can choose the
typeface and size, number of lines and
columns per page, bordering. running
titles. pagination and location of page
numbers, etc. Rules for hyphenation,
justification, margins on four sides, interline spacing and even spelling may be
included in a style sheet. The edited text
from the word processed files is then
imported into thk page layout format.
Using the mouse in conjunction with tool
box or box ffle, the headings and other
decorative features can be marked.
Using the style sheet the text is brought
to the desired format.
PageMaker, Ventura Publisher, Fleet
Street Publisher, Harvard Professional
Publisher, GEM Desktop Publisher, PFS
Click Art, Page Setter, Publisher 1000,
Ready Set Go, Stop Press, Typesetter,
City Desk, Spellbinder Desktop Publisher, Front Page, Just Text, TeX, PageWriter, Fontasy, XPress, etc are only a

few of the DTP software available in the
market. DTP is such a dynamic field that
new packages and systems or new versions of older packages with enhanced
capabilities and features are continuouslyl being developed. The trend is
to develop more user -fkiendly packages
easier to use and provide basic facilities
at a lower cost.
Word Processing
Text is usually prepared using a
standard word processing package. The
word processing software have a lot of
capabilities which can be exploited here.
The keyed in text can be edited, modifled
and then is stored in ordinary text files.
Usually the keyed in text should not
include mark-up or printing effect codes
(such as underscore, bold, etc) as these
become superfluous in DTP.
A few of the avallable packages are:
Byline, Display Write, IBM Writing Assistant, Interleaf TPS, Laser Author, Lotus
Manuscript, Mac Author, Microsoft
Word. MultiMate. Page Perfect, PFS,
Samna, Spellbinder, Total Word.
Volkswriter, Word Perfect, Wordstar, XyWrite, etc. Many of these are regularly
updated and have in-built DTP features.
Graphics Software
The graphics software falls into a
number of categories. These include
structured (geometric) image soflware
based on standardised shapes and patterns which can be initiated by the cursor, plotted figurations or stored
reference diagrams; business graphics
software which are concerned with
graphs, bar and pie charts, line
diagrams, etc; and freehand graphics
software which allow the user to draw
diagrams as per the need by either
drawing (outlining) using a graphic aid
or painting using electronic paint
brushes, ants, stipples or airbrush pat-

terns. Graphics can be generated using
any of the standard drawing packages
and can be imported in the document.
Graphics software include MacDraw,
MacPaint, Core1Draw, Click Effects, Full
Paint, Cricket Draw, GEM Paint, GEM
Draw. GEM Graph, Chart 3.0. DR Draw,
DR Graph, etc. A few of these also have
CAD capabilities.

3.3 Fonts
A font is a matrix from which the

typefaces, a set of characters that share
a common design distinct from other
sets, are generated. Typeface$ are available in different shapes (for example,
regular, light, condensed, expanded,
outline, religious and so on) and sizes.
There are hundreds of fonts and an equal
number of typefaces available in the
publishing industry. But a few typefaces
such as Times. Universe. Helvitica,
Courier, Avant-Garde, Bookman. Century School Book, ITC, etc are more
widely used. A variety of fonts in different
styles and sizes are offered by DTP
software. Styles include bold, italic.
bold-italic, extralarge, shadow. script,
and so on. A library of fonts is designed
to go with a particular DTP system. A few
are compatible to more than one system.

Conventional publishing process involves many steps. Each is a tedious
process in itself. Composing, whether
manual or mechanical, takes a big
chunk of the total time involved. Page
layout and make-up is an other important step which :leed the attention and
interaction of the publisher with the
printer.
For low-volume jobs DTP systems
offer substantial cost advantages. If the
requirement is a few number of copies,
DESZZWC Bull Znf Tech, July 1992

you can run them off directly instead of
printing them.
And for most common applications,
the DTP offers a level of printing quality
that's practically as good as conventional typesetting. Except in cases of artbooks or other specialised high
resolution needs, you'll hardly be able to
tell the difference. The scope of DTP is
quite broad and may range from internal
house memoranda to complete newsletters, journals or books.

+ External

typesetting, layout and
proof-readingare avoided resulting in
materia, manpower, and money
savings

U

0

n
5;

30a1s3a

+
+
+
+

+

+
+
+

+
+

+
+
+

DESIDOC Bull Znf Tech, July 1992

u

DESIDOC

M

4.1 Advantages
DTP offers a number of advantages,
which include
Less time required when compared to
traditional publishing
Projects a more professional imageusually at less cost
Production time can be reduced
Security of printed material (say,
confidential material) can be improved
Publication standards can be maintained using a house style and style
manual which can be stored
Run-around time is almost nfl
On screen editing and alterations are
facilitated
Changes even at the eleventh hour
can be carried without loosing quality
and problems of repaste-up of the
artwork
Visual a d s (overheadtransparencies.
diazo slides) can also be prepared
Considerable number of copies can
be pfinted in a short time (laser
printers can give 8-15 copies per
minute)
Combining text and graphics is easy
FlexlbMty and ease of production
Impro,ved quality and resolution can
be achieved

8

Text rotation using DTP

+ Graphs,
+
+
+

+
+

c h a r t s a n d even
photographs in halftone can be incorporated easily with the help of scanners
Ability to design a format and correct
it if needed at the place of work itself
More economical in the long run
Different font systems and types can
be used as and when desired. which
is very tedious and expensive in conventional system
Spelling checks can be done using
special software such as spellstar,
speller checker, etc
Minimum r e d u n d a n c y c a n be
achleved as up-to-date information
can be maintained.

4.2 Limitations
DTP can be a fast. efficient, flexible
and economical way of small-scale publication, but it has some limitations
which include
The output is not of high quality
Formal training ts required for better
results

+
+

+ High initial oost
+ Should be supported by packages for
+
+
+

word processing. typography, drawings
Not economical for bulk printing
Size is maximum to A4 size (with a few
exceptions where A3 size is possible)
Mathematical equations, complex
tables and too many photographic
images are dlfficult and time cons-=%

5. APPLICATIONS OF DTP
Most common applications of DTP are
production of reports, newsletters,
leaflets. Others such as books, forms,
covers reports, questionnaires also are
designedlprepared using DTP. However,
the technology is cost-effective only
when the number of copies made is
limited (i.e., in-house, restricted use].
However now it is a common practice
that camera-ready copy (final copy aftei
proof-reading) is being made using a
DTP and the copy is used to make negatives and processed for multi-copyprinting. Alternately, c l u b b e d with
photocopyiqg machines (xeroxing)fairly
large number of copies can be made. DTP
applications include
Reports and presentation material
Minutes of meetings, memos
Price lists, datasheets, part lists
I) Newsletters, bulletins, etc
Manuals, user guides*
Journals
Sales aids
Trade catalogues
Books and booklets
Art workllayouts of adver'cisements

+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+

12

$

+ Annual reports
+ In-house publications
+ Forms, pamphlets, handouts
+ Charts, designs, and so on.
In library and information centre environment DTP can be used to generate
in-house publications like @AS.SDI, annual reports, bibliographies, state-ofthe-artltrend reports, forms, guides,
notices, etc and any other hard copy
publication can be brodght out. Cameraready copies of the publication can be
produced using DTP which later can be
duplicated as per the requirement.

6. CONCLUSION
DTP makes available all types of
publishing possibilities to all sorts of
people. It makes possible the existence
of small publishing setup and allows the
originator df the material to communfcate with the readers directly. DTP Is an
excellent medium of publishing with
ease of use; versatility and flexibility for
manipulations; cost, material and
money savings. Anyone can become his
or her own writer cum printer cum publisher. It allows one to be creative. As the
DTP technology is always improving and
the prices of the hardware and software
are going down in the near future instant print shops may install laser
printers in the same way as xeroxing
machines. For those who want to save
time, manhours of typesetting on letter
presses, making galleys, artwork, proofreading, cumbersome paste-up jobs on
page proofs and having them read, and
finally getting a quality publication, the
DTP is the best alternative.

DESIDOC Bull Inf Tech,July 1992

