ON HIS BIRTH CENTENARY

Guru Nanak &v U n i r ~ r s i t y
Amrdtsar-143 005

Brings out a We sketch of Dr Ranganathn as a legend. Gives an
account of the achievements and milestones, he set during his life
span and how' the m e n t status of libraries and the profession
differs from that of his dreams. Highlights the national and
international recognition of his work, and the awards and laurels
conferred to him.

It is a matter of great pride for all
Indians that in library science, India is
considered among the world leaders.
Librarians of the world have expectedly
looked towards I ~ d i afor some conceptual innovations in the area of information organisation and retrieval. Dr
Shiyali Rarnamrita Ranganathan Iyer,
deservedly known a s the Father of the
Indian library movement, rather revived
the proud tradition of ancient India to
attract scholars from abroad to learn
from our savants. Such an inspired
genius was born on 12 August 1892 in
a n Iyer Brahmin family of village Shiyzli
in the then Madras Presidency. Family

was poor b u t cultured a n d deeply
religious. Early death of his father, a
small farmer. made his life strewn with
difficulties. Wading his way through
hardships, he passed MA in Mathematics in 1916 from Madras Christian
College, and became a teacher of mathematics i n Government ColIege of
Madras Presidency. He loved both
mathematics and teaching. Life was
going on, and he was already past thirty
without any inkling of the great task
ahead that the providence had assigned
him.
Suddenly in 1924, he crossed over ro
librarianship which in those days was

DESIDOC Bull Inf Tech, 1215) S e p t e d r 1992, pp.3-6

3

Dr SR Ranganathan Birth Centenary Issue

not a career for active scholars and ambitious persons. After a brief training in
librarianship from the University College, London, he returned home with his
mind swarming with new ideas. After
that, neither h e nor library science
remained the same. Xis new-found
profession provided him intellectual, social and spiritual fulfdment and fame.
The then library science cwricula and
teaching methods did not satisfjr his inquiring mind trained in science and
mathematics. Nevertheless, he was very
much impressed by the variety, extent
and intensity of library services provided
to each British citizen by the Iegislationbased British library network. He set
before himself the twin tasks of providing
wide library facilities at par with the
British services to every Indian on
statutory basis. The second aim was to
make library science true to the name of
science by writing it anew on rigidly
scientific lines. From the very day, he11
occupied himself to work for the goals he
had set before himself. The foremost
indigenous need was to create a social
awakening for the value of libraries. He
availed every opportunity, platform and
available media to convince the statesmen, scholars, bureaucrats and laymen
alike that libraries are depositories of
our culture, and an apparatus of social
memory. Libraries are indispensable to
uplift the nation socially, economically
and educationally. In the beginning, his
was the one man library movement. He
planned and worked tirelessly for a n integrated countrywide system of public
and academic libraries. He was opposed
to desultory establishment of libraries.
For this, he drafted many library plans
and library bills and wrote many books
on the organisation of libraries. His
dream was to provide free book service
to all Indians. Political leadership

respected him, but had no money for his
massive plans. He, a n incorrigible optimist, never gave in despite successive
failures, even personal discomfitures.
At last in 1948, the library legislation
was enacted by the Ulen Madras state.
Now library legislations exist in nine Indian states namely, Tamil Madu, Karn a t a k a , A n d h r a P r a d e s h , Kerala,
Maharashtra, West Bengal, Tripura,
Manipur, and Haryana. But the state of
libraries and their services is far from his
dreams. The All-India Library System
that he wanted to build has not come up.
Libraries here and there are not linked
in any system. The inforination and
book policy has not yet been kalised.
We have a Central National Library, national libraries for different subjects
s u c h as arts, sciences, agriculture,
medicine; there are legal depositories of
books, state and city libraries; but there
is no library struct'ure. There is no
scheme of cooperation: there is unnecessary duplication of our meagre library
resources. UGCs multimillion libraries
and information network (INFLIBm) is
still not past its conceptual stage. The
bibliographical activities of a e nation
are far from adequate. Yet the model he
proposed is still valid; and his dream will
continue to inspire and guide the Indian
library leaders.
Crusader in him never stiffled the
scientist he was. He possessed a radical
mind. His deliberations Qnthe.theory of
library science metamorphosed its very
face. In his first book The Five Laws of
Library Science (1931). now a classic
(reprinted many times), he gave library
science its normative principles. His
laws are a s true a s laws of any social
science. By induction, deduction and
other methods of intellectual elaboration, he carved out a s simple corollaries
of the Laws, the principles and implica!DOCBull InfTech, 12(5)September 1992. pp.3-6

2% SR Raneanathan Bkth Centenam Issue

tions for all branches of library science.
His range was amazingly ecumenical.
He was a prolific a s well a s an innovative
writer with uncanny insights and SFthetic capacity of the mind. The full
volume of his writings measures upto 60
books and 2000 papers. Ws Colon Class@2ation (1933)has been acknowledged
a s a greatest bre
ugh in library
cIassification. Its principles are taught in
all the library schools the world over. His
work has gained so much acceptance
that it forms the very bedrock of new
researches in library science. an'd finds
applications in new fields such a s artificial intelligence and expert systems. He
is to library science that Einstein is to
physics. His work has been considerably
furfhered by some of his BriGsh and
Indian disciples. International Standards Organisation (The Hague) always
sought and valued his advice. His influence in international librarianship
was a11 pervasive. It is believed that
without his advice the UN Library would
have been another U S library.
In 1943, Ranganathan got pre-mature retirement from Madras. In 1945.
he joined the Benaras Hindu University
on the invitation of Dr S Radhakrishnan,
who was its Vice-Chancellor then. In
4947, on the requese of Sir Maurice
Gwyer, the erninenet jurist, Chief Judge
of Federal Courts (now Supreme Court)
and vice-Chancellor of Delhi University,
he joined the University a s Honorary
Professor. At Delhi, he promoted higher
education a n d research in library
science. Delhi University became the
first in entire British Commonwealth, to
institute master and doctoral degrees in
library science. From 1944 to 1953, he
unanimously remained President of the
Indian Library Association. From 1955
to 1957 he lived in Zurich and obtained
a first hand knowledge of t h e use of
DESIJWG Bull Inf Tech. 6 2(5) September 1992, pp

l i b r q services to industry and E
Z
W
units. In 1962, the Government of India
founded for hixn the Docu~llentatianResearch and Raining Centre a t Bangalore
to cc
on his research and to train
librarians in the advanced work of information handling. Bt is now a world
famous ce'ntre. He died on 2'7thSeptember 1972 a t Bangalore after a brief illness.
In his ldfe time he had become a
housChold name, and a legendary figure
in library circles. Library experts in advanced countries were keen to confer
with hfm. IndLations were pouring in
from various countries. Sponsored by
the British Council and the Rockfeller
Foundation in 1948, be visited Europe
and America, and many times thereafter
to participate in international nXetihgs,
conferences, and to deliver lectures or to
advise library organisations. Me
remained always the focus in any gathering he participated. He was a valuable
speaker, and westeners saw in him an
embodiment of eastern wisdom, and addressed him as a g w u His work got so
much acceptance that in 1957 an international conference of classificationists
held a t Dorking, England deliberated
and scrutinised his work. His theory of
classification became the theory of classification in general. He received universal recognition for his work cutting
across political borders and mental
prejudices that discount the intellectual
work e m a n a t i n g from developing
countries. So penetrating was his influence, and personality so peerless that
American librarians addressed him as
Librarian t o t h e World. British
librarians named h i s life time a s
hngmathan Age. He is the architc-t of
the Indian library profession anc! bequeathed us wif3 a rich legacy

Dr SR IRanganathan Birth Centenary Issue

He won laurels and acc
and abroad for his single minded devotion, creativity, and revolutionary work.
Inventory of his awards and honours is
long. Important among them include
Padma Shri in 1957-the first year of
institution of this award; honorary DUtt
from the University of Delhi (1948) and
University of Pittsburgh (1964);National
Research Professorship i n Library
Science (1965); and a two-volume
by an international committee (1962); honarary Vice-Presidentship
of the British Library Association (1957);
and membership of honour of the International Federation for Documentation,
The Hague (1957). Personal tributes
vary from founder of a distinguished
school of thought to bringing cultural
cooperation between the East and the
West; and to enrichment of English language with his new terminology. In 1985,
a successful and widely participated
conference o n Ranganathan's
philosophy and relevance was held
New Delhi. Experts from Asia, Europe,
South Africa and North America endorsed his continued relevance in
present times. It was the first international library conference devoted to the
work of a n individual.
As a man, he was deeply religious,
simple and modest living a spartan life.
In 1957, he donated his savings of one

rupees for the promotion of library
education. Thereafter, he frequently
gave away fiis wealth for the promotion
of l i b r a r y p r o f e s s i o n i n I n d i a .
Temperamentally, he was a mystic and
a philosopher. Most of his writing is
inspired and intuitive. A s a teacher, he
was Socrattce who trained the minds of
hts students in the art of
g. More
than facts and Qures, he taught us
attitude, spirits and the scientific
method. Steeped in Indian philosophy,
he saw the entire universe from flowers
to stars linked in a Great Chafn of
Being. Accordingly, he saw the entire
humanity a s one big family. For him
libraries and free flow of information
were the instruments to promote peace
and enlightenment. The scientist Was a
spiritualist a t heart. His contribution to
information science is enduring; and his
niche is secure amongst the immortals
of the library science world. In the year
of his birth centenary and standing on
the threshold of information society. we
love the man for his dedication and
humility; marvel the thinker for the
profoundity and enigmatic energy of his
mind; remember the statesman for his
vision and crusades; and awfully admire
the librarian for his immense faith in
power of libraries to enrich life in every
human endeavour.

than the body . . . The soul, when activated, knows no exhaustion.
It is ever in ecstasy and it radiates."
-SR Ranganathan in Library Book Selection

DESIDOC Bull InfTecR, 12(5) September 1992.pp.3-6

