RANGANATHAN-APOSTLE

OF LlBRARIANSHIP

Information Consultant. B-3/9A, MIG Ffats
Lawrence Road, & h i - 1 10 038

abstract
Focuses attention on the human aspects of the personality of
Dr SR Ranganathan. Describes his entry into the profession and
the problems he faced. Gives briefly his contributions and
achievements. Traces his leanings towards spiritualism and
mysticism and their influence on his work. Gives instances of his
interest in literature, poetry and music. Comments on his style
in writing and public speaking. Pleads that to pay a befitting
homage to him,more so in his Centenary Year, Ranganathan
should be posth~~~lously
honoured with the highest possible
Republic-Day Award.

1. introduction

Bangalore in December 1968, alongwith
Shri Harjit Singh, then a student of
DRTC and now Adviser in the Ministry
of Environment and Forests. He talked
on current library problems for about
half an hour, almost non-stop. It appeared a s if a Rishi were giving discourse
to his disciples in the Ashram.

Much h a s been said about
faanganathan's achievements and contribu tions to the development of librarianship. However, some aspects of his
personality which had an important bearing on his work, have not been projected
adequately. In this paper, an attempt has
been made to highhght these p ~ f n t s . ~ e
2. Ancient Indian Tradition
author had the opportunity of attending
India has a rich tradition of building
some of his lectures delivered in Belhi and
also of meeting him a t his residence in
up knowledge and disseminating it to the
DESIDOC Bull InfTech 1215)September 1992. pp. 7 -12

7

Dr SR Ranganathan Birth Centmar). Issue

aspirants. It dates back to the Vedic
period when the sages called Rishies i.e.
seers normally associated with spiritual
pursuits, . . .; had sound knowledge of
mundane sciences and arts. Those still
referred to in the present times are Manu
(law). Panini (grammar), Aryabhata
(astronomy and mathematics], Charak
(medicine),S u s h m t a [surgery), Kautilya
Bstatecraft), Bharata (performing arts),
etc. The medium of communicatfon a t
that time was oral; and even a t a later
period, whatever manuscripts appeared
o n bhojpalra palmleaf, parchment,
paper, etc, were very few, which did not
cause any serious problem of their maintenance and use. Probably it was left
centuries later to one of their compatriots, t h e ,modern Rishi, Shiyali
Tiamamrita Ranganathan to formulate
and codify laws on the use of books-to
be precise the library science.

3. Reluctant Entry
Ranganathan came to this profession accidentally and rather reluctantly.
He was serving a s Assistant Professor of
Mathematics in the Presidency College.
Madras in the payscale of E4s 125-5-258
and wanted a much needed opening.
His guide and benefactor Prof EB Ross
and other well-wishers coaxed him to
apply for the newly created post of the
University Librarian, which h e did,
without possessing any prior knowledge
or experience of librarianship. He was
selected even though the Chairman of
the Selection Committee would have a
post-graduate in entomology, a s in his
oplnion. the chief problem in the library
was to save books from insects. For the
first few days of his appointment as
librarian, he could not know the difference between a book and a bound
Journal. Some months later, he was sent
to London where he studied librarian8

ship under WCB Sayers. He sewed a s
the first University Librarian of the
University of Madras from 1924 W1 his
retirement in 1944.

4. Achievements
With his total involvement in work
a n d missionary zeal, Ranganathan
brought librg~ianshipto the level of a
science and evolved "Five Laws of Library
Science' which may be considered his
prime achievement. His other significmt
contributions to the library profession
include Colon Classification, a catalogue
code, drafting of library development
plans and legislation, formulation of
library standards, education and research in library science. etc. He organised libraries of Madras. Benaras
and Delhi Universities. Later he became
Professor of Library Science in Delhi ar.d
Vifiram Universities. He d s o served as
the President of the Indian Library Association for about a decade (19441953).

After a sojourn a t Zurich (1955-57')
he returned to India on the pursuation
of Prof PC Mahalnobis and organised
Documentation Research & Training
Centre (DRTC) a t Bangalore a s i t s
Honorary Director. which h a s now grown
into one of the best institutes of its kind
in the world. He contributed original
ideas and concepts to almost all the
b r a n c h e s of l i b r a r y science. Rang a n a t h a n enriched the professional
literature and to date, be stands a s the
most prolific writer in library science
having to his credit 65 books and some
2000 articles besides numerous reports
and notes.

5. Simple Life Style
Although recipient of a number of
honours and awards from India and
abroad which include Padrna S h r i

DESIl W C Bull 1nf Tech 12(3 September 1992.pp. 7-12

Dr SR Ranganathan Birth Cenlenary Issue

(1957). DLitt from Delhi University
[ 1948) and University of Pittsburgh. USA
( 1964). National Research Professor in
Library Science (1965). he led a very
simple life. Even when his chief disciple
Prof PN Kaula (who is also Editor of the
latest book on Ranganathan 'A Librarian
Looks Back 1992') met him for the first
time, he mistook Ranganathan for his
servant. He worked for more than 12
hours a day and had very h g a l meals
with no tea or coffee. He was free from
any addiction. He put all his earnings to
create Sarada Ranganathan Endowment
(named after his wife) for library development in the country.

6. Visits Abroad
'Ranganathan attracted a large number of admirers and disciples from India
and abroad. He visited a number of
countries on lecture tours, attending or
presiding over professional conferences.
and impressed the audience with his
scholarship, originality of ideas and sincerity of purpose

7. Professional Jea~olrsiesand
Pinpricks
In his early phase of life, he faced
criticism and pinpricks from professional and non-professional colleagues.
In Madras someone ridiculing h i s
achievements remarked that he knew
the so called great developments made
by Ranganathan in library science, he
had simply moved a single dot (decimal)
to make a double dot (colon). When his
book Five Laws of Library Science was
being published by Madras Library Association (MALA) in 1931, he wanted to
dedicate it to his late first wife Srimati
Rukmani. The President of MALA objected to it on the. ground that the book
was a publication of the Association. In
protest. Ranganathan tendered his
DESIDoC Bull Inf Tech, 12(5)September 1992. pp

resignation as Secretary of MALA and
proposed to withdraw the book from the
Association. Finally the matter was
amicably resolved. On the proposal for
publication of Cdon Classz&ation by
MALA. Prof KA Neela Kantha Sastri
reportedly said in the meeting, 'Are we a
publication body to pubIish every book
of the Secretary?' Finally it was suggested that the book being too big,
should be reduced to less than 200
pages.

8. Leanings Towards Spirituality
Ranganathan had a religious bent of
mind a n d was well-versed i n t h e
Ramayana. the Puranas and other scriptures. This had a great impact on his
work in librarianshill. He would, ,often
quote profusely and use similes and
metaphors from the scriptures. Between
1930 and 1937 Ranganathan felt sbme
internal change and developed a feeling
to improve his inner life. He even thought
of taking retirement and settle down in
the Ashram of Ramana Maharshi. I t was
Purohit Swamy, a scholar of Gita who
asked Ranganathan, 'Does the Rishi sell
peace in botff es?' Purohit Swamy diagnosed that whenever the work slackened. Ranganathan's body went wrong.
He admonished Ranganathan that if he
hated intellectual work and ran away
from the work of the library, he would
become a great traitor. Consoling Ranganathan. Purohit Swarny gave some
rose petals sent to him by Ezra Pound,
the great American poet.

9. Influence of Mysticism
Evidence of mysticism in his work
may be found in the assignment of the
triangle symbol to the class on Spiritual
Experience and Mysticism in the Colon
Classification. This symbol has been
borrowed from the Hindu Tantrism.

Dr SR Ranganathan Birth Centenary Issue

Ranganathan was fascinated by the
figure 108 and 1008, which in numerology have the same value I.e. 1+8=9
(zeroes being omitted). The number nine
is very auspicious and signifies ascending wisdom. As a result. his book ClassiJxafion: AuuiarnentGZs and Procedures
and its counterpart in cataloguing is
based on 1008 titles. In his minibook
Elements . . ., the graded examples are
of 108 titles. Significance of this number,
i.e. 108 lies in the fact that the total
number of Upanishadas is 108 although
only about 14 are popular; there are 108
shrines of special sanctity; and 108
heads in the Hindu (~haivitkrosary).
Describing book as immortal soul in
a mortal body, Ranganathan says 'from
the point of view of a service library,
every book is a mortal. Its physical body
will perish by use or by mere efflux of

time and ageing even when locked up
ag&st use. This does not mean that the
work embodied in a book is necessarily
a mortal. The work may be immortal.
Examples are the Vedas. the Talmud, the
Bible, the Koran. the Gita . . and the
seminal books in any subject. Such immortal works get embodied repeatedly in
new editions, translations and versions.
It is called a classic. Each particular
embodiment of a classic is mortal. But
the work contained in it transmigrates
from one body to another. It is like the
immortal soul in a mortal body'.
Reference service, according to Rangmathan forms the penultimate stage in
the library's achievement of its ultimate
end of cultivating the mental resources
of the community. A schematic representation given below. which looks like

..

General Knowledge
Elevated Recreation

Memory

10

I

Specialist Knowledge
Sublimated
Emotion

DESILWC Bull Inf Tech. 12(5)September 1992,pp. 7-12

Dr SR Raneanathan Birth Cenlenarv Issue

a figure from the Hindu pantheon is self
explanatory.

10.lnterest in Fine Arts
Although projected to the world. as a
workaholic, full-time devotee of library
science, Ranganathan did have some
literary and cultural interests. Bernard Palmer, one of his great British admirers, felt
amazed by the breadth of his knowledge
which gave evidence of wide reading at
some time of his life. Ranganaw would
quote from English and American poets to
illustrate points and of course could do the
same from Indian classics. When Palmer
visited Madras he was taken by Ranganathan to Madras Music Emporium
where a 'bay-prodigy flautist' (mostprobably TR Mahalingam) was giving perforxnance. Ranganathan also had the heart of
a poet and could composeverses of quality.
Here is an extract &om his short poem on
the virtues of the Five Laws:

There is momfor all 4
Let not the mean
Or Learned dean
Restrict the books
r afavoured few
We 've books for all

11.His style
Ranganathan had a distinctive style
in writing and public speaking. He used
simple language but fortified it with his
own developed terminoloa. Sometimes
he used the dialogue form interspersed
with anecdotes. similes, metaphors from
daily life as well as from the ancient
s c r i p t u r e s . A scholarly s t u d y o n
Ranganathan's method and style carried
out by Dr MP Satija (see reference 5)
provides an interesting reading.

12.New Terminology
Ranganathan coined a number of
new words on various analogies. The

word 'librametry' was coined in the
course of a talk in ASLIB Conference
1948 on the analogy of biometry and
psychometry. The acronym PMEST
which is gaining currency, is on the andogy of VIBGYOR (seven colours of sunlight). A travelling library was called
'librachine' (a portmanteau word of
'library' and 'machine').

13.A Bullock Cart Mobile Library
This brings us to Ranganathan's bold
and novel experiment in mobile library
service. Inspired by his ideas, a Sub
Engineer named Kankasabai Pillai
designed a bullock cart for use as travelling library. It had books, maps, chafts,
and a gramophone with records. This
was inaugurated in Mannargudi Conference held on 18 October 1931. With a
stock of 4000 books, it served villages
within a radius of ten miles and was in
operation for nine years.

14.His Disciples
Some critics aver that Rangmathan
in the true gum-s hishya (teacher -disciple) tradition, which he was so fond of,
did not produce a disciple who could
excel him. It is well-known that Ranganathan had a galaxy of disciples like
Prof PN Kaula, Prof MA Gopinath, Prof A
Neelarneghan. Prof G Bhattachaqya,
who have an honoured place in the
profession. But who could excel a colossus that is born only in centuries!

1S.How Should We Honour Him?
Ranganathan lived for 80 years (12
August 1892-27 September 1972). In
view of his extraordinary achievements
and rich contributions with a whiff of
Indianness, he can rightly occupy the
ranks of the great Indians like Gurudev
Rabindranath Tagore (literature), Sir CV
Raman (science). Dr S Radhakrishnan
(philosophy), SJxi Nand LaI Bose (art),

DESIDOC Bull Inf Tech 12(51 September 1992. pp. 7-12

11

Dr SR Ranganathan Birth Centenary Issue

Pt V i s h n u D i g a m b a r P a l u s k a r
(music). In t h e Ranganathan's Centenary Year (19 9 2 ) , t h e nation should
honour him posthumously by the
highest possible Republic-Day
Award. This will be a befitting tribute
to him.

Bibliography
1. Kaula, P.N.(Ed). A librarian looks

back: an autobiography of Dr SR
R a n g a n a t h a n . ABC P u b l i s h i n g
House. Delhi. 1992.
2. Rangra. V.K. Colossus of Indian
librarianship. Patriot, 16 Feb 1992.

12

3. Memorabilia Ranganathan (Second
Fascicule). Mysore Library
Association, Bangalore, 1972.
4.

Palmer, Bernard I. Encounter with
Ranganathan (2). Herald oJ Library
Science, 1977, 16(2-3). 215-19.

5. Satija, M.P. Ranganathan: method
a n d sty&. Kalyani Publishers, New
Delhi, 1978.

6. R a n g a n a t h a n ,
S R . Colon
C l a s s i f i c a t i o n , E d 6. S a r a d a
~an'ganathan
Endowment,
Bangalore, 1990.

7. Ranganathan, S.R. Five Laws of
Library Science, Ed 2. Blunt S ~ n s ,
London, 1957.

DESIDOC Bull Inf Tech, 12151 September 1992. pp. 7-12

