SR RANGANATHAN-AN

EXEMPLARY TEACHER AND A GUIDE
Harjit Singh

Adviset; Ministry of Environment and Forests
New Delhi- 1 10 003
This year, we are celebrating Dr SR
Ranganathan's Birth centenary: I am
taking this opportunity to recollect
some of my thoughts on my acquaintance with Dr Ranganathan while I was
a student of Associateship in Documentation Course a t the Documentation Research and Training Centre (DRTC),
Bangalore during the year 1968-69, on
deputation from the Defence Research
and Development Organisation (DRDO).
Dr Ranganathan had moved over to
Bangalore in 1957. He was responsible
for the establishment of DRTC a t Bangalore in 1962 under the Indian Statistical Institute (ISI). Calcutta. The main
objective of the Centre was to conduct
research and teaching in library sciences. Dr Ranganathan served as a n
honorary professor of DRTC during
1962-72. Although I had heard earlier
about this famous librarian, I got the
first opportunity to come in contact with
him when I joined DRTC.
I admit that before joining this
course, I had very little idea about

various aspects of library science and
documentation. My first month of the
DRTC was rather a big struggle. It meant
a total change in the type of education
and the type of work I had experienced
earlier. I had a Masters' Degree in Mathematics with specialisation in Statistics
and Astronomy. I had started my service
career in the DRDO and most of my work
related to collection and analysis of
statistics on various R&D aspects. When
I was introduced to the subjects of
cataloguing and classification in the first
few weeks of my training in documentation, I thought it to be too simple and
ordinary for a post-graduate student of
mathematics. Little did, I realise their
importance a t that moment. Even on a
few occasions, 1 used to make a mockery
of these new subjects before the fellow
s t u d e n t s . My first encounter with
Dr Ranganathan was immediately after
first three weeks of my training. While
asking about my educational qualifications, experience etc, he asked how I felt
about the course. Before a dynamic per-

DESIDoC Bull Inj Tech. 12(5) September 1992.pp. 13-15

13

Dr SR Ranganathan Birth Centenary Issue

sonality like that of Dr Ranganathan. I
remained silent. But he could immediately sense my inner feelings by looking
a t my face. Then came one full h c u ' s
lecture/sermons from him with regard
to organising one's work in the office in
a n efficient manner. This lecture contained several anecdotes as to how he
had made senior officials of Government
of India realise the importance of organising information and even using the
methods of indexing and classfieation in
their office files. While listening to him,
I kept on nodding my head a s a faithful
student without realising the importance of his sermons a t that time. My
views about the course were also shared
by one of the fellow students who was by
profession a n engineer. Both of u s quite
often discussed confidentially about how
bad we felt about the course in the beginning. After some time my colleague left
the course and joined as a lecturer in
Dharwar in Karnataka. But I could not
act in the similar fashion a s I was officially deputed for this course and was
considered to be on official duty. Now I
really consider myself very fortunate in
having successfully completed t h e
course since after having undergone this
course, I learnt how to effectively organise information for accurate search
of knowledge and study. In fact, my entire way of functioning ip private and
public changed after gaining knowledge
a t DRTC. I could search for information
very effectively, write survey/technical
reports and give comments on various
aspects of R&D which began receiving
appreciation from my seniors. Eventually all these helped me in achieving a
dramatic rise in my career, for which the
entire credit goes to Dr Ranganathan
and the highly intellectual professors
and teachers of DRTC.

The DRTC under Dr Ranganathan
was like a Gurukul. On many occasions
Dr Ranganathan called students at his
house for discussjDns. hhny a time, he
himself used to come to DRTC although
with great. difficulty because of his
deteriorating health. Occasionally he
used to sit and attend the regular colloquiums where students of the course
were divided into two groups for discussing and debating several aspects of
library science. He used to watch keenly
everyone of u s and appreciate the ideas
given and also apprise u s of the facts and
knowledge in a very simple way. He
would involve all of us in the 'questionanswer*method of teaching in order to
prepare o u r minds to receive new
knowledge after scaling the caIibre and
existing knowledge contents sf each of
u s individually. He was all through plyful and lead the students to arrive a t
correct decisions. If a solution was given,
he would pose a problem to a student
and watch the psychological struggle
and attitude of other students towards
the same.
Dr Ranganathan, was a very interesting speaker with his bag full of anecdotes
like stories narrated in the Puranas,
could talk endlessly for hours together.
He had strong will power; but certainly;
could not sustain it all the time because
of his deteriorating health. When we
visited his house on a few occasions. we
could find Mrs Ranganathan's sincere
love and selfless devotion for her husband. Inspite of his ill health, he was
always anxious to translate the new
ideas instantaneously. He felt it necessary to communicate with others for this
purpose and did not have much discipline while talking to others and those
whom he allowed to visit him only for a
few minutes initially. continued to discuss with them for more than two hours.

SIDOC Bull InfTech I2(5j September 1992, pp. 13-15

Dr SR Ranganathan B k h Centenary Issue

This showed his enthusiasm to prove his
point and that the new idea which came
to him was fool-proof. Not only Dr Ranganathan was a veteran speaker b u t
also a prolific writer. While he started his
career a s a teacher in mathematics, it
was not widely known that he had also
first class degree in English literature.
The Five haws of Library Science happened to be one of his earliest works in
simple language and extremely precise
for expressing to the librarians as well as
to the non-librarians. This work could be
said to be the best testament of the
library profession. He used to write at
great length. One could see him writing
endlessly sitting on his hard bed at his
residerlce. Anyone could also see the
simple life he used to live. The house of
this giant professor was simple with no
luxuries around.
The work and nothing but work' was
his motto. This implied a total surrender
on the part of those who wokked with
him. He sought to build u p t h e atmosphere of an Ashram around DRTC. We
were required to reside on the campus
and one of u s who was local and married
was not allowed to visit his family even
on week days. We were required to complete so many assignments that we had
hardly any time left to go out for a walk
or to cinema even on Sundays. Although, in the beginning this kind of
hard work was difficult but slowly and
gradually we all started enjoying since
the course was made in the real professional style and conducted in a much
thoughtful and interesting manner.

While we were nearing the completion of the course, we had DRTC Annual
Seminar in December 1968, where I had
prepared hard for presenting a paper. I
went through many of the papers to be
presented in the Seminar and noted
down ideas and questions. I was hoping
that Dr Ranganathan would be there to
see how a new entrant to the library
profession interacted with professionals
in the field. But alas! my enthusiasm was
short lixed when I heard that Dr Ranganathan was not well and he would not
be in a position to attend the seminar. A
taped version of his speech was played
before the participants. I was rather disappointed for his absence.
Dr Ranganathan could be seen a s an
optimist who had great hopes for the
country's future a s well a s the library
profession in India. He is truely called
the 'Father of Library Science in India'.
His Colon Classification and Classified
Catalogue code received much attention
not only in India but all over the world.
Only a few Indians can claim to have
received s u c h a n honour. Dr Ranganathan has left several admirers all
over India and abroad. The news of his
death on 27 September 1972 sent waves
of shock among his admirers. I was
much grieved at the sad demise of this
exemplary teacher and guide. Nevertheless, it gives me immense pleasure to
notice that DRTC continues to follow
his principles and bring out every year a
select band of trainees full of intellect
and knowledge.

