Dr SR Ranganathan Birth Centenary Issue

THE INCREASING RELEVANCE OF THE FIVE LAWS OF
RANGANATHAN

Regional Libfarfan, Briflsh Council Muision, British High Commission
New Delhi-110 001

-

1. The Five Laws of Rannanathan
The most seminal contribution of
Dr SR Ranganathan to Iibrarian'ship has
been the Five Laws. Profound messages
are hidden in these laws and it is likely
that this profoundness will continue to
increase a s librarianship advances further. The Laws are more relevant today
than
were 60 y e a r s ago when
Dr Ranganathan enunciated these. This
is because of various factors such a s the
increasing urge by individuals, institutions and nations to be on the forefront;
stiff competition in every sphere of activity: unprecedented resource limitations; availability of technologies and so
on. It is very unlikely that these trends
will be reversed. In this scenario, Ranganathan and his Five Laws will earn
more and more relevance in the years to
come.

* The author was research assistant
to Dr Ranganathan during 1969-1972.

Ranganathan's early writings show
that a t the time of formulating the Five
Laws, the library scene was very different. In fact, there was hardly any
professionalism then. Closed access. if
not chained libraries. highly restricted
use, Ubrarles run by scholars or clerical
staff was the rule of the day. It was
agdnst this background Ranganatha
started his career as a librarian. Overwhelmed by the potentials of libraries
and concerned about the non- or underutilisation of library resources. Ranganathan started organising the Madras
University Library in 1925, immediately
after his return from the UK, where he
studied librarianship and visited as
many libraries a s he could. 'It was a rich
experience,' wrote Ranganathan. This
rich experience a n d t h e ' g r e a t e s t
inspiration' which he received from Berwick Sayers, had helped Ranganathan in
organising t h e Madras University
Library and in formulating the Five
Laws.

DESIDOC Bull InfTech, 12f51September 1992. pp.21-23

21

Dr SR Raneaoathan Birth Cenlenarv Issue

2. The Message of the Five Laws
The Five Laws enunciated by Ranganathan are :

Books arefor use
Every reader his book
Evey book its reader
Save the time ofthe reader
Ubrary ts a growing organism
Later versions of these laws replaced
books by 'documents' and then by 'information.' A s is evident from these laws
Fbnganathan's focus was on 'the user.'
The first four laws very clearly point
this out. In fact. the first law 'Books are
for u s e ' is t h e sumrnum bonum of
librarianship.
The second. third and fourth laws are
only derivatives of the first law. Thus the
First Law (Complimented by the rest) is
the ultimate in librarianship; it explains
the very purpose of the library. justifies
the very existence of libraries, and argues for professionalism in librarianship. Ranganathan called the Five Laws
a s the foundation of librarianship. It is
in fact more than the foundation. The
laws are the foundation. the structure.
the exterior, the fnterior and everything.

3. The Ranganathan Era
The Ranganathan era was a watershed in the history of librarianship in
India. From nowhere, he enunciated the
Five Laws, and libraries of all types went
through a transformation.
The seeds of professionalism were
sown d u r i n g t h i s period by Ranganathan, and he personally and singlehandedly nurtured it for quite a lengthy
period. He demonstrated the importance of the Five Laws first in LFle Madras
University Library and later in many
other places.

4. The Transformation
Convinced that the Five Laws were
the ultimate, Ranganathan formulated
theories. technique's, and procedures to
support these. Thus he developed a new
theory of library classification and
cataloguing. a new approach to references service, principles of book selection, and emphasised the importance of
library management. He critically examined every factor that would directly
or indirectly contribute towards the fulfilment of the Five Laws. He borrowed
heavily from o t h e r disciplines to
strengthen the case that 'Books are for
use.' He personally supervised the transformation in Indian Libraries with great
joy. He left no stone unturned which
would have blocked such a transformation. often to the dislike of many. Rang a n a t h a n definitely succeeded i n
bringing forward librarianship from
nowhere to a respectable level. He even
developed built-in mechanisms to keep
the ascendancy going. This he did by
introducing library legisIations, library
education, library publications, raising
the status of librarians, introducing research in librarianship. establishing international links and so on.

5. High Expectations from the
New Generation
Ranganathan had very high expectations from younger generations. He was
very hopeful that the later generations
would complete the work initiated by
him to the satisfaction of the Five Laws.
He often used to say so with great enthusiasm. I still remember the talk he
delivered a t DRTC in November 1973 to
the delegates of the IASLIC Conference,
which was held in Bangalore that year.
After feeling the pulse of +he audience,
which included many from the 'younger
generation', Ranganathan went on with

DESIDOC Bull Inf Tecf, 12(5) September 1992. pp.21-23

22

Dr SR Ranganalhan BiPth Centenary Issue

his talk for about two hours, a t the end
of whch he. was literally 'gasping for
breathband could not even get up from
the chair without support. This was a
true d e m o n s a i o n of the frustration of a
leader with his own generation.
But where is the New Generation?
That "younger generationhabout
gmathan spoke enthusiastically in 1970, is almost on the way out.
m e t h e r that generation of librarians
rose to the expectations of Ranganatha
is debatable. But it is a fact that their
contributions did not make any marked
improvements to the cause of 'Books are
for use." The user is still in need of a
better deal and library resources continue to remain under-utilised or unu s e d Definitely the increasing use of
technologies has made some difference

23

or improvement to the information
provision function. But the credit for
that should go more to some other
profession.

6. Wanganathan" Message
'Effective information provision' is
the very purpose of librarianship. This
may be seen as a new interpretation of
the First Law. If' the use of technology is
going to aid it, let us change it; if conferences and seminars are going to aid
it, let u s orgmise more of' these. But the
relevance to the fulfilment of the First
Law should be tested before embarking
on any activity. Ranganathan practised
this, and this was his message to the
library profession, which he passed on
to the new generation of librarians
through the Five Laws.

DESlDOC Bull IniTech 12(5)September 1992,pp.21-23

