Focus

Hypertext and Hypermedia: An Overview

DESIDOC, Minisb-y of Defence, Metcalfe House, Delhi- 1 1 0 054
Abstract

The historical developments of hypertext (HT), which is
non-linear text or non-sequential writing, hypermedia (HM)
and multimedia; types of HT systems; their general
charateristics, advantages, disadvantages and limitations
are overviewed in this paper. It also lists important HT
systems and HM products, their storage and distribution
patterns. Problems like disorientation, cognitive overhead,
lack of presentation, rhetoric and construction of default
paths are also discussed.

1. Introduction
Information storage, retrieval and dissemination is a dynamic process. A number of technologies like radio, motion
picture, telecommunications, computers,
optical storage technology, etc have
added strength in terms of sophistication,
speed and accuracy. But, to retrieve the
information quickly, especially when the
size of information is large, is rather difficult and time consuming. So far there is
no foolproof system to store all the inforThe author is presently workingfor
PhD at Deptt of Library & Information
Studies, Loughborough University of
Technology, UK.
DESIDOC Bull of Inf Techno1 12(6),1992

mation of human knowledge, and retrieve
the same as and when required.
A record, if it is to be useful to science,
must be ~ntinuouslyextended, it must
be stored; and above all it fiust be consulted (1). At present only 10% of the
information published is in electronic
form and the rest is in printed form. It is
a big problem to access the 90% of nonelectronic information which mainly
comes from magazines, newspapers,
R&D reports, reference manuals, personal communications, etc. Above all, information doubles every few years (period
varies from field to field). To store all the
literature published in the world and
make it easily accessible to users is a

3

gigantic task. This problem has drawn the
attention of pioneers in information field
since the second world war.
Vannevar Bush identified this problem
as far back as 1940s and gave a serious
thought to overcome this situation. In
1945,he invented a technique which was
later called 'Hypertext (HT)' (2). He
foresaw the problem of information explosion in future and developed a
mechanical recording device called
'Memex'. He described it as 'a device in
which an individual stores all his books,
records and communications, and which
is mechanised so that it may be consulted
with exceeding speed and flexibility. It is
an enlarged intimate supplement to his
memory' (ref 1, p 106-7). This can be
considered as the first seed of the concept
of HT.
In 1960s, Engelbart designed the first
hypertext system named a s 'on Line
System' (NLS),for the knowledge workers
to augment the human intellect. A number of concepts and items related to HT
like mouse, windows, editing text on the
screen, links between the chunks of information, teleconferencing, hypermedia
(HM), office automation, outline processing, etc are some of his important contributions. Later, NLS (popularly known
as Engelbart's system) was named as
AUGMENT (text processing multi-user
systemW3). and was distributed commerUY.
Theodor Nelson defined and coined the
term hypertext in 1965 (2). His book (4)
can be considered as a treatise on HT and
HM. According to him ordinary writing is
sequential for two reasons. First, it grew
out of speech and speech-making,which
have to be sequential. Second, books are
not convenient to read except in a sequence. But structures of ideas are not
sequential. They tie together in every conceivable way. And when humans write,
they always try to tie ideas together in
non-sequential ways. The footnote is a

break from sequence, but it can be extended (ref 4, p. 29). So hypertext is nonsequential reading and writing. When
other media elements such as graphics,
images, sound, video and animation are
added to the HT, the resulting form is
called hypermedia. In 1960s he started a
project called 'Xanadu'--a global literary
system (5,6) aimed as instantaneous
repository and delivery system for the
published works like text, graphics,
audio, video, etc so that any user may
rapidly get any frame or whole work. The
system has automatic royalty facility to
avoid copyright permission problem. Nelson had also foreseen 'computer teaching
(7).
Van Dam designed FRESS, a File
Retrieval and Editing System (8)in late
1970s by incorporating the best ideas of
Engelbart's NLS and some of the best
features from his Hypertext Editing System. Later, under his guidance another
hypermedia system 'INTERMEDIA' (9,101
was designed by Meyrowitz a t IRIS,
Brown University for conducting research
on 'use of hypertext for teaching.
From the mid-eighties, a number of
people started working on various
projects of hypertext. Presently there are
more than Bfty HTIHM systems designed
for specific purposes like conducting research, commercial purpose, in-house
use, etc.

2. What is Hypertext and

Hypermedia 3
Text is an assembly of words, formed
out of letters organised according to a set
of principles. We use text to communicate
our ideas to others either by speech1talk
or in writtenlprinted form. Though we do
not think linearly, while writing we try to
join or link all those ideas in a logical
manner. All written communications like
books and other printed publications are
linear,in which text is arranged sequentially. For example, traditionally text of a
DESIDOC Bull of Inf Techno1 12(6),1992

book is arranged linearly from page 1 to

page X. At the end there may be an index
through which one can retrieve the information easily and quickly.
When text is converted into hypertext,
all the individual ideas instead of being
joined sequentially,will be linked in nonlinear fashion with some logic. The information is stored in the nodal points,
joined through machine-generated W s .
This is considered to align more closely
with human thinking than conventional
computing.
HT consists of chunks or fragments of
text, linked associatively. Nodes are the
basic.units of information in an HT. So,
HT is creation and representation of links
between discrete pieces of information
[text or data). In HT, instead of continuous flow, text breaks into units or
modules or fragments of information
which will be linked in non-sequential
manner. In HM, more than one media are
arranged in HT linking pattern.
Hypertext can be simply defined as
non-sequential writing (2)or as the text'
in electronic form that takes advantage
of the interactive capabilities ( 11).
HM is simply the extension of HT that
incorporates other media elements in addition to text. With HM systems, authors
can create linked corps of materials that
include text. static and animated
graphics, video, sound, music, etc (10).

HT document systems allow authors to
link together any information blocks
created with a text editor, while HM document systems provide linking capabilities
between heterogeneous blocks created
with different applications such as a
painting program, chart package, or a
music editor.

3. Multimedia
Now-a-daysmultimedia is probably an
over-used phrase in the personal computer (PC) world. Every new product,
DESIDOC Bull of Inf Techno1 12(6),1992

which involves any type of media, say
sound, graphics or even text, is described
as a multimedia product. Multimedia can
be defined as a process that can handle
text, still images, video, sound, and
animated graphics (12).TV,video tapes,
video disks, etc are some of the commonly
available multimedia products. The advantages of TV multimedia communications and the widespread dissemination
of information can then be combined
with intelligent capabilities of the PC.
Multimedia manufacturers are making
these more attractive, but the
viewerluser cannot interact with the program in the same way as in the case of
HM because of the former's sequential
organisation of information. Despite the
feeling of being in control, the user can
only watch the program but cannot interact. Some of the multimedia products like
compact disk-interactive (CD-I), digital
video interactive (DVI) are having some
level of interaction because of their
development using HT technique or
some other pattern which allows the
machine to generate links between information blocks. When a multimedia program is developed in HT environment, the
resulting product is called Hypermedia.
So, HT is a part of an interactive multimedia environment. All HM products are
multimedia but not vice versa.
Multimedia is a general term which
includes HM. The basic difference between HM and multimedia is the organisation and the linkages of the
information fragments. Multimedia
products are organised linearly whereas,
HM products are organised non-linearly
linking all the information chunks. There
are quite a few companies making multimedia hardware systems. Apple's Macintosh is one of the best machines for
developing multimedia applications.
One of the first and useful multimedia
packages is Farallon Computing's
Mediatracks which could be used to
record a series of screens and use the

sound hardware to record a step-by-step
guide for using any Mac software. Two
multimedia projects h m Europe are to
be mentioned here: (i)Nordic Life Today,
a full multimedia publishing platform for
schools,colleges, libraries and other cultural institutions of Scandenavia, and (ii)
55 Anos Despues, tourist information
multimedia system.

4. Characteristics of HT and HM

Systems

+ In hypertext, information (text and

data) is represented in discrete
chunks. The information may be a
paragraph, diagram, graphics of
image or a combination of any of these
items.

+ A n HT databaseis formed by interlinking chunks. A chunk could be linked
with another or many chunks forming
a network in the HT database.

+ Any document written by using HT
technique is called a hyperdocument.
In HT environment, the information
chunks or frames will be linked within
and in between the hyperdocuments.

+ In HT systems, the user can navigate

rapidly in either directions between
nodes of the HT database. An HT user
to access informationby both assodative and intuitive routes, irrespective
of the actual location of information,
or for any visible database structure.

+ Users can create, edit and rearrange

the chunks according to their needs.
HT databases can have changeable
structures which can be changed according to the author's or designer's
addition, deletion or editingof the text,
graphics, images, etc. It does not have
a clear structure like a conventional
book in which the length, breadth, etc
can be defined. Moreover the arrangement of information in HT databases
can change according to the user's
interaction.

+ At any time, a reader/user is able to
see only a small fragment of informa-

+
+
+

tion fi-oma large HT database.
There are no page boundaries as in a
conventional book.
To a large extent, HT leaves control of
information in the hands of users.
Unlike a printed book, HT is multifaceted, with many entry points to add
or retrieve information according to
the need /requirement, level of interest
and learning style of thd user population.

Ted Nelson has classified (ref 4. p. 32)
Hypertext into &re types:
(a) Chunk or discrete style HT: It consists of separate pieces of text called
'chunks' which are connected by links
and represented in the form of footnote
markers. When the user interacts with
the chunks, they come out with a
response and present an entirely new
fi-agment of information related to the
previous one. Using these 'jumpable
connections' one can provide detailed
explanations for a word, phrase or topic.
This is a n entirely different way of
presenting information compared with
traditional sequential form. While constructing this type of database, one has
to provide these links logically, artistically and also according to the subject
relevance through which a reader can
grasp, understand, and assimilate the
knowledge easily.
(b) Collateral HT: For two types of data
structures, creation of collateral HT is
possible. It may be useful to compare
collateral equivalents of two tables of
contents, writer's notes, etc. Crehtion of
multiple viewable links in between any
two data structures is called 'collation'
and the structures are called 'collateral
strictures'. When comparing two definitions or laws on the same screen, it is
DESIDOC Bull of Inf Techno1 12(6),1992

very easy to draw conclusions.
Moreover, the user absorbs quickly by
seeing those d e m o n s or laws simultaneously on the screen.

6.1 Broad Classification

(c)Stretchtext: Here all the related prose
is written closely. It is very easy to use
and has advantages of descreteness and
looseness. In stretchtext, the screen will
show two 'throttles*,the first one moves
the text forward and backward, up and
down on the screen; the second throttle
causes changes in the writing itself.
This is completely controlled by the
user. The text can also be changed with
the throttles connected to the computer.
Stretchtext can be made longer / shorter
by adding and substracting words or
phrases respectively. The gaps between
the phrases can be used to pop-in new
words and phrases like a cartoon picture. It is read by the userlstudents
from the computer screen.

(a) Macro Literary Systems: These systems are similar to very large size outline libraries in which all types of
information on every topic will be stored
and can be retrieved. The broad based
systems like Memex, Augment, Xanadu
and Textnet were designed for the multiuser environment, where one can store
all types of published information. They
could also be used for various purposes
like publishing, reading, collaborative
works and criticism.

(d) Grand HT: It consists of 'everythhg'
written about a subject or relevant to it,
tied together by editors, and the users
can navigate in all the directions and
read the information according to their
choice. There are different pathways of
thinking. Ted Nelson's Xanadu is the
best example of grand hypertext system. in which one can read 'everything
and also write on the screen.
(e) SpecIfzc HT: It is specifically written
for a particular purpose in a specific
area, consequently the usage also will
be limited to a specific type of clientele.
For example, Anthological HT,where all
the materials are brought together and
arranged like in an anthological book.

6. Classification of HT and HM

Systems
We can classify the Hypertext and Hypermedia systems according to broad
classification, environment or generations.
DESIDOC Bull of Inf Techno1 12(6),1992

Conklin has classified (13) all the
available hypertext systems into four
types under the broad classification.

(b) Problem Explomtfon Systems: These
systems are basically issue-investigation
type, designed to support high interactivity and unstructured thinking. They
are developed to assist the members of a
team in creating and structuring of information. These systems have built-in
ability to handle large unstructured
chunks of information and allow the
user to focus, browse and organise the
concepts. These systems assist the
users with such mechanisms by praviding information lenses to filter the
various levels of details. They also permit the user to see differing views of the
same information. Examples include
PIE, IBIS, Synview, WE and Outline
Processors.
(c) Structured

Browsing Systems: These
systems are almost like systems
described at (a),but smaller in size and
are being used for computer-aided
teaching, reference, and public information. They are simple, user-friendly, and
very easy to use. Examples include
KMS, Info, HypeflIES and DE. Normally
these systems are read-only type and
will not allow the user to add new information because they are meant for
providing information only. They are
being used in museums (14) for Mormation displays (HyperTIES), com-

puterised information management
systems (15) for aircraft carries
(KMS/ZOG) (15). and online computerised help systems (INFO) (16).
These systems can be used at any place
where well-defined information has to
be provided.
(d)Modifred Database Management Systems (DBMS]: Now-a-days a number of
DBMS packages are coming with simple
HT linking features. To make DBMS
software useful and attractive, the
designers incorporate the flavour of HT
technique, but they are not real HT systems. Normally we find such features in
the currently used software for information retrieval purposes where data
pointers merely increase text retrieval
facilities. They are retrofit systems
rather than true HT systems.
(e) General Experimental S y s t e m s :
There are a number of systems
developed for experimentation of reading, writing, collaboration, etc aspects of
HT such as Intermedia, NoteCards and
Hypercard. Even though they are strong
in some aspects of HT, they are very
general in nature and could be used for
any work.
6.2 HT and HM Classification with
Reference to Environment

(a)Dlsb.ibuted Systems: Normally these
systems are very powerful and are able
to handle very large volumes of information. Since they are multi-user systems,
they allow a number of users to work at
a time in doing collaborative work. Intermedia is a good example for this type
and is being used for computer-aided
instruction at the English and Biology
Departments of the Brown University for
the past three years. Other examples include NoteCards, Neptune, and KMS.
(b) PC-Based Systems: These are single
user systems, comparatively small in
size and could be used to design personal HT applications. The most popular

example of this kind is Hypercard.
Others include Guide, HyperTIES, and
LinkWay.
6.3 Classification based on Generations

Despite the commonality in the basic
architecture of the HM systems. they are
classified into two generations (17). All
the ikst generation HM systems originally
developed on mainframes, mainly
focussed on text nodes and.user display
technologies with little or no graphics
capabilities. However, they were
developed to support work of a team.
sharing a common HM network. These
systems were developed prior to 1980and
include NLS/Auigment ( 18), FRESS (8)
and ZOG ( 19).
Those developed after 1980are second
generation systems-which include
various workstation-based, researchoriented, and PC-basedsystems. The first
category systems include NoteCards,
Neptune, Intermedia, PlainText and
KMS. These systems have got advanced
three-dimentional graphics interface,
strong support of graphics, animation,
composite multimedia nodes, sophisticated navigational displays and interface
tailorability. They were basically
designed for single users or small teams
of workers. Later, PC-based HT systems
Guide (201,HypeflIES (21), LinkWay (22).
HyperPAD (23). HyperDOC (24)etc have
emerged.

7. Advantages of HT and HM

Systems
HT is a pervading concept in the
present computer world. The most important advantage of these systems is the
ease and speed of browsing through
greater volumes of information. One can
also add personal annotations (25),
without altering the original information
of the document. The information in
these systems may be v i e d in varying
degree of details. In case of larger HT
DESIDOC Bull of Inf Techno1 12(6),1992

systems, greater economy of information
storage could be achieved. Normally in
very big databases, there will be a lot of
information duplication at many places
due to the inaccessibility of same information. In HT databases all the information is stored in basic units. The
inter-linked information is easily accessible, so one can eliminate the repetition
of same piece of information at more than
one location which ultimately saves a lot
of storage space of the computer. These
systems encourage highly collaborative
work environments (26.27) (for example,
Augment (28).Intermedia (29).KMS (30).
Neptune (17). Notecards (31), and WE
(32). Hyperdocuments are always
dynamic and encourage the users to contribute their knowledge and ideas. The
advantage of this function is that both
users and authors can refine anil also add
new information to the system all the
time, with a result the information in the
system w
ill always remain updated when
compared to traditional databases. It is
possible to provide comments, criticism,
discussion, etc on a concept or topic by
various people which ultimately lead to
development of critical thlnking in the
users and are very useful for any research.

+ Software engineering, for example,
CASE, Neptune
+ Authoring and designing tools, for example, Hypercard, Guide, HyperDoc
+ Collaborativewriting, for example, Intermedia, WE
+ Writing aids, for example, WE, Notes
+ Instructional aids, for example, Hy+
+

+
+

8. Applications of HT and HM

Systems
These systems find applications in the
following areas:

percard, HyperDoc, LSM InfoMaster,
etc
Computer -aided training/ teaching,
CSILE, IRIS'S INTERMEDIA
Presentation aids and information
kiosks, for example, Boston MacWorld, LITA Conference Information
Disk, Metacatalog (multilingualinformation kiosk)
Information and retrieval systems, for
example, HIRS, HyperDoc, KRS,IBIS
Library and information handling
sources/services:
- Dictionaries, for example, OED,
Webster's Dictionary
- Encyclopedias, for example, Grolier's
Electronic Encyclopedia, Compton's
Multimedia Encyclopedia
- Medical text books, for example,
Dynamic Medical Handbook
- Product catalogues, for example, The
Savings Zone Club Disk
- Online user manuals, for example,
Hypercard
- Electronic maps, for example,
HyperMap, Business Class
- Travel guides, for example, Glasgow
Online.
Literary collections, for example,
Xanadu, Textnet
Electronic document publishing (considerablecost reduction in publishing,
reproduction, and distribution)
Expert Systems (+Hypertext),for example, KnowledgePro, Plus, HyperBridge, MacSmarts, 1st Class FIT

+ Technical documentation, for example, DE, ThothII
+ Help systems, for example, Emacs,
INFO, Hypercard, Guide, askSam
+ Museum exhibits, for example, Kings

+
+

Herald's Dream, Jewish Heritage,
HypeflIES

+

for exxnple,IBIS

A number of American libraries are
already using HT for providing library and

+ Religious studies, for example, The
Bible Library
+ Problem solving and idea processing,
DESIDOC Bull of Inf Techno1 12(6),1992

information services to their users. Apart
from special and university libraries, a
number of public libraries also started
using Hyper Card and other HT systems
for providing services to the users of their
libraries.

8. Drawbacks and Limitations
8.1 Superficial Problems

Temporary in nature, these are implications or technological drawbacks,
that are common to any new technology.
These include problems related to the
structure of HT, learner control, integration of and synthesising information,
retrieval of information, processing
strategies of HT. retrieval of iconised
nodes, copyright, compatibility, etc.
8.2 Deep Problems

These problems are more stronger
which may take long time to solve and
sometimes they may not be solved at all.
Presently there are four such problems
which overlap each other.
(a)Disorientation: The tendency of users
to get lost in a HT database is termed as
disorientation. This tendency depends
on the size of the database; the bigger
the database, the easier to get lost. Inspite of page numbers, chapter headings, sometimes we loose the sense of
location while reading a book which is
normally very small in size when compared to an HT database. In an HT
database, the information is neither sequential nor it has the pages to flip
through. So,it is easy to get lost. In case
of multimedia environment, this problem is more severe because each
medium may have its own cycles. Some
of the I-IT systems are providing aids to
overcome the problem of disorientation.
for example, Find and Goto commands,
bookmarks, database maps, location indicators, etc. But these are not permanent solutions. Research is

underway to develop solution to this
problem. (33-35)
(b) Cognitive Overhead: Even though
users familiar with a particular network
do not experience any disorientation,
working in an HT knowledge base curtails some extra 'cognitive overhead'
(36).An additional effort and concentration is required by the user to maintain
several tasks or trails at the same time.
Psychologists have found that a normal
human being can maintain at the most
flve to nine thoughts in His memory at
one time, whereas HT and HM systems
require occasionally more. If the information is not properly organised and
linked between the related chunks, the
nonlinear representation leads to
greater risks of potential intellectual
digestion, disorientation and cognitive
overhead.
(c)Lack of Presentation Rhetoric: Landow
has discussed (37) the need for a
rheotoric of linking in HM. Indication of
the destination of a link, and inviting
the user to that destination are the two
problems according to him. He has formulated nine rules for creating mcaningful links in HT database to have logic
or relationship among nodes. HT systems are useful only when there are
balanced number of linear and nonlinear links, otherwise they lead to more
distortion. The number of linear or nonlinear links will depend on the
knowledge1information being stored.
the objectives of documentation, and
sophistication of the user population.
Large size databases, have more links to
integrate the chunks which leads to
'nodal or linkage explosion', i.e., distortion. In second generation HT systems,
this problem was taken care by aggregating sub-networks into composite
nodes which have chunk material on a
higher level of abstraction. But creating
another dimension of hierarchy complicates the representational architecture
and, unless implemented in a manner

DESlDOC Bull of Inf Techno1 12(6), 1992

transparent to users, may increase disorientation and cognitive overload (17,
p.99).

creating useful materials. Empirical
studies in all the related fields of HT could
be conducted to develop appropriate
guidelines to make use of this technology
optimally. The speed in which the research is going on, one can expect that
they will be available very soon.

(d) Construction of Default Paths: This
problem is also related to rhetoric experienced in the construction of very big
HT databases. Construction of required
links itself is a time consuming task and
creating default paths requires more
time. Thus this becomes a major constraint in d6signing a sophisticated HM
system.

Acknowledgements

9. Storage and Distribution of HT

References

and HM Documents
The main problems in storage and distribution of HT and HM systems are their
size and multimedia nature. Since these
have graphics, photographs, -tion,
sound, etc they normally require very
large disk space, which often exceeds the
memory of large computers also. For a
simple HT system, memory of a
microcomputer is adequate whereas the
same will be inadequate for HM. In
general, most of the HM systems require
an external storage device for storing and
usage. Some of the storage and distribution devices include magnetic disks, video
disks, optical disks, and online networks
or bulletin board systems.

10. Conclusions
There is no doubt that HT has created
a new revolution and opened a new way
of presenting the information. At the
same time, many people, especially computer scientists, believe that HT concept
is a breakthrough in the computer world;
something comparable to the invention of
printing machine. Research is in progress
to add new strengths and facilities to HT
and to overcomethe problems. HT is overwhelmingly accepted by many of the computer users in almost all areas.No valid
and verified guidelines are available for
designing the HT materials. Effective
guidelines are necessary to assist in
DESIDOC Bull of Inf Techno1 12(6),1992

I would like to thank my supervisor
Prof A J Meadows because of whom I
entered in this field and doing research.

1.

Bush, V. A s we may think.Atlantic
Monthly. 1945, 176(1). 101-8.

2.

Nelson, Theodor H. The hypertext.
In Proceedings of the World
Documentation Federation, 10-15
October 1965, Washington, DC,
1965. p. 80.

3.

Engelbart, Douglas C. A conceptual
frame work for the augmentation of
man's intellect. In Vistas in information handling, Vol. 1, edited by
P. Howerton. Sparton Books,
Washington, DC,1963. pp. 1-29.

4.

Nelson, Theodor H. Computer
lib /dream machines. Microsoft,
Redmond, 1987.

5.

Nelson, Theodor H. Replacing the
printed word: a complete
literary system.In IFIP Promedings
80,edited by Lavington. North- Holland, Amsterdam, 1980. 1013-23.
(IFIP Congress series Vol. 8)

6.

Gregory, Roger. XANADU: hypertext for the future. Dr Dobb' Journal,1983, 75 (January),28-35.

7.

Nelson, Theodor H. No more
teachers dirty looks. Computer
Decisions. 1970, September, 16-23.

8.

Van Dam. Andries. FRESS: file
retrieval and editing system. Text
System, Barrington, 1971.

Meyrowitz, N. Intermedia: the architecture and construction of a n
object-oriented hypermedia system
and applications framework. In
OOPSLA'86 Proceedings. ACM, New
York, 1986. pp. 1-23.

18.

Yankelovich, N., Haan, B.J.,
Meyrowitz N. & Drucker, S.M. Inkrmedia: the concept and the construction of a seemless information
environment. IEEE Computer, 1988,
21(1), 81-96.

Engelbart, D.C. & English, W. A
research centre for augumenting of
human intellect. In Proceedings of
the Fall Joint Computer Conference, Vol. 33, No. 1, AFIPS Press,
Reston, 1968. pp. 395-410.

19.

Akscyn, R.M. & McCracken D.L.,
ZOG and the USS CARLINSON:
lessons in system dyelopment. In
HCI-INTERACT'84. Proceedings of
the IFIP Conference on HC1,London
4-7 Sept 1984, edited by B.Shacke1.
North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1985.
pp. 901-6.

20.

Brown, P.J. Turning ideas into
products: the Guide system. In
Proceedings of the Hypertext '87.
Univ of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
1987. pp. 33-40.

2 1.

Shneiderman. Ben. User interface
design a n d evaluation for a n
electronic encyclopedia. In: Cognitive
engineering in the design of humancomputer interaction and expert systems, edited by G. Salvendy,Elsevier,
Amsterdam. 1987. pp. 207-23.

22.

Harrington, R.. Fancher, B. &
Black, P. IBM LinkWay: hypermedia
for PC. John Wiely, New York, 1990.

23.

HyperPAD. Personal Computer
ori id. 1989, August.,pp. 190-93.

24.

The world of hyperdoc-ideas for multimedia applications. Hypedoc International Newsletter, 1989. 1(2),2.

25.

van der Merwe, D.P. Annotating
literary texts with hypertext. In
Proceedings of the 12th International Online Information Meeting,
London, UK, Vol. 1, 6-8 December
1988, Learned Information, Oxford,
1988, pp. 239-47.

26.

Smith, J B., Weiss, S.F. & Ferguson,
G.L. A hypertext writing environ-

tin,TX, December 1986. ACM, New
York, 1986. pp. 147-52.

Conk&, Jeff. Hypertext : a survey
and introduction. IEEE Computer,
1987, 20(9), 17-41.
Multimedia road show gets set to
achieve stardom. PC Week Supplement, 1990 (4 September), 12.
Conklin, Jeff. A survey of hypertext. MCC Technical Report No:
STP-356-86, Rev.2. MCC, Austin.
1987. p. 9.
Shneiderman, B., Brethauer, D.,
Plaisant C., and Potter, R. Evaluating three museum installations of a
hypertext system. J o u r n a l of
American Society of fhe Information
Science, 1989, 40(3), 172-82.
Mc Cracken, D. & Akscyn, R. Experience with the ZOG Human-zComputer Interaction System.
International Journal of ManMachine Studies, 1984, 21, 293310.
Stallman, R.M. EMACS: the extensible,
customizable
selfdocumenting display editor. In
Proceedings
of
the
ACM
SIGPLAN/SIGOA Conference on
Text Manipulation. Portland, June
1981. pp. 147-56.
Delisle, N. & Schwaritz, M. Concepts--a partitioning concept for
hypertext. In Proceedings of the
Conference o n Computer -Supported Co-operative Work, Aus-

DESIDOC Bull of Inf Techno1 12(6),1992

The University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Dept. of Computer
Science, Chapel Hill,October 1987.
14 p. A text lab report No:TR87033.

ment and its cognitive basis. In:
Proceedings of the Hypertext'87.
Univ of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
1987. pip. 195-214.
27.

Fish, Robert S., Kraut, R.E., Ieland,
M.D. & Cohen, M. Quilt: a collaborative writing. In Proceedings of
the ACM Conferenceon OMce Automation Systems. ACM, NY, 1988.
pp. 30-37.

28.

Engelbart. D.C. Authorship
provisions in Augment. In Proceedings of the IEEE COMPCON, San
Francisco, CA, Spring 1984. IEEE,
New York, 1984. pp. 465-72.

29.

Garrett, L., Smith, K. & Meyrowitz,
N. Intermedia: issues, strategies
and tactics in the design of a hypermedia document system. In
Proceedings of the Conference on
Computer -Supported Co-operative
Work. Austin.TX. December 1986.
ACM, New York, 1986. pp. 163-74.

30.

3 1.

32.

Yoder. Elise.. Askcyn R. & Mc
~rackeh.D. Collaboration in KMS,
a shared hypermedia system. In
Proceedings of CHI'89, Austin,=,
May 1989. ACM, New York, 1989.
pp. 37-42.
Halasz, F. Reflections of Notecards:
seven issues for the next generation
of hypermedia systems. Communications of the ACM, 1988,
31(7).pp. 836-52.
Smith, J.B., Weiss, S.F. & Ferguson, G.F. A hypertext writing environment and its cognitive basics.

DESIDOC Bull of Inf Techno1 12(6),1992

33.

Fairchild, Kim F., Poetrock, S.E. &
Furnas, G.W. SemNet: threedimentional graphic representations of large knowledge
bases. In Cognitive science and its
applications for human-computer
interaction, edited by R. Guindon
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Hillsdate. 1987.

34.

Beard, D.V. & Walker, J.Q. Navigational techniques to improve the
display of large two-dimentional
spaces. UNC, Dept. of Computer
Science, Chapell Hill, 1987.Technical Report: 87-031.

35. Foss, Carolyn L. Tools for reading
and browsing hypertext. Information Processing & Management,
1989, 28(4), pp. 407-18.
36.

Dede, Christopher. The role of hypertext in transforminginformation
into knowledge. In Ps-r
of
NECC'88. Int. Council Comp.
Educ., 1988. pp. 95-102.

37.

Landow, George P. Relational encoded links and the rhetoric of hypertext. In Proceedings of the
hypertext'87, 13-15 November,
1987, Univ of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill.Univ of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, 1987. pp. 331-43.

13

