Focus

EFFECTIVE TECHNICAL PRESENTATION
1. INTRODUCTION
As a researcher or technical professional,
you are frequently involved in technical presentations to gain or share information with higher
management or colleagues - to convince them
and to project or sell your ideas.
This article is designed to help in improving
your participation at such meetings and to
become a more effective presenter and communicator.
One of the major challenges you, as a technical presenter, face in managing a presentation
is the 'starting trouble' explaining the purpose
of your presentation. Anxiety is natural but fear
is not. If you are able to channel your anxiety
positively by following a few steps mentioned
below, you may succeed in enhancing the impact of your presentation.

2. GENERAL TIPS FOR EFFECTIVE
PRESENTATION
Organise: Better organistion of presentation
will give you more confidence.
Visualise: Imagine the sequence of your presentation.
Practice: Rehearse a presentation standing
up, as if the audience i s in front of you. At least
two full rehearsals are recdmrnended; i f
possible, have somebody to assess you. Listen
DESIDOC Bull of Inf Technol, 1993, 13(4)

to the assessment, accept suggestions if you feel
they are required, and improve your presentation.

3, PLANNING THE PRESENTATION
You should clearly ascertain the size of the
expected audience, their knowledge background and their attitude. The level of presentation should match the level and intent of the
audience.

3.1 Developing Objectives
You should develop a clearly defined objective for a presentation, for example, you may tell
the audience about some project or explain
implications of your new service.
Always remember that the main objective of
technical communication is to reach certain
level of commonness or understandingbetween
you and the audience.

3.2 Allocation of Time
Sufficient time should be kept for discussions. Limit your talk to 20-25 minutes, because this, as experience indicates, i s the time,
which matches the most successful reaction.
This period of oral presentation is equivalent to
a paper with maximum length of 2500 words
(or about 8 pages of A4 size). As a thumb rule
you may follow the following time distributions.

3

- -

-

-- - -

Part of

-

- -

-

Duration o f presentation

presentation

<15rnin

>15rnin

Introduction

20%

10%

Body

60%

809'0

Conclusion

20%

1090

Question & answers

20% of the total time

3.3 Organisation of the Talk
A good presentation should normally cover:
s2 An enthusing introduction,

a A clear statement of the subject dealt with,
a A brief description of the approach, and
a A forceful review of conclusions.
A well planned introduction is an essential
ingredient of a successful presentation. It should
serve as an appetizer for the audience to the rich
menu that follows. It should be brief and meaty
enough to capture the interest and attention of
the audience and sustain it. Making i t too long
and digressive dissipates the attention of the
audience, and attenuates the rapport with the
presenter in following the subject matter that
foHows in which the presenter may be thorough
and good in exposition.

This should be followed by a clear statement
of the problem dealt with or the contents of the
talk. Then the approach or methods/techniques
employed relevant to the subject of the talk, and
then the data and resu\ts may be presented
briefly. Finally an emphatic review of the conclusions should be presented.
Since technical talks are normally meant for
ready comprehension by the audience, you
should present only essential technical details.
Detailed data, methods and techniques should
be kept ready fcx providing clariiications. You
should mention briefly about this abridgement
and how to get the detailed data or information.
Frequent reierence to the main theme should be
made during the course of your talk.

3.4 Linguistic Aspects
Simple sentence construction and frequent
use of the first person in the active voice are
highly desirable. Let the more effective verbs,
instead of abstract nouns with involved construction, do your communication. Use of
parenthetical explanations and asides must be
made short and not too frequent, and should be
interesting or humorous where possible.

4. DELIVERING THE TALK
4.1 How to Start 1
The best way to begin a meeting and to
eliminate the pre- meeting jitters is to project a
visual of the agenda. It forces immediate attention on to the matter at hand. It tells your
audience that you are organised, mean business, have lots of things to discuss and need their
attention.
Now you are ready to go into your presentation. Ifyou have put the key points on the visuals
you don't need a script. The margins on cardboard transparency frames can carry all kinds of
notes to keep you on track. Remember you are
looking at the overhead projector while it is on.
Your audience is looking at the screen. When
you have covered the information on the visual,
turn off the projector switch and attention will
immediately shift back to you.
Choose a relaxed pose. Inhale deeply a number of.timesbefore yo11 start.One or two gentle
steps either side-to-sideor towards the audience
will help loosen muscular tension.

The feeling of intimacy by the audience will
help you in establishing proper communication.
Look at individuals in the audience, try to make
the presentation similar to an intgr- personal
communication.

4.2 Essential Points to be Observed
The visual aids are meant for viewing, only
for a short time on the screen and you should
not read out the contents on them. You may
explain the points or ideas given in them. The
audience lose interest if they are required to
digest details more than that can be assimilated
DESIDOC Bull ofInf Technol. 1993, 13(4)

at a glance. If details of an equipment or flow
diagram are to be presented, only a small and
relevant section of it should be shown. You
should give the audience a few seconds for
studying every slide or transparency before or
after you explain the contents. Talking while the
audience read the slide, distracts their attention.
You should speak loudly enough for everyone in the audience to hear. It is worthwhile to
have a friend in the audience to give you an
indication whenever the voice become inaudible. If a portable mike is not provided, you
should not continue to speak while you move
away from the fixed mike.
It is embarrassing to sh& your back to the
audience; speak to the audience and not to your
notes, blackboard or the screen.

*

zt Make list elements parallel; they should be

either all phrases or all sentences. Preferably,
they should 'all start with the same part of
speech such as a noun or a verb. And they
should all follow the same capitalisationand
punctuation style.

a

Human being are visually oriented from
birth. We are influenced by all kinds of visual
stimulation (advertisements, cinema, road signs,
television, etc). Visuals help the speaker control
the presentationand maintain the group's attention. 90% of the tnessage we hear is misinterpreted or forgotten entirely. We retain only 1%
of what we hear. Adding appropriate visual aids
to your talk increases retention up to 50%. They
are vitamins to oral presentations.
The use of visuals naturally forces you to
organist?your thoughts concisely. Simply list the
key points you want to cover, so that people can
see them. A few tips are provided below.

*

00 not use visual aids to impress your
audience with complex graphs and tables.

* Use KISS principle; Keep It Short and Simple.
a Simple charts with few words are the most
effective. Limit the information to what your
audience can grasp rapidly.

To show the relathe importance of topics,
ideas, or items, put related items under the
same bullet item.

* To

give your presentation a unified
appearance, use the same bullet shape/or
colour for all the bullet slides.

5. USE OF VISUALS

5.1 Function and Effective Use

Avoid putting too many characters on a line.
Try to limit it to about 25 characters, but
remember that the number of characters
you can display in a line depends on the text
size.

a

Round off large numbers in a column slide
to make them easier to read and
comprehend.

* Use only a '.few key k r d s in a column
slide/visual.

*
*
/

*

Do not use more than 20 items in a single
column chart For a twocolumn chart, use
at most ten lines; and for three4umn chart,
do not use more than seven lines.
When choosing a text size, consider the
output medium you will use and the number
of characters on each line of the &an
In an organisation chart, illustrate only one
type ofhierarchy such as people, functions
or divisions.

a If you have two or more thin slices in a pie
chart, combine them in a singie slice under
a label like, 'others'.

,

a Use short words, short phrases, and short
sentences.

* A combination of upper and lower case
letters is easier to read than all upper case
letters.

.a Units of measurement should preferably be
given as per the relevant IS Standard.
However, if certain such units are not
common, more common units that are
expected to be familiar to the audience may
also be indicated.

5.2 Importance of Colour
The sense of colour is a product of our
nervous system. It is a sensation like taste or
smell. Colour perception is subjective. tndividuals can have vastly different colour discrimination capabilities due to differences in the visual
system. Colour i s also subject to contextual
effects, in which adjacent colours influence one
another. Colour is an important factor that influences our perception and understanding of
the visual material. Use of colour in graphics can
help hold your audience's attention and make
complex information easier to understand. Colour is used in graphics not only because it looks
good, bur because it adds to information.

a Limit your slide to about eight lines of text
If you have more than eight lines consider
making a second slide.
a Use double or more spacing between the
lines in a single column slide.
a Make the type large enough so that

everyone in the room can read it. Thumb
rule is if you can read the writing on the slide
without the help of a magnifying glass, it will
be legible for a large audience.
a Display at least three but not more than 20

boxes in an organisation slide.
tr Use a landscape format for an organisation

slide.

5.3 Guidelines for Effective Colour
Usage

*
*

Avoid simultaneous display of highly
saturated, spectrally extreme colours.
Avoid pure blue tor text, thin lines and small
shapes.

tr Older viewers need higher brightness levels

to distinguish colours.
tr Colour changes appearance as the ambient

fight level changes.

*
*

All colours are not equally discernible.
Do not overuse colours.

tr Group related elements by using a common

background colour.
tr Use brightness and saturation to draw

attention.
tr To emphasize a slice, make it the darkest or

brightest colour.
tr Avoid putting red and green next to each

other in the chart; one out of twenty-five
males are colour blind and cannot
distinguish between the two colours.

5.4 Directions for Slide Projection
ir

Each slide should contain only one main

idea.

6

a Slides should be indexed on the right hand
top corner by a bright coloured dot; this
helps in proper loading of the slide
magazine/carousel. Sequence number can
also be marked to ensure proper sequence
in the presentation.
a Combination of cardboard and plastic
frames/rnounts should be avoided as this
may cause jamming in some projectors.
a Most screens are designed for horizontal
slides and mixing of horizontal [landscape
orientation) and vertical (portrait
orientation) slides should be avoided as far
as possible.

be used again and again,
duplicates of the slides must be used rather
than running back and forth through the
projector.

tr If a slide is to

tr Matter for slides shoutd be prepared with

electronic typewriter, phototypesetter, or a
DTP system with a laser printer. For good
legibility, the letters and symbols must have
a certain minimum size. Protessionalr
recommend 15 x 23 cm (6 x 9 inch) size for
the of text in the camera ready copy and the
minimum letter size as 6 mm (1/4 inch) high.

5.5 Directions for Overhead
Projection
With this 'personal' presentation tool

a Face your audience. You will be able to pick
up audience reactions immediately and
make changes on-the-spot, if necessary.
a You can present to any size of the group in
a fully-lighted room. The result is better
audience attention and participation.

a 8y controlling the light (most of the
overhead projectors are fitted with light
dimmers) attract attention .of the audience,
whenever necessary.

* The

overhead projection transparency
sheets must be carefully checked before
matter is written on them. They must be
highly transparent, free from scratches or
folds. Writing or drawing on them must be
done using suitable instruments by persons
skilled in such writing. Different colours and
appropriate colour combination for the
matter would improve readability and gain
attention of the audience.

.a If you do not want to reveal the entire
content of the slide in the beginning,
, disclose the matter in the transparency
sequentially using a sheet of paper.
a The transparency can be prepared by hand
using transparency pens or by using an
office plain paper copier.

5.6 Pre-presentation Checks
A few minutes of planning, checking the
equipment and seating arrangement can prevent disasters. A presenter can usually exercise
a degree of control over his speaking environment. There are a few items you can check
before you start.

Overhead Projectors : Make sure that the
bulb is not burnt out and that there is a spare
bulb avaikble. Cleaning the projection screen
and the optical system of the projector can
sharpen the image. You may need a few blank
transparencies and pens for use during your
presentation.

~ESIDOC &rU of lnf Tmhnd, 1993, 13(4)

Slide Projectors : Check whether it is in
working condition. is the lens large enough to
project the image size you need?Does it have
a remote control that works, or can you get help
from someone to operate it for you? Haw you
practiced using the machine?
Handouts : Are handouts easily accessible
and in order, so that they can be handed out
with minimum disruption?Have you arranged
for assistance in handling them out, if needed.
Pointers :Will you need a pointer?Is it within
reach, so that you can use it when you need it
during the presentation?

Mimphones :If speaking to more than 50100 people you wi# probabty need a microphone. Before your presentation you may
request for a miaophone that allows you to
move around a mike that will hook on to your
jacket or tie and allow you to &ep your hands
free.

-

Lighting :Do you need to dim the lights in
the room? Check to see if there is a dimmer
switch. Some light in the room is desirable in 35
mrn slide presentations. Check h see that all the
bulbs and fixtures in the room are working.

6. REASONS FOR FAILURE OF A
PRESENTATION

*

Failure to set goals for the presentation,

a Lack of organisation of the presentation,

*

Failure to set limits on the subject,

.a Failure to plan for proper use of the time
available,

a Overcomplexity of visual aids,
h Use of terms

not familiar to the audience,

and

a Failure to prepare properly for the
presentation itself.

7

