Focus

-

Advances in Communication Technology :Teleconferencing
and Telepresence
,
Ashok Kumar
Defence Scientific Information & Documentation Centre
Metcalfe House, Delhi- 100 054

Technology is developing at a very fast
rate and what looked impossiblea few years
back is becoming reality now. Sometimes
a possibility may look to be impractical
because it goes against our accustomed
style of working or is unacceptable because
it does not offer a complete solution. However, people are getting used to the existence of new technologies. Already people
have started using voice and electronic mail
as preferred forms of communication in the
same way as the use of remotely driven
devices.

existing technology allows only one mode
of communication, i.e., voice or data as
compared to true face-to-face communication achieved by human contact. Equip
ment which allow both voice and picture,
such as video phone are still not available
commercially, and the available technology
supports only one connection between two
participants. The channel bandwidth, data
compression, and applications software are
still some of the limitations for adding the
ability to pass binary data along with voice
and video.

Developments in 'virtual technology'
offer to bridge gaps in these applications
and at the same time give rEse to newer
possibilities. Video teleconferencing and
telepresence are among such applications,
widespread use of which may become a
reality i n the near future.

Large outfits Like IBM and AT&T are a p
plying technology to solve this problem.
They have started many expensive satellitebased video-teleconferencing systems to
create 'virtual meetings' involving people at
multiple locations. But the cost of such
systems is far from the reach of others because even the cheapest system costs more
than a million of US dollars. Moreover, it
does not provide a complete solution since
participants are required to go to the special
video-teleconferencing centres at their respective locations. Therefore, the developers are now aiming at bringing this
technology to the desk-top to make it more
acceptable and widespread.

TELECONFERENCING
lnspite of the various developments in
communication technology-computers,
telephones, fax and modems-a lot of time
and money is still consumed for the organisation and movement of personnel for conferences and meetings. This is because, the
DESIDOC Bull Inf Technol, 13(5),1993

3

Video teleconferencing has the power to
reduce or eliminate paperwoik, and delays
due to commuting and travel involved. This
has the potential of reducing operational
costs by making an employee's location
irielevant.
Video teleconferencing integrates data,
voice and image, and can be used by groups
working on same subject but spread over a
large geographical area. It can reduce travel
expenses and speed up decision making.
Using the right software, one can have a
meeting with a colleague locatedat another
office. He can send documents without
breaking the conversation or constantly exchange data through attached I/O devices
on the data channel. Using a network, more
participants can be included while the cornputer will do the switching between different participants.
Already crude form of multi-participant
teleconferencing is widespread in the form
of a dial-up computer service's chat mode.
In advanced countries, even text teleconferencing, where participants hook on through
computer networks and talk through keyboards instead of their voices i s common. A
group-based teleconferencing system,
Groupsystems from Ventana, USA, links
participants in graphically managed meetings. They can share files among themselves
and mark up comments on shared documents.
In full-fledged video teleconferencing,
the images of the participants are captured
by computer-mounted cameras; videoprocessors digitise and compress images,
which are exchanged over a network in
addition to data transfer. The voice signals
travel through either network or standard
telephone lines. With the advent of
multimedia and standards for data transfer,
it is becoming possible to have all these on

a single computer and communication
channel.
Video Telcom, a USA-based company
has developed a multi-participant video
conferencing system called MediaMax. The
system works with DOSbased PCs and
ISDN, and can handle upto six participants
who can see movingcolour pictures of each
other with facial expressions and voice, and
pass on data through the ISDN link. Special
video teleconferencing rooms are required
for holding such meetings.
Yet another full featured desk-top system
has been developed by Northern Telecom
of USA. It is a dial-up video teleconferencing
system and is named Visit. Visit enables a
PC or a Mac to manage both video teleconferencing and voice mail (ordinary telephone talk). Two connected persons can
see moving picture of each other in a window on the screen. They can also see their
own picture being transmitted. Both users
can share documents in a shared working
space. The system allows them to mark and
write comments in addition to two-way file
transfer.
The system manages data channel dynamically to take care of variations in the
information quantum in the channel. Normally audio and video occupy full bandwidth of the channel at 8-14 frames per
second. When required it cuts down the
video frame rate to free some bandwidthfor
data transfer. For still faster data transfer
requirements, video is reduced or even
stopped temporarily. It works with a PBX
which makes it easier to get connections to
multiple desks. The system costs USS4000
per user excluding computer and telephone hardware.
At present, existing technology for teleconferencing is very limited for wide scale
use. These still lack the feeling of true cornDESIDOC Bull Inf Twhnd, INS),1993

munication which one gets by human contact--expressions, sights and voice-and involve huge costs. Efforts are on to make a
video call as simple as a telephone call while
retaining all the benefits offered by high
speed digital channels, and to develop small
systems based on personal computers that
equal the quality of conference room.
In future, video teleconferencing may
become more common with the develop
ments in software and hardware for digitising and compressing video for multimedia,
availability of cheaper video processing
equipment, and digital telephones. Even cellular communication will soon be able to
transfer high speed data and possibly low
speed video also. As compared to DOS and
other operating environments on computers, UNlX holds more promise for the
success of this technology.

The databases mihimise the amount of
information that is to be sent through communication channels. With such databases,
virtual reality is created without moving
large amounts of data. The information is
passed through packet networks using high
speed modems which are sufficient for two
users. ISDN channels are best for carrying
such large amount of data required for true
telepresence effect. It is expected that with
the proliferation of broadband ISDN, telephone lines would also be able to carry such
data.
A typical set-up required for telepresence includes remotely operable hands
required to manipulate objects, two-way
microphones for speaking and listening,
and stereoscopic TV cameras for sight. The
current cost of this is very high which is
estimated to be more than US$100,000 per
user.

TELEPRESENCE
Telepresence is another application
made possible by the developments in communication technology. Telepresence uses
virtual-reality technology to simulate o b
jects, people, sound and environment. The
components of a telepresence system are
sensor equipped gloves connected to a
computer and head mounted displays. The
computer simulates wents in a distant virtual world using databases or real-time o b
jects and sounds.
The output from the digital databases of
real-time objects and sounds are sent to the
user through a display mounted on the
head, showing scenes. The user's senses get
immersed in a illusionaryyet sensible world.
The person may be mounted on a movable
chair fitted with movement sensors to have
corresponding changes in the viewpoint of
the virtual world.
DESIDOC Bull Inf Technd, 13(5),1993

Virtual reality technology enables the
user to participate in artificially created
worlds, simulated inside a computer. It can
become a very powerful educational tool.
In India, National Informatics Centre is
working in this area whose 'virtual star gallery' and 'virtual art gallery' are to open in
a couple of months. In Defence, virtual
reality is being used to create environment
of virtual battlefield where users actually
battle.
Software packages to create simulated
objects, people, sounds, and worlds using
interactive, 3-D real-time graphics are already available commercially, for example,
World ToolKit can run wen on a PC AT.
Developers of telepresence systems are
optimistic that telepresence is going to be
availatile online soon and the first product
may be available probably by the end of
next year.

