Focus
b

M E E T I N G OF THE HEADS OF LIBRARIES/TICs
OF D R D O LABS/ESlTS

29-30 Sept 1993
The Sixth Meeting of the Heads of
Librariespechn ical l nformation Centres
(TICs) of DRDO was inaugurated by Dr APJ
Abdul Kalam, Scientific Adviser to Raksha
Mantri at Metcalfe House, Delhi on 29 Sept
1993. The twoday meeting was organised
by DESIDOC with a view to assess the
common problems confronted by the
libraries/TlCs in procurement of foreign
publications, information handling and
networking of information resources of
DRDO
labs.
Fifty
officers-incharge/librarians/information scientists
from 35 TICSand DESIDOC participated in
the meeting.

Or Abdul Kalam in his inaugural address
wished that all libraries and TICSshould be
managed by professionals, as they are
trained to handle information in a better
way and can offer effective library services
to the user scientists. He exhorted that the
library professionals should be motivated
and trained in the use of latest information
technologies to cater to the information
needs of scientists/R&D managers. He
further desired that research element
should be incorporated in the library and
documentation activities and services.

The Scientific Adviser cautioned the
library managers to be vigilant about loss of
publications in TICs. He further asked them
to make best use of the resources available
to them.. For this purpose he felt the
necessity of creating regional databases at
Delhi, Bangalore, Hyderabad, etc where
major clusters of DRDO labslestts are
located, and network them for getting
maximum benefit. He emphasised the need
for launching SDI services for the scientists
based on their interest profiles, which
should be regularly updated.
Dr Abdul Kalam felt that librarians and
information professionalscould be made to
attend project discussions as far as possible,
so that they are able to get a clear idea of
the information requirements of projects
and keep providing relevant information to
the scientists without loss of time. He asked
the librarians to make library and
information services more dynamic.
The Scientific ,Adviser, thereafter,
answered many questions from the
participants and a lively discussion
followed.
Earlier, D r S.S. Murthy, Director
DESIDOC, welcomed the Scientific

Adviser, participants, local Lab Directors
and other invitees, He informed the
participants that the meeting was being
revived at the initiative of the Scientific
Advisor and his presence at the Meeting
showed his interest in and support to the
development of an effective information
system for DRDO.

for release of FE for procuring foreign
publications, etc.

He pointed out that the unique feature

2.
Regional databases could be developed and maintained at Deihi, Hyderabad, Bangalore and Pune and networked.

of the meeting was that all technical
sessions were going to be chaired by the
Corporate Directors who are well informed
about the subject and looking after such
functions in the Headquarters, and the
participants could directly express their
problems and views to them. He stressed
the need o f avoiding unnecessary
duplication i n library acquisitions and
advocated resource sharing in this era of
financial crunch. H e suggested that
establishment of regional databases i s a
viable alternative for effective utilisation of
the library resources and for largely meeting
the information needs of the scientists.
Shri U.R. Sharma, Deputy Director,
DESIDOC proposed the vote of thanks.
The deliberations on various topics of
common interest were spread over two
days in five technical sessions. The topics
included were : creation of in-house
databases in specific areas., networking of
regional databases, ways and means of
improving library services including SDI
services, speedy delivery of documents,
need o f managing libraries/ TICS by
professiona[s, organisation of short and
long-term training courses for scientists
engaged in information work, resource
sharing to overcome the shortfall in annual
budget of librraies, need for a library manual
covering relevant procedures and practices
for use jn the DRDO libraries/TtCs,
stock-takingand simplification of procedure
DESIDOC &J# of hf Technd, 1993, 13(6)

Some of the recommendations are as
follows:
1.
The libraries/TlCs should develpp
their own databases as per the requirements of their respective labs.

3.

All the libraries/TICs of DRDO labs

should provide their databases and their
regular updations to their regional centres
in the 'Common Communication Format'
(CCF) and AACR2 for rendering data elements.
A Specialists Committee may be appointed to go into the various aspects of
networking like suitable library application
software, computer hardware and networking nodes.
4.

5. The officer-in-Charge library, may be
invited to attend any suitable forum of the
lab tr, enabje himlher to comprehend the
informationrequirementsof the scientists in
relation to their projects.
6.
DESlDOC should develop continuous training programmes, suitable to
various levels of personnel, in database creation, networking, SDI and other areas in
association with DIMT, Mussoorie and
other agencies.

7.
The library budgets should be related
to the project budgets so that libraries can
get proportionate increase in their budgets
with the increase in the budget for project
programmes.
8.
Libraries/TlCs shall take the responsibility of retrospective data conversion in
CCF format and ensure quality control with
the available financial resources.

