DOS 6.0 for Personal Computers
MS DOS from Microsoft Corporation,
USA has been the most widely used
operating system for personal computers all
over the world. In 1993, the company came
out with the latest version DOS 6.0 which
is now also available in Indian market.
The earlier 5.0 version of DOS had the
ability to run in the high memory area of
RAM, making programs to run faster and
more efficiently. It had an improved
graphical interface-MS DOS shell which
could manage programs and switch
between them. tt had two new
commands-unformat and undelete-for
data security; and online help for all MS
DOS commands, MS DOS shell, and for MS
DOS Editor which allowed users to easily
create and modify text files. The version had
the capability to create larger disk partitions
upto 2 GB and support 2.88 MB floppy
diskettes.

space on the same hard disk used with
earlier versions. Similarly the floppy drives
too could now store more data.
The DoubleSpace utility is automatic. It
creates a comp.essed volume file (CVF) that
contains an alternative file system to store
compressed
files.
DoubleSpace
compresses
each
file
using
Lempel-Ziv-Welchtechnique and stores it in
the CVF using space reclaimed from
uncompressed disk. This conversion
process is continuously checked by the
utility making it fault- tolerant. This CVF
shows up as drive C and therefore DIR and
CHKDSK command show the virtual space
estimated on average compression ratio.
The utility can not compress files which are
already compressed such as ZIP files. MS
DOS 6.0 has enhanced disk cache for better
compression syStem.

The package comes with a number of
additional tools which include a disk
defragger, a serial/parallel file transfer tool,
an antivirus tool, and client-only NetBlOS
LAN software, as well as enhanced backup
and undelete tools for installation on MS
DOS, Windows or both.

Disk Defraggers :DOS 6.0 provides two
disk defraggers, one based on Norton's
speed disk for traditional disk
reorganisation. The other is internal to
DoubleSpace and compacts the CVF. The
first defragger invokes the second.
MEMMAKER provides much needed
automation for users of EMM386.EXE or
the LOAD HIGH and DEVICE HIGH
commands. It prepends SIZER command to
every device driver and program named in
CONFIG.SYS and AUTOEXEC.BAT and
reboots the machine.

Doublespace Utility: Like other
compression utilities, MS DOS 6.0 has
DoubleSpace Utility. This virtually increases
the disk spape by 1.8 times. Thus it can
make available a lot of precious memory

Antivirus Tool :It includes a monitor that
watches for any suspicious disk or memory
access and MS DOS and Windows version
of scanner to check and remove known
viruses. The scanners also record file

The MS DOS 6.0 has some much
wanted requirements like data compression
and memory management. These features
are robust, automatic and fault tolerant.

checksums to detect changes in EXE and
COM files. It gives some false alarms too.

Undelete Tool : In MS DOS 6.0 users
can undelete directories with subdirectories
but it works with only one level at a time.

Backup Tool : The tool allows the user
to define archive sets and store them on
floppy disks or network drives using the
same communication technique as
Doublespace. But there is no support for
tape drives for backup.
MS DOS 6.0 supports limited
networking and E-mail through a separate
workgroup connection module. This
networking lacks server capability and
protected mode protocol support of
Windows for Workgroups. The file transfer
system has c(ient and sever components.
INTERSVR runs full screen on a host, waiting
for clients to connect to its local drives or
printers. It runs on the client and establishes
connection without buying a separate
module, user has to reboot the system after
including INTERLNK by way of
CONFIG.SYS and other utilities.
DOS 6.0 can skip CONFIG.SYS &
AUTOEXEC.BAT file, if F5 key is pressed
while the system is booting up. It even has

DESIDOC Bulletin ofInf Technol, 1994, 14(1)

an option of selecting each line o f
CONFIG.SYS for execution for better
convenience, by using F8 key.
For organising the boot-up process, a
user can create multiple paths through
CONFIG.SYS using MENUITEM. Sim~larly
an user can branch in AUTOEXEC.BAT and
CONFIG.SYS Files but this sometimes has
problem with MEMMAKER, therefore with
MEMMAKER, one still has to maintain
multiple CONFIG.SYS file.
Unlike the fixed EMS and XMS with
earlier version, DOS 6.0 enables EMS and
XMS pools to adjust dynamically as per
usersf requirements. The version has two
additional DELTREE and MOVE commands
similar to that of UNtX. User can detete
entire trees of directories and subdirectories
and can also delete individual files marked
hidden, system, or read-only. MOVE
transplants files from one directory to
another, rename a directory CHOICE
prompts for a single character of input and
returns on ERROR LEVEL.
The features included in the version are
very usefui to and much wanted by the
users.

11

