FOCUS

COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT IN DEFENCE SCIENCE
LIBRARY
Sumati Sharma, Anil Kumar Singh and Vijay Lakshmi Dhingra

Defence Scientific Information & Documentation Centre
Delhi- 1 10054

ABSTRACT

Basic elements of collection development process are presented in
this paper. Collection development of Defence Science Library is
discussed in detail. Data presented in the paper reflects that
there is a steep fall in the number of titles subscribed during last six
years. On the other hand reference collection of library has become
richer during past few years. Resource sharing is discussed as a
solution to overcome the problem of increased cost of publications
and present financial crunch.

1. INTRODUCTION
A library collection is the sum total of
library materials - books, manuscripts,
serials,
government
publications,
pamphlets, catalogues, reports, recordings,
microfilm reels, microcards, microfiche,
punched cards, computer tapes, etc.
Collection development is a challenging
activity which refers to the systematic
building up of a library collection by way of
periodic evaluation of the collection,
selective acquisition and weeding.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1994,14(2)

2. ELEMENTS OF COLLECTION
DEVELOPMENT
The basic elements of the collection
developmenk process are:
determining what information
resources are needed
(community analysis)

policies
identifying or selecting the appropriate
items,
acquiring, and
3

/WEEDING1

f

Figure 1. Collection development process.

O evaluating the collection and weeding
out items not required.

of users for developing an effective
collection.

Collection development is a common
activity in most libraries and information
centers. Figure 1 illustrates six major
components of the process of collection
development as a continuous cycle in the
life of a library or information centre.

Defence Science Library (DSL), apart
from the usual methods o f need
assessment; periodically organises
meetings of the user groups/project heads
and collection development staff to know
about their future research activities,
present project assignments and on that
basis determines to enrich the collection in
the required subject fields.

2.1 User Group Analysis
Collection development is a dynamic
process that should involve both the
information professional and the user
community. Knowledge of the use+
community is the keystone to effective
development. The more the collection
development staff knows about the work
roles, general interests, education,
information/communication, behaviour,
values, and related characteristics of
potential users, the more likely the
collection will be able to provide the desired
information at the required time. No
collection can completely meet the
information needs of an individual user or a
class of users. With limited resources to
serve a wide range of interests, there must
be proper analysis of the information needs

2.2 Policy
No library can be effective without a
policy which sets out aims and objectives,
identifies user groups and services, and
indicates priorities amongst them. Since
libraries are usually short of resources,
prioritising is an essential part of the process
and use of library budget is a key instrument
for prioritising services.
Effective collection development
requires creating a policy to correct
weaknesses and to strengthen a collection.
Collection development policy is a written
statement, providing details for the
guidance of the library staff. The Defence
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1994,14(2)

Science Library also has a collection
development policy which leads to the

The sources for book selection may
consist of:

0 Informs the readers about the nature

0 Readers' suggestions
0 Book reviews in periodicals

and scope of the collection

0 informs about assigning priorities
0 Forces thinking about organisational

Subject bibliographies
National bibliographies

goals to be met by the collection

Trade catalogues

Establishes some degree of commitment to meeting organisational goals

Bibliographies of reference works

0 Sets norms for inclusion and exclusion
Reduces the influence of a single
selector and personal bias
Provides a trainindorientation tool for
new staff
Guides the staff in handling problems
Aids in weeding and evaluating the
collection
Helps in rationalising budget
allocations
Provides a public relations document
Provides means of assessing overall
performance of the collection
development program
Provides outsiders with information
about the purpose of collection

2.3 Selection
The selection of library materials is a
highly time consuming, intellectual, and
continuous process. Selection is the
process of deciding which materials to
acquire for a library collection. In essence,
it is a matter of systematically determining
quality and value. But, there is not enough
money available to buy everything that
might be of value to the user community.
This necessitates that one or more
professional staff members in the form of a
selection committee, must decide which
item should or should not be purchased.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techn~i,1994,14(2)

Bibliographies of periodical publications
Bibliographies of abstracting periodicals
Bibliographies of translations
Books in Print and Book Banks in CDROM form
Book fairs
2.3.1 Books

In book selection, each book has to be
evaluated individually against a background
of other factors - library policy, user
demand, budget allocation, etc - before a
selection decision can be made.
Often, only a single aspect of a book
may ensure its selection, e.g. the reputation
of the author, or the appearance of a new
work by a famous novelist or an authority
on a subject. Similarly, another feature may
rule out a publication-for instance, wrong
level of content, an unusual format, or a very
high price. Some key characteristics of
books are listed here which help in the
selection decision:
Price
Date of publication
Author
Publisher

3 Level of readership
Topic and contents
Readability

Language
Index, bibliography
Physical features of book e.g. format,
binding, illustrations, typography
[3

Publisher's information
Reviews - reviews in the popular
press, specialist journals and general
reviewingjournals.

2.3.2 Periodicals

Periodicals are often the first printed
sources of information about a new subject
or development, and generally contain the
most current information about a topic.
Selection of periodicals for a special library
requires a study of subjects covered by the
library. Directories of periodicals, general
guides to serial publications, and similar
compilations that list titles of periodicals
covering different subjects should be
referred for selecting periodicals. The
complete list of periodicals on subscription
should be reviewed annually to enable new
titles to be added and those of lesser value
be considered for deletion. Important
abstractingand indexingjournals that cover
the same subject areas should not be
purchased. Suggestions from the users also
form one of the basis for selecting
periodicals.
2.3.3 Government Publications/ Reports

Government publications and reports
are important part of a library's collection.
They contain nascent microthought or
policies of Government. Government
documents can be identified by a number
of labels such as government publication,
official document, federal document,
agency publication, legislative document,
presidential document, etc.
Defence Science Library maintains a
unique collection of reports literature.
6

Various reports which are coming to DSL
are as follows:
Reports

-

National Technical Information Services (NTIS), Research and Develop
ment (RAND) and National
Aeronautical Space Administration
(NASA) reports; Second World War,
and British Intelligence Observations
(BIOS) reports
Patents

-

American (US), British, German,
French, and Japanese patents.
Specifications US Mil specifications & standards,
American Society of Testing Materials
(ASTM), American National Standards
Institute (ANSI), and JointServices Specifications (JSS, India)
Standards American Society of American Engineers (ASME), BSI (British standards),
BIS (Indian standards), and UK
Defence standards.
Annual Reports DRDO, CSIR, and Public Sector
Undertaking annual reports.
Miscellaneous General Accounting Office (GAO) reports, US Govt. Printing office
(USGPO) reports, Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Develop
ment (OECD) reports, UMI dissertations; Canadian and Japanesereprints..
2.3.4 Audio-visual Materials

Knowledge is no more confined to the
usual book form but is now-aclays also
coming in various audio-visual forms. These
audio-visual forms are more convenient to
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technd, 1994,14(2)

users for assimilation
understanding.

and quick

The physical audio-visualforms in which
literature is coming i n DSL are
audiocassettes, video cassettes, microfilm
and microfiche. Facilities and equipment
required for using them is provided by DSL
The commonly used equipment required
for using the aforesaid audio-visual
materials are:
Cl Tape recorders

Cl Colour TV sets
Cl Video cassette players

O Head phones
Cl Microfilm and microfiche readers

Microfilm/microfiche readercumprinters
Defence Science Library has acquired
360 video cassettes in the field of military
science, computers, management,
environment, optics, communications, etc.
About 125 audio cassettes are available in
DSL mainly covering the area of linguistics
and management.
A lot of literature in microfiche form has
also been acquired. There are about twenty
nine thousand microfiche in DSL which
covers the area of lasers, military science,
combustion,
material
science,
environment, etc.
2.3.5 CD-ROMs and Databases

Use of data processing techniques for
processing, organising and disseminating
information in libraries has led to the
emergence of' various bibliographic
databases. These databases may be local,
national or international in scope. The use
of databases accessed through
telecommunication links and searched
online, has become familiar to most
librarians over the past decade. A more
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1994,14(2)

recent information storage medium are the
invaluable CD-ROM databases. Evaluation
of the databases themselves can be a
complex process. The databases must not
only be compared against others in the
same subject area, but where they exist in
both online and CD-ROM form, the two
formats must be compared for
effectiveness.
The following are some of the important
criteria for evaluation of databases:
(i) Subject coverage of one database in
relation to other.
(ii) Sources covered and type of literature included such as books, journals, reports, etc. Retrospective
coverage may differ between online
and CD-ROM services.
(iii) Average delay between publication
of the documents and their addition to the database.

(iv) Effectiveness of the indexing and
retrieval system used.
(v) Software system, includingdocumentation and the existence of a help
desk.
(vi) Costs - Online searches add a considerable and frequently recurringexpenditure to a library's budget ;
whereas CD-ROM involves cost the I
original purchase and its cost effectiveness increases with increasing
use.
Defence Science Library has added
many CD-ROM databases to its collecti~n
in order to facilitate information retrieval
services and to provide its users with more
precise and accurate information i n
minimum time. The following CD-ROM
databases have been acquired recently:
Cl INSPEC Ondisc (UMI, USA)

0 NTlS Database (Silver Platter, USA)

-

LISA Library and lnformation A b
stracts (Silver Platter, USA)
ISA - lnformation Science Abstracts
(Silver Platter, USA)
Applied Science & Technology Index
(HW Wilson, USA)
Wilson Business Abstracts (HW Wilson, USA)
Whitaker's Book Bank (Whitaker's, UK)

the ultimate selection and evaluation of gift
is the responsiblity of librarian.
Library also acquires some items
through exchange between libraries. This
method is often used to acquire documents
from countries whose commercial trade
operations are limited. Such exchanges are
established through formal agreements
between the co-operating organisations.

Aldrich Chem Data Search (Aldrich
Chem Co. USA)

Thus, gifts and exchanges can play an
important role i n developing a
comprehensive subject collection. DSL
received about 300 publications through
gifts during the period September 1986 to
December 1993 and is currently receiving
40 journals through exchange.

McGraw-Hill S&T Reference Set
(McGraw-Hill, USA)

2.4 Acquisition

Ulrich's Plus (RR Bowker, USA)
Books in Print Plus with Book Review
Plus (RR Bowker,USA)

Current Technology lndex (BowkerSaur, USA)
GDI - Global Defence lnformation (Teldan, Israel)
All the above mentioned CD-ROM
databases are important abstracting and
indexing services and include journal
articles, conference proceedings, books,
reports, etc.
2.3.5.1 Online databases : Defence
Science Library is also conducting searches
on foreign databases through DIALOG for
retrospective coverage.
Defence Science Library has also
developed inhouse database for online
catalog which at present has around 63,000
records (including books and reports) to
give easy access to its users to know about
the holdings of the library.
2.3.6 Gifts and Exchange

Library often acquires some documents
as gifts. These gift items are handled by the
acquisition department of the library and

Acquisition is the process for obtaining
materials, after the selection. Acquisition
involves selecting vendors, placing orders,
sending reminders to vendors and finally
prbcessing the materials and bills when
received. In DSL, acquisition activity is
divided in three categories:
2.4.1 Books

After approval of the Book Selection
Committee, order for each title is placed
with appropriate vendor. As soon as a book
is received it is processed for acquisition,
classification, cataloguing and put on
display. Reminders are generated for nonreceipt of publications. Bills for the acquired
books are processed for payment.
Defence Science Library at present has
a total collection of about 55,000 books
which include handbooks, series
publications, advances in various subject
areas, conference proceedings, etc. Some
statistical data about acquisition of books in
DSL is given in Table 1.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1994,14(2)

Table 1
Year

No. of books
acquired

journals. Ten Society publications are
received throgh membership. DSL also
subscribes to newspapers and magazines
for general reading. The statistical data for
the subscription of journals in DSL during
the last few years is given in Table 2.

Table 2
Year

1988

No. of journals
subscribed
724

2.4.2 Periodicals & CD-ROMs

*

Periodicals and CD-ROMs are acquired
on subscription basis by placingorders with
various publishers through agent(s). The
agent takes the responsibility for proper
addressing of the periodicals and
CD-ROMs, claiming missing issues in the
case of periodicals, and notifying the library
when subscriptions fall due or when there
are changes in the subscription rates.
Foreign publications are also obtained in
the same manner. There are a few
periodicals which cannot be handled
through dealers, and require membership
with an association. Such titles are
subscribed directly by the library. Orders for
periodicals are placed annually. The title list
is decided well in advance latest by August
every year.
Defence Science Library currently has
around 32,000 bounded periodicals and
subscribes to 480 journals, in the field of
military science, computer science, library
science, materials science, physics,
chemistry, electronics, environment and
general sciences, out of which 50 are Indian
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1994,14(2)

Due to the financial crisis, subscription
of journals has decreased from the year
1990 onwards, but needs of the user
community of DSL is met by resource
sharing with various libraries.
2.4.3 Reports

Libraries
acquire
government
documents in a variety of ways. Some
libraries have standing orders through
official or commercial vendors, while others
purchase documents individually or acquire
most of their documents free of charge.
Some libraries have depository collections
with international agencies. Depository
collection is an agreement between the
library and the government publishing
body, which provides publications free of
charge.
Defence Science Library i s acquiring
reports mainly on subscription basis from
NASA, RAND, IHS for US military
9

specifications, and deposit/advance
remittance through USGPO, US Patent and
trademark office.
Defence Science Library has more than
83,000 technical reports, 18,000
standards/specifications, 8,000 patents,
12,000 reprints and 29,000 reports in
microfiche (SRIM) form.

2.5 Weeding
Weeding has been defined as 'the
practice of discarding or transferring to
storage excess copies, rarely used books
and materials no longer of use'. Before a
weeding program i s implemented, an
evaluation of library policies and goals must
take place. This evaluation should atso
include analysis of the present situation,
consideration of possible alternatives,
feasibility of a weeding program in terms of
library operations, faculty co-operation,
type of library involved, types of materials
collected, and cost. Some of the data for the
weeding program should come from the
collection evaluation activities that the
selection officers and others have
undertaken on a regular basis. An active
weeding policy should be a part of the
library's collection development policy.
Selection and weeding are similar activities
as both are necessary in effective collection
development program and require the
same type of decision-making rules. The
same factors that lead to the decision to add
an item can also lead to decision to remove
the item sometime later. So book selection
policy will also determine weeding policy.
Weeding out in DSL is carried out
annually, in which a team of experts under
guidance of the selection officer, prepare a
list for books which are old and not relevant
to the subject area covered by DSL, whose
new editions have been acquired and those
which are rarely used. Another list is
10

prepared for the books which are physically
damaged and can not be read. The first list
is sent to all the laboratories/establishments
of DRDO to know if any book or material
from the list is required by them for their
projects. The books which are demanded
by any laboratory are permanently
transferred to them. Fcr the rest of the
books which are not demanded by any
other lab and those physically damaged, a
meeting of weeding out board is called and
approval is taken from all the committee
members to weed them out from the library.

2.6 Evaluation
Evaluation of the collection completes
collection development cycle. Since it is
closely tied to the need assessment
activities it forms the basis for the next cycle.
Collection evaluation involves both
objects and activities as well as quantitative
and qualitative values. As there are so many
subjective and quantitative elements in
collection development, the person for
collection development should be an
intelligent, experienced and cultured
selection officer with diplomatic abilities.
DSL also has a selection officer with a team
of experts to evaluate, from time to time,
the usefullness, strengths and weeknesses
of the collection, and finally how effectively
the collection development has been
achieved.
Defence Science Library has a rich
collection of books and reports as well as
non-book material in the area of military
science and technology, lasers, computer
science, radar technology, optics, library
science and management. A good number
of reference sources covering almost all the
science subjects apart from military science
and library science are added to the
collection. These reference sources include
encyclopaedias, handbooks, directories,
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1994,14(2)

year-books, manuals and guides. All the
titles of Jane's publications and SlPRl
publications are -procured every year to
enrich the military science collection of the
library.
Another remarkable feature of DSL is
that it has a good number of important
society publications such as SPlE (Society
for Photo-optical Instrumentation
Engineers) covering areas of optics,
optoelectronics, lasers, communication,
electronics; IEEE titles in video cassettes,
etc.

the necessary skills. lnspite of all the
problems like paucity of funds, price hike,
limited resources, a person becomes
proficient in the process of developing a
balanced collection through professional
skills and practice only.

5. FURTHER READING
1.

Agrawal, SN. Procurement of
periodicals. IASLIC Bulletin, 1975,
20(1), 7-13.

2.

Augustine, CA. Acquisition of
government publications in Indian
libraries. IASLIC Bulletin, 1966, 9(1),
1-15.

3. RESOURCE SHARING
Now-adays cooperation and resource
sharing through interlibrary loan have
become essential part of collection
development policies and procedures. Rise
in the total number of items published each
year in all fields of knowledge and rapidly
inflating prices of both books and non-book
materials cause intolerable pressure on the
budgets o f a11 libraries. DSL i s also
influenced by such factors and efforts have
been made to fulfil the requirement of the
users by utilising the resources of important
Delhi based libraries viz. INSDOC, IIT, Delhi
University Library, IDSA, NPL, American
Centre Library, British Library, etc. DSL also
shares the resources of some very
important libraries located outside Delhi
viz. National Aeronautical Laboratory
(Bangalore), Bhabha Atomic Research
Centre (Trombay), Instruments Research
and
Development
Establishment
(Dehradun) to meet the requirements of the
DRCO scientists.

3.

International Library Movement1987,
9(2), 63-71.
4.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1994,14(2)

Bose, H. New process for acquisition
work. IASLIC Bulletin, 1968, 13(3),
219-21.

5. Chakrabarti, Ajit K. A treatise on book
selection. Delhi, DK Publishers, 1983.
300 p.
6.

Francis, S & Rippon, JS. Selection and
acquisition of library materials in
Asworth. Handbook o f special
librarianship. London, Aslib, 1965. pp.
35-78.

7.

Gupta, SP. & Bhatia, KK. Problems in
acquisition of scientific and technical
reports in research libraries. AGLlS
journal, 1988,6(1-4), 4-7.

8.

Kaula, PN. Periodicals in libraries genesis, peculiarities, problems and
treatment. Herald o f Library Science,
1989,28(1-2), 69.

9.

Ramesh Kumar. Effective acquisition of
society publications. IASLIC Bulletin,
1983,28(3), 107-16.

4. CONCLUSION
Selection and collection development
are arts, not sciences; and as with any
artistic endeavour, a person wishing to
practice art, must devote years to develop

Banwari Lal. Collection development

- A strategy, policy and observations.

11

