Global Communication Language
for Networks*
With the advancement in the field of
communications and computer hardware,
there is a growing need for having portable,
continuous and interactive access to
information. Although the developments in
wireless communication hardware hold
promise for this, the biggest hurdle in this
field is the existence of different protocols
which are used in data communication
process. This has raised a need for a
user-friendly, transparent and universal
communication language.
Telescript is an interpretedlanguage that
works independently any and all protocols
and transports. The developers of Telescript,
General Magic of USA plans to push
Telescript as a standard for any type of
network interaction from personal E-mail to
interaction over commercial data networks.
Like
language from Adobe
I
which has revolutionised printing by using
Programs '0 contrast the "You' of text and
graphic' On a Page, Telexri~t
is machine
independent and can run on printers of
different
and
resolution. Telescript promises to bring the
same intero~erabilit~to the networking
field. Like Postscript it is also an interpreted
Extracted from :
Wayner, Peter. Agents away. Byte, May 1994,113-1 8
DESlDOC 8uIktin of lnf Technol, 1994,14(3)

language independent o f hardware
platforms
and operating
- systems running it.
.
*

Advantages of Telescript
At present, a lot of time is taken by
messages to travel across the network
duri.ng a communication process.
Information travels in the form of small
packets across the network to a computer
and vice-versa taking twice the network
travel time.
Telescript allows user to bundle his
messages, requests and preferences into an
intelligent program that travels to a distant
computer in the network; gets answers to
the queries and returns with answers to the
host computer. This results in only two trips
across the network and saves time,
bandwidth and involves less cost.
The major difference between other
software communication
and
Telescript
is that Telescript
is

c or BASIC
computationa~~y
as powerful
and has built-in intelligence about how to
interact with other systems. Other
networking protoco~ssuch as Novell's IpX
or
IP merely pass packets of data
between computers and require a software
for manipulating the bits as they arrive.
Computer with Telescript can understand
any Telescript program that it receives on
3

the network because of built-in intelligence
in the program for making decisions based
on preferences. These packets of Telescript
code (Telescript programs) are called
Telescript agents. Of course, this would
require a network of computers running
Telescript interpreters. One such network
called AT&T Personal Link is expected to be
established shortly in USA.

How Telescript Works?
There are two types of Telescript-high
Telescript and low Telescript. High
Telescript i s a modern, high-level
object-orientedlanguage having simple and
clean semantics and is similar to an objectoriented version of Lisp. Telescript code is a
dynamically bound code at run time. The
Telescript interpreter handles garbage
collection and memory management and
provides security since such a program
(agent) can change or damage the host
system like a virus. High Telescript is sent to
a locally resident Telescript software which
consists of a converter and an interpreter.
Low Telescript is a simple stack-based
language running on Telescript interpreter
similar to Forth and Postscript. High
Telescript is designed for programmers
while low Telescript is easier to be handled
by the computer having small interpreter
size and minimises the memory usage by
agents and gives easy portability to the
interpreter. Low Telescript interpreter
requires run code which can be generated
by computer and thus it is easier to create
these without caring for semantic errors. Its
stack-based nature is easier for computer to
parse but difficult to humans to read.
In a network the system that provides
service requires only low Telescript while
the client machine needs the highTelescript
capability. Both these languages are used
without showing the actual language like
4

the PostScript code. The language can be
used through interface and pre-created
skeletal agents for collectingthe parameters
for the agent.
When the Telescript engine receives a
new agent, it converts it into low Telescript
and executes the GO command sending
the bundled agent to its destination.
Another version of GO command is sent
where an agent or sub agent creates its
version and sends them to all possibleways.
The Telescript engine saves an agent by
bundling up the agent's low Telescript code,
the program counter, the stack and any of
the memory-based objects owned by the
agent. This information is stored into one
bigfile and then sent over usingappropriate
network transports.
The destination of the agent can be
specified into one of the following four
ways.
The first two methods involve providing
a name or providing an address as 16-byte
generated tags unique to a particular place.
The name consists of the authority and
identity of the place while the address
consists of the authority and location of the
place. This method provides flexibility for
the changes in the nature of network as
more and more new services are
introduced on the network.
Third way i s that the agent finds
destination by asking from a directory the
machine offering the particular class of
cheapest service. In the fourth method, the
interpreter provides details of information
by specifying how to find address.

Security of Systems
Running Telescript on an interpreter
enables machine independence, ease of
porting, and security.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/, 1994, 143)

The security aspect assumes importance
as the world-wide network is also open to a
lot of unwanted programmes. Telescript
interpreter can check the identity of each
computer sending the request and allows
authorised users to access information.
Agents, being small intelligent programs,
are similar to viruses except that these
contain the identity which is required for
execution. After interpreting these agents,
the Telescript acts as an intermediate layer
that examines and executes each
instruction and can stop any agent trying to
do unwanted activity.
Another security feature i s the
incorporation of Teleclicks. Teleclicks are
equivalent of money coupons on the
network which limit the action of an agent.
While creating an agent, it is given a certain
amount ofTeleclicks to do its job depending
upon the expected CPU time to be used.

This feature can stop unauthorised use of
resources of host as well as over spending
by the client.
The third aspect of security is identity.
Each Telescript agent is sealed with a
cryptographically secure signature.
Telescript host can verify the security of the
agent from the signature and this will.also
help in billing for its services.
As on today Telescript offers a broad
vision in network communication and
despite its initial limitations, it has the
potential to become world standard in this
field. AT&T personal Link network will
demonstrate the capabilities of Telescript
and its real potential will be known when
many more network providers make use of
this technology.

(Ashok Kumar)

e golden vessels of the
mps to be he(d ever in the

- Richard De Busy

DESIDOC Bulleth of Inf Techno& 1994,14(3)

5

