FOCUS

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN LIBRARIESA FUTURISTIC PERSPECTIVE*
SS Murthy
Defence SCientific Information and Documentation Centre'
Metcalfe House, Delhi-ItO 054

1. INTRODUCTION

These technologies are operative in the
following environments,

The term information technology (IT) is
most commonly used.to mean computer
technology and comrnunicati9n technology.
The technologies of 'optical/vid~osystems
like CD~ROMs, are also. il)dudedin the
computersgroupbythel>ooks .and
periodicals on computer technology. In the
field of journalism, IT is generally meant as a
technology used for ·information
dissemination which.includes systems like
telex, fax, teleprinter and so on. For a
librarian, IT has a wider connotation which
includes the technologies and systems Uke
microfilms, microfiches, CD-ROMs,
computers, .information networks, etc. The
librarian's connotation of IT in my view
should include all those technologies which
the libraries and information centres use for
collection; processing, storage, retrieval and
dissemination of recorded information.

(i) Library Management (classification,
cataloguing,indexing, 'database
creation, CAS, SOI,etc)
(ii) library Automa;tion (organising
databases and autornatlng library
housekeeping op~ratiQns)
, .'
(iii) LibraryNetworking (forresource sharing
and inform~tiondiss¢mij,ation) ,
(iv) Reprography (photography, microfilms,
microfiches, .audio and video tapes,
printing, optical disks, etc)
(v) Technical Commullication(technical
writing, editing, publishing, 'including
OTP system's, etc) One may not agree with the broad scope
I have set out for IT; but Iwould like to stick
to it for the present, as all these areas are

..Basedot'l the First/LA Ranganathan MemeorialLecture delivered on 72 August 7994 at New Delhi.

- Database
- Cataloguing/
Indexing

- Database
Creation

Organisation &
Management

- Ubrary

- Ubrary Networks - Photography
- Microfilms
- Information
Networks
- Audlo/vMeo

Management

- Technical Wrlting
- Edltlng
- Publl~hhg

- Optlcal/digltal

Operations

- CAS
Figure 1. Areas of information technology
relevant to library management and it would
enable me to cover the developments in
these areas in a somewhat systematic
manner.

2. GLOBAL FUTURISTIC
SCENARIO
Any IT development usually first occurs in
an advanced country and then moves to the
developing countries like India. O f course,
during Dr Ranganathan's time, quite a few
innovations and new ideas in the field of
library science and technology were
generated in lndia and moved to the West.
But in other areas of IT mentioned above, the
technology transfer continues to be from the
First world to the Third World. While some
technologies move fast, many others move
slowly. Thus, if we consider the trends in
technological developments and the
predictions of these developments in the
advanced countrles, we can expect their
arrival to the Third World and particularly to
lndia in due course of time. So, I shall now

discuss first the futuristic scenario of the
advanced countries as predicted by experts*
and then present the possible IT scenario in
India. These projections will cover a period
of about a hedade from now. since the
developments are so vast and innumerable, I
have to be selective in discussion here.
Before I discuss any of these developments,
one important indicator I must mention, is
that during the next decade IT developments
are expected to be only 'evolutionary' and
not 'revolutionary'. This means, no pathbreaking or startling innovations that may
revolutionise the IT world are likely to take
place.

2.1. Library Management
Before I discuss the trends in the library
management, I must mention about the
developments in a closely related field,
namely education. Since libraries and
education go hand in hand, I shall mention
some of the IT developments in the field of
education which have a bearing on libraries.

An excdlent overview of the projections is given in Martin, j, et at. Information UK 2000. Bowker-Saur, London,
1991. pp. 7-34.
4

DESIDOC &nWetinof Inf Technol, 1W4,14(5)

>

Educational institutions, even middle and
high schools, will have increasing IT
environment.

>

Satellite channels dedicated to education
and training will increase.

>

Interactive training programmes through
cable TV will be quite common.
Multimedia (a combination of text,
graphics, pictures and animation) learning
stations will proliferate. Some electronic
universities, wherein all the educational
programmes are conducted through
electronic media and satellite channels,
are likely to come up.

>

Artificial intelligence (Al)-based training
will also increase.

Some of the developments which the
library managers will notice are :

o Library budgets will continue to decrease
in real terms. So, libraries will shift their
efforts from acquiring and maintaining
comprehensive collections to providing
comprehensive access to information
available in databases. This trend will lead
to continual increase i'n resource sharing
arrangements. Thus, libraries will
increasingly play the role of switching
centres rather than resource centres.
Also, use of CD-ROMs and other new
portable storage media will increase.
Image
databases and multimedia
publications will also increase. However,
shift towards the use of these IT media will
not be as fast as it should be, owing to the
resistance by users. Readers will continue
to prefer paper-based literature as far as
possible because of the ease of use. They
will use new media only as an alternative
whenever necessary. This will keep the
use of paper on the increase, in spite of
the increasingusage of the electronic and
optical media. Parallelly, more and more
scientific and technical information, and
reference information used for corporate

functions will be disseminated online and
on CD-ROM.

o Remote browsing of libraries through
networks and teledelivery of documents
(reading o f text remotely and
downloading of electronic publications
and training courses) will come into use.
Similarly, music or video materials will be
available for listening or viewing from
hgmes, the desired portions being
downloaded for subsequent use - all on
payment basis. Such facilities may largely
replace audiolvideo rental shops and also
lead to reduction in sales of such items.

o Depth of technical processing like
classification, cataloguing/indexing by
the libraries will reduce. These activities
will be contracted out.
o The information retrieval systems will be
more and more user-friendly and
customised. So, library users will
increasingly be carrying out information
searches online and on CD-ROM by
themselves and ordering document
copies through e-mail or on networks.
Information intermediaries will be
required only for specialised and
complicated searches. They will be using
expert systems and hypertext methods
also for carrying out such searches.

o Since information services will be priced
by almost every organisation, users'
expectations will be much higher in terms
of relevance, currency and accuracy.
Pricing of online searches may depend
more on results rather than on the time of
search and the quantum of information
retrieved. As the priceslcharges for
information services increase, litigations
on the responsibility for accuracy or
authenticity may come in.

o Many organisations may integrate their
bibliographic and MIS databases for
operating decision support systems.
5

o Library services will be increasingly
expected to be self-reliant and budgetary
support will be decreasing continuously.
Governmental support to libraries to keep
up their services to the public will be
questioned and debated.

o Value-added services of libraries, like
current awareness, SDI, digests, etc will
mekt with increasing competition from
private agencies.
Concurrently,
partnership of public and private sector
agencies will grow i n providing
information services.

o Retroconversion of catalogue data of
major libraries' into machine-readable
format will be completed by the end of
this decade. Most of such libraries will
operate OPAC (online public access
catalogue).

o Database producers will play a more
powerful role in providing access to their
databases than vendors or hosts. This will
lead to the producers taking over of the
marketing of t h e ' databases and
developing the necessary sales forces or
arrangements. As regards retrieval
efficiencies, Boolean searching models
will be replaced by other methods such
as similarity/word-association-based
searching methods.

o Library networks will develop more
rapidly and will form subsets of major
national networks.

o Library suppliers will make stock
information available online. Acquisition
staff in libraries will therefore be able to
know the availability of the titles required
and place instant orders electronically.

o Bookshops will offer more and more of
non-paper and composite media (a combination of paper, floppy, video, e t ~ )
publications. Readers will increasingly use
pocket computers, lap-top computers or
6

other PCs, to manipulate the information
and download for their notes.

o Traditional library posts will decrease.
Library professi~nals'willbe increasingly
called upon to function as specialised
information intermediaries, database
producers, online information providers,
information network managers and so on.
For functioning effectively in these roles,
library professionals will need good
educational qualifications, wide general
reading and good communication skills,
IT skills, initiative and readiness to adapt
to the new technologies. They will
necessarily have to work very hard to
occupy top positions.

2.2. Computers and
Telecommunications
There will be several changes in the fields
of computers and communications in the
coming decade and it will be quite difficult
to cover all those changes because, firstly,
being basically a library professional, Icannot
comprehend all the changes expected in the
world of computers and communications. I
believe even a specialist in computers cannot
do justice for such a coverage i n
telecommunications and vice versa.
Secondly, all the changes in these fields may
not be relevant to libraries and so need not
be covered. Therefore, I would restrict my
coverage of these fields to the changes
expected in the coming years as relevant to
the library professionals. Some of them are as
follows.

2.2.1. Hardware

o In the coming decade we will see faster
processors, increased memory and
cheaper mass storage, and overall
reduction in hardware prices will
continue. Parallel computing techniques
will increase. This is considered
advantageous in searching bibliographic
DESNXX= Bvlleth, of lnf Techno/,1W4,14(5)

databases, as using parallel processing
architecture and techniques, one can
partition a database and search the
portions parallelly on different
processors. The use of specialised
coprocessors for bibliographic information processing applications such as
text compression and string matchingwill
also increase. In the parallel processing
environment, the database structure will
shift from inverted files to serial files as
they can be more readily distributed
across a parallel processing system. This
arrangement *ill permit quicker updating
of text databases.

o PCs will have more and more power and
PC-based networks will provide a viable
alternative to minis and small mainframes.

o Much of the memory of the PCs will be
occupied by system software, more
sophisticated
packages,
and
graphics-based interfaces. PCs will have
voice outputs also. They will take voice
inputs from newslineand give printouts of
desired portions in desired formats.
Portable (hand-held) PCs will be very
common. Laptop PCs which can provide
colour pictures and animation, with
cellular and infrared networking
capabilities will be available.

o Speech (limited vocabulary) and t~uchsensitive screens will be increasingly used
but the keyboardwiH continue to be used
for accessing databases.

o Disk storage will be used to a greater
extent than tape storage as the costs of
the former will continue to decrease.

o Digital image processing (DIP) systems,
similar to fax machines but faster, will be
increasingly used for processing large
number of document images. Digital
signal processors will be used for reading
and enhancingof poor quality originals of
documents. More and more powerful
DESIDOC Bulbtin of lnf Technd, 1W4,14(5)

scanners will be available which can
capture
a
whole
document
instantaneously rather than line by line.

o Dramatic changes in software are unlikely
because of high investments required for
achieving path-breaking or startling
developments and the high costs of
expert manpower.
I

o UNlX will be the most widely used
operating system. CASE tools and
object-oriented programming will be
more widely used.
o Full text databases with irnages/graphics
will increase. It is unlikely that natural
language processing or speech
processing techniques or expert systems
will be commonly used for searching large
databases because of the huge amount of
knowledge base required for efficient
retrieval. Simllarly, hypertext databases
are also not likely to be used widely
because of the high manpower costs of
their treation 'and other problems. The
need to acquire new reading skills will
inhiblt their use except for integratingtext,
sound and image data.
1

2.2.3. Telecommunications

o Telecom will heavily influence computer
specifications as online networks will be
more and more common.

o Voice traffic will continue to grow but
non-voice .traffic (data and graphics
through,fax, e-mail, file transfer, etc) will
grow faster. Video phones will mostly
replace the existing phones.

o Packet-switching networks will continue
to expand. Charges for inland and
international calls over these networks
will continue to fall but the quality and
range of facilities will continually improve.

o The channels of valueadded networks
(VANS) will be mainly used for online
access to databases.

o Wireless communication systems-which
can make and receive long-distance calls
and divert the calls to persons who are on
the move on road, rail or aeroplane-will
come up in a decade or two. The
development of intelligent pocket
computers with built-in communication
facilities, will bring in the era of 'Virtual
Enterprises' which will not be confined to
the limits of walls of buildings but employ
and get work done by suitable persons
wheresoever they be located in the world.
Such persons will be able to receive
messages and instructions even while on
the move.

o PABX systems connected to public
telephone exchanges (CENTRIX) will be
quite common and these will successfully
compete with traditional PABX systems.
ISDN (Integrated Services Digital
Network) will be available but its use will
not be as much as presently expected.
Telex, being obsolete will decline fast.
Higher and higher capacity digital
transmission channels will be available at
rapidly falling communication costs. By
the year 2000 AD, channels with,data
transfer rate of up to 4 G bits/s will be
available. Demand for private channels
will exceed the supply, leading to a steep
increase in the prices of such channels.

o X-terminal with x-window communication protocol will >playan increasingly
important role in network operations. This
coupled with a laser printer will be
commonly used for retrieval of textual
and graphic information instead of ASCII
terminal and dot-matrix printer.

o Because of high R&D costs in this field,
telecom companies, even large ones, will
increasingly collaborate in carrying out

R&D projects and also in executing large
projects/installations. Small companies
will form consortia to survive the
onslaught of telecom giants.

o Standardisation problems in the areas of
telecommunications, computing and
broadcasting and related areas will
continue.

2.3. Reprography
3

In this category I would like to cover, as
stated earlier, the areas of audio and video
including digital optical systems, as relevant
to libraries. The following are some of the
important developments expected to take
place in the coming years.

o The coming decade will be an era of
image processing. For archival storage of
documents, document image processing
and digital optical storage will replace
microfilm systems. Similarly, electronic
media will replace 16 mm film fully (this
has already become outdated) and 35
mm film gradually. Electronic disk still
cameras will out perform 35 mm cameras.
Full-length productions will be distributed
on disc. Digital HDTV (high-definitionTV)
will not be common till the middle of the
first decade of the twenty first century.
Thereafter it will dominate over the
analogue HDTV in the market.

o Presently, CD-ROM does not provide
high performance searches in a multi-user
environment, and is presently being used
as a transfer medium. Databases on
CD-ROM are transferred to hard disk and
put in multi-usersystems for enabling high
performance searches. This will change.
High performance multi-user CD-ROM
systems will be available and CD-ROM
networks will be common. Also,
CD-ROM networks with OSI architecture
will be in use. We will also see portable
CD-ROM readers, and CD-TV shortly.
DESlDOC Bulletln of Inf Technol, 1994,14(5)

0

Optical disk (OD) will dominate in the
area of video systems. Interactive O D
with sound, text and graphics will be
common in libraries. However, WORM
will also continue.

o Digital video will gradually come into use
but will not supersede analogue video in
the video film consumer market in the
coming decade.

of the World (of National Geographic
Society), and 1993 Time Almanac in
CD-ROM format

o Books and journals will have a shorter
span of currency. Market for popular
paperbacks and magazines will largely be
affected by entertainment systems like
laptop TVs and portable videos and
players.
*

2.4. Technical Communication
Effective communication of information is
an integral part of information dissemination.
Before any information is disseminated, it is
to be repackaged or reshaped to match the
requirements of the user. Such repackaging
calls for high communication skills both in
form (medium) and content (language, style,
typography, graphics, etc). However, this
area is generally not given adequate
emphasis in the library science schools.
Development of communication skills and
use of appropriate technologies greatly helps
the library professionals and they would do
well after knowing the developments in this
area also. The following are some of the
major developments expected to influence
the library profession in the coming years.

o Notwithstanding the proliferation of
electronic publications, publications in
print form will increase. Most professional
publications will continue to be in print
form. The number of publications coming
out both in print and in electronic form
will increase only gradually. The shift to
electronic publication will gather
momentum with the increase of print
production costs, ease of retrieval of
information and ease in updating
information. In the coming years we will
see textbooks also published in CD-ROM
and in multimedia along with the printed
versions. Already we see New Grolier
Multimedia Encyclopedia, Guinnes
Multimedia Disk of Records, Picture Atlas
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1 W4,16(5)

o Ondemand publishing will be common.
This method ensures preservingof edited,
composed and formatted text in
electronic form and producing copies
only on receipt of orders. Buyers will have
choice of type style, paper, binding and
so on. This will obviate the need for
holding large stocks of publications by
publishers and distributors.
o More and more authors will generate
their works on DTP systems and use
spellchecks, thesauri, and style checkers
and provide camera-ready copy (CRC) to
publishers. Many of the authors will be
designers of their own publications and
some of them will bring out multimedia
publications. Editorial work will alsp be
carried out by exchanging messages and
comments electronically during the
pre-CRC stage. Authors will increasingly
publish their own works and make
distribution arrangements with marketing
and
distribution agencies. This will
increase the problem of bibliographic
control.
o Publishers may enter data about their
publications directly into the national
bibliographies. Archival repositories will
receive more and more documents in
electronic form.

o Copyright and inteltectualproperty rights
problems will continue.

o Multimedia presentations for presenting
scientific, technical and research ideas
will be common.

3. INDIAN FUTURISTIC SCENARIO
As you are aware, in India there are
pockets of excellence in several subject areas
while in many areas the level of attainment is
not significant. As someone said, we have the
jet aeroplanes and bullock carts operating
parallelly in the aviation and agricultural
sectors respectively. Similarly, in some of the
IT areas, lndia is not much behind the
advanced countries, particularly in the
computer software development, library
management methods and techniques, etc.
The country's achievements in the field of
telecommunications and computer
hardware are also significant if we look at the
work of C-DOT and CDAC under the
Department of Electronics, and ANURAG in
DRDO. However, in the field of reprography,
including audio and video technologies,
there are hardly any notable innovations and
we have been only using these systems and
equipment after importing them. But the
coming years are expected to witness certain
developments which may change the present
sceriario for the better. Against this
background I would venture to make some

predictions on the IT futuristic scenario.
Again, I shall proceed to present some
important developments in the four broad
areas of IT which I mentioned earlier.

3.1. Library Management
As you may be aware there are about 230
universitylibraries, 5200 college libraries and
3290 special libraries (libraries in R&D and
other specialised institutions) in India. While
most of the libraries do not use If for their
activities, the situation in S&T libraries, which
come under the category of Special Libraries
is somewhat better. A good number of
libraries, though a small number when
compared to the total number of libraries in
the country, use current IT products and
systems like computers, e-mail, CD-ROMs,
and online searching. Table 1 gives a
sirpplistic view of such use.
Although the use of IT in libraries is
presently quite low, it is expected to go up in
the coming years with the prices of the
hardware and general software coming
down. Also, the extent of use in the libraries
which are already using the IT will increase
several-fold.
In the academic institutions the following
picture is likely to emerge.

Table 1. Use o f IT products/systems in Indian libraries

Product/sptern

No. of libraries

Computers

272

(3% of 8700 libraries)

CD-ROM systems

53'

(0.6% of 8700 libraries)

Online searching of foreign databases

93

(1% of 8700 libraries)

E-mail

125**

Source : NALANDA database compiled by ILA.
A supplier of CD-ROM systems has claimed in an informal discussion that his firm has supplied over 300
systems in the country but all of them may not have been installed in libraries.
** R&D institutions have e-mail facility which is also available to their libraries.

-.

10

DEStfX3C BulIe#n of Inf Technol, 1W4.14C5)

o More and more university departments,
colleges and elite schools will have more
IT environment. Their libraries will also be
using PCs.
o A dedicated TV channel is likely to come
up for education and training.

o Multimedia learning systems will be
available in many elite institutions.

o Al-based training will be available at
advanced training institutions (including
those in the R&D and industrial sector)

searches and in using
system/hypertext methods.

expert

o About 75 per cent of the retroconversion
of library holdings data will be completed
in special libraries by 2000 AD. A large
number of databases will come up in S&T,
industrial and commercial sectors.

o Major library suppliers will provide stock
position through email and some online.
They will supply more non-paper and
composite publications.

In the lndian libraries, the scenario may be
as follows :

3.2. Computers and
Telecommunications

o Budgets will decrease in real terms.

o Many of the new computer hardware and

Emphasis will shift from comprehensive
collections to comprehensive access t o
information.

related technologies coming up in the
advanced countries will be arriving in
lndia owing to the large market and
globalisation of the lndian economy.

o Library science as a discipline will have
limited growth. The field will be
increasingly dominated by IT. Library
professionals are likely to lose top
positions to other IT specialists. To go up
in the profession, and to acquire senior
positions, library science specialists will
have to develop expertise in database
production, network management, etc.

o Resource sharing will grow only slowly.
Use o f CD-ROMs will increase.
Multimedia collections will develop only
in the libraries of etite institutions.

o Shift to the use of IT among library users
will not be as fast as we expect. Readers'
preference will continue for the
paper-based materials.

o Remote browsing and teledelivery of
documents will be used only on an
experimental level.

o More and more library users will carry out
CD and online searches by themselves.
So, library professionals must develop
expertise in conducting complicated
DESDOC &Netin of Inf Technd, 1994,14(5)

o In software, more and more powerful
indigenous packages will come up.
Expert systems and artificial intelligence
systems will be used only by a few elite
libraries and information centres, on an
experimental basis.

o Packet-switched networks will be
common by the year 2000 AD. However,
tariffs for the communication services
may not come down. Digital transmission
will be available on trunk routes. Glass
fibres .and optical laser channels will be
introduced in a limited way.

o Library networks like DELNET, CALIBNET,
INFLIBNET and a few other metropolitan
networks will be operational by 2000 AD.
However, the level of services will
significantly vary among them in terms of
sophistication and efficiency.

3.3. Reprography
o Many of the new systems/equipment
developed in the advanced countries will
be arriving in lndia for use. A few lndian

ones will also come up based either on
licence production or indigenous
development. But the R&D efforts in this
field in the country will not be significant
barring a few sporadic efforts and
developments.

3.4. Technical Communication
Although there is hardly any R&D work
going on in the country in this field, advanced
systems like the colour-graphics-based DTP,
parallel-processor-based composing and
multimedia technical presentation systems
will be used. In the coming years we will find
the following scenario :

o Ondemand publishing will be common.
Authors will increasingly use DTP for
preparing their texts. Product
(publication) design by authors will. not
however be common.

o By the year 2000 AD, there will be only a
few electronic publications, not more
than a couple of dozens and thereafter
this speed will increase to a considerable
extent.

o Multimedia technical presentations will
be common among elite institutions.
o Laptop TVs and portable videos will be
common.

4. CONCLUSION
I have so far presented a futuristic IT
scenario both at the international level and
at the national level, based on my perception
and projection of the IT developments. Some
of them may happen and some may not
happen and yet some others may happen in
a different way. But you can see one
important point in all these developments.
Ranganathan's principles will continue to be
relevant in most of the developments of the
present and the future. For example, all
databases and CD-ROM products are aimed
basically at saving the time of the user
(reader) in getting exhaustive as well as
specific information. Again, some users feel
comfortable to use these current media while
some others will continue to prefer
paper-based information. %,, every user or
reader will get his medium and every medium
will have its users. Thus, if you try to correlate
the famous Five Laws of Ranganathan with
the IT-based library setvices you will find all
of them will be relevant in the new library
environment. I hope R&D work will be
carried out to adopt his methods and
techniques like Colon Classification and
Chain Indexingto the library and information
activities and services in the current IT
environment.

"New opinions are always suspected, and usually
opposed, without any other reason but because they are
not already common."

.
12

- John Locke
-

DESIDOC Bultetin of Inf Tshnol, 1W4,14(5)

