MACHINE TRANSLATION
Ashok Kumar

DESIDOC, Metcalfe House, Delhi-1 10 054
ABSTRACT

Machine translation (MT) i s an important technology which assumes
significance in view of increasing globalisation and sharing of information
among all the countries. The article attempts to bring the status and various
features of MT to the notice of providers and users of information. MT has
moved from mainframes to personal computer and is thus available to all for
personal and organisational use. The paper describes various types of MT
systems and the processes involved in translation. It also gives a brief idea of
development of MT systems and the software available.

1.

INTRODUCTION

I n the present 'information age'
computers are being used for processing,
storage and retrieval of information. At the
same time, the need for sharing of this
information among all countries of the world
has also been felt. Faster communication
techniques are being used for easy portability
of information. But the existence of
information in different languages still
remains one of the barriers in its use
world-wide.
Machine translation (MT) is an important
technology for converting information from
one language into another with the help of a
DESIDOC 8deffn of Inf Technol, 1W4, 14(6)

computer. However, the large number of
languages prevalent in the world make
translation a huge task, for example, just 9
languages require 72 different directions by
way of combination for translation. MT
attempts to provide fast translation ability on
not only desktop computers but also on
laptops in future.

2. HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
MT involves many complex tasks and it is
the earliest kind of natural language
processing. The first translation machines
were designed in the early 30s and after the
design of ENlAC in 1946, dwelopment of MT
picked up momentum. The advent of
3

computers in 1940s led to increased
experimentation .in this area. MT was
launched as a scientific enterprise in 1949.
The technical feasibility of machine was
demonstrated in USA, by IBM in 1954 which
encouraged government funding for
research in this area. However, much of the
early enthusiasm was dampened with the
emergence of linguistic complexities and
crude quality of translation produced by this
method. High costs of inputting and delay in
the development of optical character
recognition technology also contributed to
further disappointment.
In 1960s, research in the field of MT was
slow and the area was almost ignored by the
computer scientists, librarians, information
scientists and linguists. It was almost
forgotten by the common public. 1970s saw
the revival of interest in MT and this time the
researcher adopted more modest objectives.
They aimed at translation that is good enough
for a particular purpose and which may not
be stylistically adequate but succeed in
conveying the intended message. In the 80s,
better and better systems were developed
and now MT is available on desktop PCs.
The first generation systems for MT
adopted word-to-word approach using large
bilingual dictionaries. These systems were
designed specifically for a specific pair of
languages. In the second approach which
lead to the development of second
generation systems, the input text was
analysed independently of the target
language using syntactic and semantic
representations and then the output is
reconstructed into the target language. This
approach facilitated development of
multilingual systems. Further research lead to
development of semantics-based and
interactive MT systems. These systems are
discussed in detail under the types of MT
systems.
4

3. MTTODAY
Machine Translation is not a new idea, but
it has found greater awareness or more
favourable response now with the use of PCs.
MT was earlier restricted to mainframes due
to high requirements of processing power
and storage capacity. Unlike interpretors,
translators normally produce written output
which makes translation a slow process.
Computers can do this activity faster and free
human translator for more creative aspects of
the job.
MT analyses text in the source language
and automatically generates sentences in the
translated language. The computer requires
machine-readabletext as input and produces
translated text as output. MT too involves
human assistance but differs from MAT
(machine-assisted translation), where a
human translator performs the translation
and prepares the translated text using word
processors, automatic terminology
managers, dictionaries text-critiquing
software, repetition-processing to enhance
productivity. Already most of the translators
use these tools including full MT.
Machine Translation works best if the
subject matter is specific or restricted. The
translation quality improves further if the
original text is straightforward and devoid of
ambiguities, for example, maintenance
manuals which are consistent in style and
vocabulary.
Currently efforts in the field of MT are o n
to develop systems capable of handling
difficult text types and language
combinations with least human assistance
and translating between languages having
different alphabet structures. Today's PCs
possess enough processing power required
for such jobs which were till now
mainframe-dependent. Because MT involves
looking at different ways a sentence can be
parsed depending on various meanings and
DESIDOC BuHetln of Inf Technd, 1W4,14(6)

roles of each word, it takes a lot of time on
these choices and in applying available rules.
At present 386 and 486 PCS high-end Mac
and UNlX machines can handle such jobs,
but it depends on the availability of software
for these platforms.
The move of MT from mainframe to PC
has led to other advantages. Now it is
possible to use OCR, CD-ROM, modems and
facsimile for inputting text, downloading
databases and also to exchange computer
readable information world-wide.
The cost of converting the input text to
machine-readable form is also debatable.
But the widespread use of OCR technology
and the availability of text in digital form is
making it more feasible.
With database management tools for
retrieving terminology and previously
translated text, style checkers and DTP
software, added with tools to create own
dictionaries and linguistic rules, one can
customise the basic architecture of an MT
system.
Local Area Networks (LAN) offers
costeffective MT systems to a large group of
users. The translation can be done on a
less-used CPU in the network while the large
lexicon and specialised glossaries can be
stored at one location for use by all. Use of
LAN also facilitates the control of updates at
a central place for consistency in translation.
Large number of dial-up services are available
for MT. The files can be exchanged using a
modem on networks.
Machine Translation can also be
integrated with DTP process. One can retain
the tags (identification name for paragraph
format in DTP) of input text in translation, so
that the output is also ready for DTP after
translation. This can save a lot of cost and
time in providing printed translated
documents. Graphics and tables of the
original can be retained, avoiding redrawing
DESIWC Wthof Inf Technol, 1994, 14(6)

efforts. MT also prevents errors occurring
during re-inputting.

4. THE PROCESS OF MT
Although translation is one of the most
complex type of processes, it has certain
common elements .
In an MT system there are three sets of
data: input text, translation program and
permanent resident sources. The most
essenial component is a dictionary of words
and phrases of source language against
which input text i s matched during
translation. Knowledge sources also include
the sets of rules that are fired at various points
in the translation process. In addition, there
is a bank of information about the concepts
invoked by the dictionary.
In large MT systems, dictionaries hold
numerous words. For each word, a record
holds formalised representation of
information about how the word functions.
These dictionaries occupy many megabytes
of storage memory.
To begin with, an MT system matches the
words of input text with those in dictionary
through index. For each word, it retrieves a
complete record which includes information
about the possible functions of the word and
its relationship to words that may occur with
it.

5. TACKLING THE PROBLEMS OF
AMBIGUITIES
Any natural language has inherent
ambiguities which cannot be tackled using
pure logic. It is a difficult task for the
computer to translate the language
accurately. Researches have indicated, that
MT systems must remove at least five layers
of ambiguity before it can map sentences
from one language to another with some
degree of accuracy.

In the first stage every word is viewed in
the context of the sentence. Using grammar
(stored as set of rules), the MT operates at
syntactic stage. In the next stage, using more
intelligent rules, it goes beyond syntax to
semantic stage which is not present in most
of the low end systems.
Processing at this lexical semantic stage
introduces another confusion arising out of
multiple meanings of words. This is generally
solved using sentence level semantics in the
third layer.
The fourth layer of difficulty deals with
ambiguities introduced at sentence level of
the semantic stage (e.g. to analyse the
meaning of prepositions). The fifth layer of
ambiguity concerns more technical issues,
such as ellipses and amphora and calls for
processing at a discourse level. Only a few
systems have this ability.

6. I M P R O V I N G QUALITY O F THE
TRANSLATION
Depending upon the time availability the
human translator can interact before, during,
or after the automatic translation process, but
for routine translation jobs, this interaction
can certainly be avoided.
Presditing: In this method the editor
(operator) intervenes before translation to
eliminate lexical and structural ambiguities by
either revising the text by editing software, or
by customising the text for translation
according to pre-established rules and
vocabulary; this method is called pre-editing.
Although this makes it easier for the machine,
it requires editing of output too. But it is
advantageous while translating from one
language to many languages.
Interactive Editing: Here the editor
responds to the questions posed by the
computer during the process, The computer
offers various alternatives, and the operator
clicks on the most appropriate choices. This
6

reduces. manual editing required after or
before the translation.
Post-editing: The post-editor can use
word-processors and macros to speed up the
process. Though post-editing i s more
laborious it gives control over the quality of
text. This can be avoided if a rough translation
is needed for a large number of readers.
Depending on the text, the translation output
can be doubled (comparedto hwman output)
upto 3000 to 10,000 words per day (8 hours).
Depending on the requirement, either a
thorough translation or only a rough
translation may be needed. The rough
translation may convey the information but a
thorough translation captures all the nuances
of the original text. Most of the translations
are still performed by people but computers
have increasingly been used for this purpose.
The use of MT depends on the need of
the users. In the case of time-bound jobs, the
quality need not be perfect because the style
and subject matter of sources varies. Such
jobs can be handled by the general purpose
systems. These systems have large and
detailed dictionaries, knowledge sources and
grammar rule bases. However, the output is
inferior to the output produced by specific
domain systems.
Translation quality improves as the
systems acquire more rules and larger
detailed lexicons through use. As the
dictionaries and rules bases grow laqger, less
and less human intervention is required. The
other factors which affect quality are
structural proximity of two languages, the
domain, and the type of text. The quality
required of the translation also depends on
its intended use. Human intervention is
needed to make the raw machine translation
acceptabte by further polishing.
General purpose MT systems can speed
up the work of in-house translators who
produce publication quality copy in various
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1W4,14(6)

subject areas. The most widespread use of
MT is in translating text in limited domains
(manuals etc). This reduces ambiguity and
keeps terminology consistent even when the
quantity of job is very large.

7. TYPES OF M T SYSTEMS
Languages are complicated, and this
makes translation a formidable challenge.
Each language is unique, with elements that
make it colourful and special. But it also
makes a language difficult to translate for a
human or machine.
Automated translation is feasible because
some applications like technical documents
are straightforward. As MT systems evolve,
they will take on the challenge of general
translation.
MT systems can be categorised as direct,
transfer or still complex inter-lingual systems.
They can also be categorised as those whose
knowledge bases are built by humans and
those that collect their rules statistically.

7.1 Direct-translation Systems
These systems include software that
translates languages by replacing source
language words with target-language words.
These are suitable for applications where text
having limited vocabulary and definite style
i s translated. The systems contain
correspondence lexicons and clarity of
replacement patterns. Such a system can
handle similar languages like English and
German but have problems in handling
non-similar languages like English and
Chinese or Japanesebecause of difference in
grammar and other unique features of these
languages.
Direct MT systems need massive lexicons
of specific words and phrases. These lexicons
become more cumbersome as they grow and
contain many redundant entries. The latest
systems include analysis of wordform and
DESIDOC Bulletin of lnf Techmi, 1W4, 14(6)

structure and remove commonalties by
creating a root and rules for deviation.

7.2 Syntactic-transfer Systems
These systems have evolved from direct
systems and use software to analyse the input
sentence and then apply linguistic and lexical
rules, called transfer rules, to map
grammatical information from one language
to another. Using 'parser' software, these
systems identify the structure of the input
senteke to an acceptable level. After
creating a parsing tree, the system uses its
transfer rules to rewrite the tree according to
the syntax of target language. Then a
sentence generator program builds
sentences and takes care of proper tense and
number.
For deeper analysis and better translation,
shallow semantic transfer systems analyse
sentences for their meaning. Such systems
have been developed using advances in
computational linguistics and Al. These
capture the meaning of sentences and then
apply transfer rules to rewrite the result in
target language.
Programs called 'analysers' have been
developed, which often contain a parset and
identify the appropriate representation term
for each word or phrase and assemble the
terms into a coherent structure. The systems
generator finds appropriate target language
words for the semantic frames it encounters.

7.3. Inter-lingual Systems
These systems use software to translate
text by using a central data representation
notation called
inter-lingual. Only
experimental prototypes have been
developed which run on workstations.
Inter-lingual systems can usually produce
several paraphrases of the input sentence
using semantic analysers and generation
rules. More and more powerful generators

are being developed to handle the
complexity of languages.
Inter-lingual systems require more
detailed analysis than is necessary for any
language combination, resulting in
overloading of the generator and failure if it
exceeds the flexibility of the interlingua.
These systems also use less number of
rules and thus perform better on multi-lingual
MT systems instead of having transfer rules
for each language pair. They create one
representation midway between all the
languages which means, less human effort is
required to construct transfer rules. Adding
a new language to an inter-lingual system is
therefore easier and the system is language
neutral.

7.4 Statistical Systems
The inter-lingual and transfer systems
require large lexicons and rule sets to make
it robust when handling new text. In direct
MT, the information i s encoded in
dictipnaries, phrases and words; in transfer
system, the data is placed in grammar,
lexicons and transfer rules. Inter-lingual
systems contain the information in
representation databases and lexicons.
The work required for creating such
systems is erlormous and therefore attempts
to acquire the requisite information
automatically have gained momentum
recently, leading to the statistical systems. In
statistical systems, the computer creates a
correspondence lexicon from an existing
body of parallel text in two languages, using
programs to line up each word in a sentence
with its foreign counterpart. Over 90 per cent
accuracy has been achieved in automatically
developing correspondence lexicon of
words and phrases. Translation is then done
by direct substitution followed by the
recording of words using statistically derived
rules.
8

But statistically-base'd systems require
large mainframe systems to build and store
their correspondence lexicons. They also
need millions of sentences of parallel text
containing the words to be translated.

7.5 Hybrid Systems
Recent developments show that it is
possible to create hybrid statistically-based
transfer systems, where the correspondence
lexicon contains not only words and phrases
but syntactic terms that represent line,
number and part of speech. Such systems
can thus minimise the human effort required
in lexicon, grammar, and rule construction.

8. DEVELOPMENTS 1.N MT
SYSTEMS
Japan has been one of the most active
countries in the development of MT systems.
ATLAS-1 is a syntax-based system-world's
first commercially available English-Japanese
translation system. The prototype was
completed in 1982. ATLAS-1 1 i s a
semantic-based system which translates from
Japanese to English although its ultimate aim
is to translate into three or more languages.
Both these systems require per- as well as
post- editing work. These systems also have
benefited from research in the area of
artificial intelligence.
I n USA, the first commercial
system-MicroCAT
computer-based
appeared in 1983. At present the Sun
Microsystem Sparc station and other
midrange Unix workstations are host to many
commercial MT systems. Engspan is a recent
system designed on 386 machines by
American Health Organisation. This system
translates from English to. Spanish and is
derived from the earlier system developed on
mainframe computers.
East Asian Consortium ClCC (Centre of
the International Co-operation for

Computerisation) has been working on
building such system working with groups in
East Asian countries. Such systems in US
include KBMT (Carnegie Mellon University),
Ultra (New Mexico State University) and
Panglose (jointly developed by the above two
un-iversities and University of Southern
California) with many multiple chained
workstations. PC versions may be available
by the year 2000 AD.

UeeMng for MT

o Have an appbcation for whi
appropriate.

o Make the input for translation a v a i W
inmachmereadabhtom, otherwise $re

cost increases significantly.
o There should be a large volume of
material for translation (approx. 160,000

japan is leading in R&D work for speech
translation. The ATR (Advanced Telecom
Research) Institute at Kyoto, japan has
developed a prototype translatingtelephone,
enquiries about configuration registration
which aims at translating anyone's speech
without customisation to specific voice
patterns using a vocabulary of 1500 words.
Speech-recognition systems use
microphone with software which match
incoming sounds against stored patterns to
produce a string of text with 90 per cent
accuracy. Another system from NEC can
recognise 5000 isolated words or a
1500-word vocabulary of fluid speech.
In Germany, a project called Verbmobile,
to build a portable translator device is under
progress. This system uses English as a kind
of interlingua for translating business
discussions.
The multi-lingual information retrieving
systems are expected to be commercially
available to provide information on selected
topics by giving a collection of keywords or
a few relevant paragraphs. A multilingual
information retrieval system developed by
Fujitsu Labs (Japan)can translate query words
from German or English into Japanese to
retrieve relevant articles, translate their titles
and a request to translate even full article.
An MT machine developed at Carnegie
Mellon University, using optical scanning
and OCR technology, translates the text
placed on its face plate. This technology may
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1994, 14(6)

wdrds per month).

o Initially have only one subject (domain);
it can be expanded as experience is
gained in using MT.

o The text to be translated should contain
no ambiguities.

o Good word processing support and
skilled operators should be available.

o Have positive attitude abaut using MT,
.

especially in the beginning stage which
involves customizing the dictionaries
and gaining proficiency in post-editing.

o Buy software according to Identified
criteria specific for your needs, also look
for customer support from vendor,

o Test the systems on randomly selected
texts, making sure that outputs to be
compared are under the same
conditions.

o The software should be easy to use and
the system should be well maintained.

o Know the language combinations that
have been developed for the system,
the size of dictionaries or knowledge

bases.

o Know the ease with which dictionaries
can be added and
potential
expandability to indude the domain of
you interest.

be available commercially in general domain
a
in the next 10 years.

A hand-held word-translation device,
called Passport, uses holography to input
text. The user can photograph a piece of text
which is shown on its display. You select the
words by circling them and the machine
provides a translation on an LCD using
bilingual dictionary chip for each language.
Another machine called Signspeak can
translate American sign language for
hearing-impairedand spoken English using a
glove with sensors to track arm movements.
C-Star system jointly developed by
Camping & University of Karbuls (Germany)
trained networks recognises English text and
generate Chinese output. Another project
deals with English and Russian.

9. MT SOFTWARE FOR DESKTOP
Today's PCs and workstations are
powerful enough to handle MT software.
Therefore there is a migration of application
software from mainframe to desktop.
Machine Translation software for desktop
computers translate language sentence by
sentence using Al or linguistic rules to deal
with syntax and grammar. The documents are
processed in either batch mode, where the
sentence allows post-editing of each
translated sentence or in interactive mode
where a number of optionals are displayed
for the operator to choose. The price of the
package range from $79 to $1200 and are
available in Arabic, Danish, Dutch, Finnish,
French, German, Greek, Italian, Japanese,
Korean, Russian, Spanish and Swedish. For
Portuguese, Chinese and Norwegian,
packages have also been developed.
Software is generally for one way or two way
language pairs. e.g. LanguageAssistant Series
5.0 from Microtac and GTSBasic 1.0 and
GTS- Professional from Globalink
respectively. Professional Translation System
10

2.0 from Toltran uses a modular language
translation concept for selling language as
source or target language module.
Details on some MT software packages
available on personal computers has been
provided in the Appendix.

10. FUTURE OF MT
All over the world, there is move towards
networking and to have more electronic and
paper-less communicatlon. Thus there is a
greater need for inexpensive technology for
translation assistance of email messages.
In the near future, MT is going to become
a way of life to help in breaking the language
barrier. Translating telephones, multilingual
e-mail, and small computers that would scan
and translate. This would enable business
across the world, travel and bargain to foreign
countries, without learning language.
Breakthrough in speech recognition
technology will make it possible to develop
speakerdependent applications from the
written-text MT systems of today. Research in
developing knowledge sources and internal
representations for MT will enable faster and
less human dependent systems. This will
enable better ways to capture, store,
represent knowledge development in
general purpose systems; parsed information
achieved will be a boon for building large
knowledge bases.
Many technologies would be involved in
doing this. These include automated speech
recognition, speech generation, OCR and
machine translation. Intermediate tools are
already available. Already systems can
recognise limited amount of speech without
customisation. Further training on voice
patterns may give unlimited capacity. When
the specific vocabulary in a limited
environment of subject (included to a few
theorems and words) is used, the error rate is
negligible.
DESlOOC BuRetln of Inf Techno/, 1994 14(6)

The spread of e-mail and computer
networks have created need for an
inexpensive technology for browsing type
translation assistance of e-mail messages.

6.

Ishida, Richard. Future translation
work-benches
some
essential
requirements. Aslib Proceedings, 1994,
46(6), 163-70.

At present, fax machines have quietly
changed our lives and business. In coming
years, automated MT systems will make
speech and writing in a multitude of
tanguages, easier to find, read and
understand.

7.

Keynes, Mutton, et a/. ELINOR: The
Electronic Library Project at De
Montfort University. Aslib Proceedings,
1993, 45(1), 3-6.

8.

Miller, L.C. Babelware for the Desktop.
Byte, 1993, 18(1) , 177-83.

9.

Poulter, Alan. Building a browsable
virtual reality Library. Aslib Proceedings,
1994,46(6), 151-55.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.

Fransman, Martin. The market and
beyond: Information technology in
Japan. Cambridge University Press,
USA, 1993. pp. 219-22.

2.

Hovy, Edward. How MT works. Byte,
1993, 18(1), 167-76.
.

3.

Hovy, Edward. MT at your service. Byte,
1993, , 160.

4.

Hutchins, W J. Why computers do not
translate better. Aslib Proceedings,
1992, 44(1O), 35 1-59.

5.

Hutchins, W ). Machine translation and
machine-aided translation. journal of
Documentation, 1978, 38(2), 119-59.

10. Riley, Christopher. The foreign language
barrier in information transfer at the
University of Tasmania. Aslib
Proceedings, 44(1O), 1992, 33 1-40.
11. Scott, B.E. Five layers of ambiguity. Byte;
1993,18(1), 174.
12. Wilks, Yorick. Developments in MT
research in the US. Aslib Proceedings,
1994, 46(4), 111-16.
13. Vasconcellos, M. Machine translation.
Byte, 1993, 18(1), 153-64.

