DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology,Vol 1 5, No 1, January 1995, pp 12-16
O 1995, DESIDOC

Document Delivery-Past, Present and Future
NV Sathyanarayana

Informatics (India) Pvt Ltd, Bangalore 560 003

1.

GENESIS

The origins of document delivery, as the
term came to be known, is from an
inter-library loan and photocopying service
for journal articles, offered by libraries
largely free of cost. For long, it remained a
passive and co-operative service
spear-headed by library networks as part of
their resource sharing plans. British Library
Document Supply Centre (BLDSC), UK was
the only organisation which extended the
service from journal articles to conference
papers and other documents such as
theses, dissertations and reports. The
service evolved and grew in demand with
the gradual increase in the usage of
bibliographic databases. For the first time,
Current Contents published by the Institute
of Scientific lnformation (ISI), USA
expanded the scope of document delivery
outside the library networks by providing a
means for direct contact between the user
and the author or publisher. As a database
producer, when IS1 introduced Original
Article Tearsheet Service, (now called'
Genuine Article Service), it set the frame
work for legalising document delivery and
respecting copyright by setting up a system
for paying royalty to the publisher for every
article delivered to the end user. Taking
clue from ISI, many database producers
started offering document delivery service
(DDS) as a supporting service for the
12

documents covered in their databases.
Today most database producers offer DDS
though very few of them operate it as a
serious business.

2. ONLINE ORDERING
As databases went online, the online
hosts like Dialog who commanded the
centralised bibliographic access as a kind of
information super market, realised the need
for supporting their clients in obtaining
complete articles. In the early days of
online, computing and storage costs being
high and limited, delivering documents
online was unthinkable. What the
companies like Dialog did was to provide
an online ordering service for full
documents or articles available from a
select list of document delivery vendors.
Dialog called this service DIALORDER and
released Yellow Pages of Document Delivery
Vendors which included many national
libraries, database producers and third party
suppliers. Today, Dialog's list of
DIALORDER suppliers includes about 100
companies and organisations. The concept
of online ordering pioneered by Dialog
using document delivery agencies as
back-up for fulfilment, operated in an
electronic mail environment developed
internally by Dialog. For ordering a
document, required the user is required to
have a prior agreement or deposit account
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/, lW5,15(1)

with the document delivery agency. For
instance, one can order for an article from
BLDSC or for a PhD thesis from UMI
through DIALORDER (INSDOC is ako
providing such a service except for the
technology element of bibliographic access
and online ordering missing). Also, in this
model, Dialog did not play the role of
supplier; it simply provided a means for
online ordering. With vast spread of
networking technology today, online
ordering is directly supported by document
delivery vendors.

Delivering more than 35 lakh articles
every year, British Library Document Supply
Centre leads the document delivery market.
BLDSC introduced its online ordering
service called ARTTeI (Automated
transmission requests through telecom)
during last 80s. Currently, 52.8% requests
are received by BLDSC through ARlTel and
another 13% requests are received through
other electronic media such as fax and
database hosts. Only 34% of the requests
are received by post which is losing its
share. ARlTel can be accessed through
GPSS, Internet, Janet, Sprintnet and many
other global data networks.

3. FAX DELIVERY
Online ordering reduced the transit time
in ordering from about ten days to one day
and facilitated faster order processing. The
transit time for delivery of documents still
remained with the mercy of postal system
until fax delivery was introduced during the
late 80s which earned limited popularity.
Fax delivery was expensive for developing
countries particularly for India and
continues to be so for international
deliveries, as fax uses regular phone lines. In
USA, it is widely becoming popular due to
low telecommunication cost.

3.1 Limitations
The document deliveries through fax
suffer from three major limitations:

o Even today, most of the documents are
not available in electronic media.
Electronic Joumak are only a recent
phenomenon and only a small
percentage of scholarly and technical
joumak are available in electronic form.
Hence, the logistics of material handling
and the associated manpower costs still
continues. Most bound volumes simply
cannot be used by conventional fax
machines, and require scanning or
photocopyingbeforedelivering the pages
to fax machines. In BLDSC the major cost
is still attributed to the physical process of
picking up the journal from the shelves,
copying or scanning for email or fax
delivery and shelving back the volumes.

o

Fax, as said earlier, is still expensive. While
it is cheaper to own a fax machine, the
cost of telephone lines makes it
prohibitive in India. For instance, sending
one page document from Bangalore to
Dehi takes about a minute and will cost
approximately Rs 401- towards
telecommunication charges alone.

o The quality of delivery depends on the
reliability of network telephone.

3.2 Network FAX
The drive for economy in using
telephone for computer communication
gave rise to development of data networks.
While telephone still remains the link at the
user end, the data networks have become
inexpensive interface between the user's
telephone and the service providers like
online hosts and email systems. The fax
technobgy today can successfully interface
with data networks. This will make the fax
delivery as economical as m a i l delivery of
documents in the near future. Network

faxes are already operational in many parts
of the world. The offices abroad are
extensively using this system. They pool and
send their fax messages to a local network
centre which manages the network delivery
of fax. For a user, it effectively becomes a
local fax call plus a small additional fee for
transmission outside his city.
As Internet became popular, many
projects were initiated by various libraries to
fax articles through Internet. The Academic
Computing Services at Ohio State
University, USA has developed an
Internet-fax gateway that can be used with
the existing Group IH fax machines. The
project is called Network Fax Project. The
Research Library Graup (RLG), USA
developed Ariel, a software solution that
uses existing hardware. It is capable of both
sending and receiving documents directly
and is commercially available.
The emerging ISDN technology provides
for natural interfacing of telephone with fax
technology. It has dramatically increased
the delivery (transmission) speed and
reliability and allows for very high quality
(zero-error) delivery of documents. Further
increase in speed from the current
4800-9600 bps to several kbps is expected
to bring down the cost transmission current
technology takes about 6 8 minutes to
receive a 10 page article by fax. With ISDN
technology and high speed fax-modems it
should take less than 30 seconds to receive
the same 10 page fax.

4. ONLINE ACCESS AND ONLINE

DELIVERY
The services like Dialog's DIALORDER
facilitated only online ordering but the
delivery was off-line, either by mail or fax.
This was because the databases available
were largely bibliographic. Electronic
journals started their entry into online
market due to declining storage costs and

increasing computing power. American
Chemical Society was one of the earliest to
offer full text of all its journals as an online
database for searching and delivery. This
was accelerated by Dialog by the addition
of more full text online databases. Full text
Sources Online, a directory published by
Bibliodata (1994), lists over 5,000 journals
and newsletters available online through
various online hosts. Dialog alone offers full
text of over 3000 journals and magazines
online, largely in business area. The trend is
towards full-text databases with the option
for DD either online or through fax or
e-mail.

5. FULL TEXT VERSUS FULL
DOCUMENT
What the online companies deliver as
full text online is only a part of the
document available as ASCII file for
searching and delivering. If the articles
contain images and graphs, they are rarely
found in the full-text databases. Images
require 25 to 100 times more storage space
than text files which makes the cost of
storing and delivering more expensive.
Most online companies still deliver data at a
maximum speed of 9600 bps and most
users still use 1200/2400 bps modems.
These are serious limitations for online
delivery of full document with images and
graphics. Current developments in the
following three areas, which may take at
least another 3-5 years to reach consumer
level, will mak; online databases move fmm
full text to full document:

o

ISDNtechnology for networkingand data
communication

o Storage and compression technology for
large volume disc storage

o Modem technology
Here too, the trend is visible. Dialog
started delivering images since 1988 with
DESIDOC BuJYetk, of Inf Technol,1995,15(1)

two databases-Trademarks Scan, and
Chapman & Hall Chemical database.
Recently, Derwnet made available the
images (drawings and diagrams) for its
World Patent Index Database through three
major online hosts. STN has recently
started offering complete journals of the
ACS, both text and images, online.

6. CD-ROM TECHNOLOGY
CD-RCM has emerged as the cheapest
storage medium for large volume storage
and publishing. More full text/full document
databases are available on CD-ROM than
on online. FulCtext databases of journal
articles on CD-ROM are of two types:

o ASCII files of text and scanned images of
graphics linked to the text.

o Complete scanned image of text and
graphics supported by bibliographic file
linking each article.
The first type is ideal and cost-effective,
but the second type is easier to produce.
Most full-text databases of journals available
on CD-ROM are image files (the second
type), including ADONIS, UMlfs IEEE/IEE
On disc, etc which can be called
Document Delivery Products. ADONIS has
a royalty payment system added to its
subscription price. For every article printed,
the subscriber pays a royalty to ADONIS
which is shared with journal publishers.
IEEE/IEE On disc does not levy any royalty
but the subscription price of the product is
high enough to compensate for the royalty
loss to IEEEIIEE. While ADONIS covers
journals of a few hundred medical
publishers, the latter covers all the journals
of IEEE and IEE only.
CD-ROM is a good archival medium, but
i t cannot be a total substitute for
subscribing to current journals in printed
form. However, it is a very convenient
technology for document delivery. With
DESIDOC BuWMn of lnf Teehnd, 11995.15(1)

CD-ROM publishing going desk-top and
becoming cheaper, even the individual
libraries can plan for converting their back
volumes into CD-ROM masters and can
develop a high quality true-to-original
document delivery system.
Some of the current journals like journal
of Biological Chemistry have also started
publishing a CD-ROM version parallel with
the print edition. This visible trend of
primary journal publishing on CD-ROM is
yet to become a publishing culture.

7. REMOTE ACCESS DOCUMENT
DELIVERY SYSTEM
The integration of online, CD-ROM and
fax-modem technologies has set a new
high-tech trend in document delivery, which
can be called Remote Access Document
Delivery System (RADDS). It combines the
benefits of online searching, online
ordering, CD-ROM and fat technologies for
network delivery. Dialog SourceOne and
Carl's Uncwer are examples of RADDS,
which work on the following lines:

o Search a database online
o Identify the articles or patents of your
choice

o Login to the fialog SourceOne database
o Order for the selected article(s) for fax
delivery (or e-mail in future) giving fax
number to which the document should
be delivered
The order is transmitted by Dialog
SourceOne to a CD-ROM storage system
which has the complete image file of the
document. The C D ROM storage system
controlled by a file server picks up the
ordered item(s) and transfers it to a
computer controlled fax machine which
automatically dials ' and delivers the
document instantly to the customer.

The entire system i s computer
controlled, operating in a network
environment which guarantees fax delivery
within minutes.

7.1 Technology for RADDS
The hardware for setting up RADDS
includes file servers, networks, CD-ROM
storage systems (Juke-boxes)and computer
controlled fax machines. The critical factor
is the software and system integration for
transferring scanned and stored images and
text to fax machines for automatic delivery.
Many software are available, the notable
ones being 'XpressNet' by Article Express
International and 'Ariel' by Research
Libraries Group. This technology brings a
big opportunity for large libraries and
emerging library networks to experiment
and setup RADDS in India.

8. CONCLUSION
Document delivery is the logical end to
a bibliographic information system. A large
part of the document delivery needs are
met by libraries at local and national level
with fully or partly subsidised deliveries.
Application of IT will make document
delivery faster, more effective and visible.
As it becomes more visible, copyright
clearance will became a serious issue.
Users will certainly benefit by direct fast
access to 'real information' as against
bibliographic surrogates. Technology trends
are very encouraging for the document
delivery process to go completely
electronic. But, someone has to bell the cat
for the initial investment on technology and
the market should be willing to support and
promote it.

