C

DESlDOC Bulletin of Information Techndogy, V d 15,No I,january 1 995,pp 1 7-23
6 1995,OESlOOC

Marketing of lnformation Products and Services
MN Seetharaman*
Consultant GIST, Bangalore-560008

1. INFORMATION :THE
INVISIBLE INGREDIENT
It i s universally recognised that
information, particularly scientific and
technical information, is one of the basic
but invisible ingredients for the success of
any organisation or enterprise. As an
ingredient, information is like electrical
energy and the impact of a reliable, current
and fast information service will be as great
as that of electricity on the socioeconomic
and industrial development of the country.
lnformation is also an essential ingrzdient of
change, and change is nothing other than
the transformation resulting from a new
contribution of data or the re-interpretation
of existing data. Under development, in the
final analysis, is no more than the
consequence arising from the inability to
generate information, to handle it properly,
to store it and to distribute it equitably.
Many advanced countries are said to
have entered into a so called 'post-industrial
society' in which the rise of GNP depends
not so much on the productiort and
distribution of goods and services but on
the generation, distribution, and application
of scientific knowledge and information.
Formerly, Head, Information Centre for Aeronautics,
NAL, Bangalore and Librarian, Central Library, Indian
Institute of Techndogy, Madras.

2. FREE OR FEE-BASED
INFORMATION PRODUCTS
AND SERVICES
Since its inception, UNESCO has been
advocating free flow of information across
nations and peoples of the world. It is also
initiating projects for the 'universal
availability of publications' to facilitate easy
access to and flow of information,
overcoming barriers of distance, language,
costs, etc.
Consistent with this philosophy of
UNESCO, many libraries and their
information centres were making available
their information products and services free
of cost to the users till recently. These free
services included the following:
(a) Reference and consultation of library
resources
(b) Loan of books
(c) Supply of reprints of articles fromjournals
(d) Distribution of library accession lists,
bibliographies and reading lists
(e) Distribution of other publications like.
technical reports, theses, conference
proceedings, etc.
However, the position is changing now
and the trend is towards fee-based
information services. The reasons for this

change are attributable to the following
factors:

3* INFORMATION SERVICE AS
AN INDUSTRY

o The cost of books and journals is
increasing year by year

o The library budgets for document
acquisition are not keeping pace with the
increase in the cost of the publications
but, on the contrary, are subject to drastic
cuts due to economic considerations,
governmental policies, etc.

o The operational and service costs in
libraries are increasing on account of
labour,
equipment and other
infrastructural inputs.
In many, countries, libraries which are
supported by public funds are now required
to be self-supporting and recover part of
their maintenance costs through fee-based
information services.

As pointed out earlier, information is
now treated as a 'resource' and as a
'saleable commodity'. The business of
generating, storing, retrieving and
transmitting information is carried on under
several garbs like the 'IT industry',
'telecommunication industry', 'knowledge
industry', 'information industry', 'networks'
and so on. In USA, all those organisations
which are providing fee-based information
services have come together and formed an
'Information Industries Association'.

4. MARKETING OF
lNFORMATlON PRODUCTS
AND SERVICES

Some Government organisations in
India, like the .Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research, New Delhi, have issued
directions that atleast onethird of the
expenditure on the upkeep of the libraries
in the national laboratories/institutes should
be earned through fee-based services.

In a broad sense, marketing, in the
context of information products and
services, may be defined as a concept of
sensitively serving and satisfying the
information needs of all those who are
involved in education, scholarship, research
and development, business, trade, industry
etc. It connotes a function which has been
hitherto peculiar to business firms in the
task of finding and stimulating buyers for
their products and services. It involves
product development, pricing, distribution,
communication and continuous attention to
the changing needs of the customers and
the development of new products and
services to meet these needs.

These changed policies have cast a great
responsibility on the librarians and
information officers and are forcing them to
publicise and market the fee-based services
in order to earn adequate revenues,
although,by tradition and by training, they
are not wellequipped to assume this new
responsibility.

Every library or information centre may
be having some kind of information
products or services to offer commercially.
If there is a library which does not have any
worthwhile product or service, now is the
time for it to make a beginning, if it is
serious enough to meet atleast some of .its
operational expenses.

The British Council Libraries, the Library
of Congress, the US Government Printing
Office and many other information service
centres abroad have switched over from the
earlier policy of free services to one of
fee-based services.

18

The demand for information products
and services will increase manifold thanks
to the opening up and globalization of the
lndian economy and industry. There are
hundreds of thousands of information
seekers working in about 180 universities,
1,000 professional colleges, 10,000 public
and private limited companies, 500,000
medium and smallscale industries and
1,500 R&D centres in the country,
constituting a vast and potential target
population for marketing information
products and services.
The kinds of marketable information
products and services which most libraries
and information centres could offer are
described in the following paragraphs.

4.1 Physical lnformation Products
Physical information products are
tangible items like books, journals, reports,
patents, standards, audio-visual materials,
etc that are normally held by most libraries
as part of their document collections.
Till now, access to the document
collections in almost all libraries is free to
bonafide internal and external users. The
documents may also be made available to
other libraries under the traditional
inter-libraryloan mode.
The facility of providing access to
information may be marketed and revenues
earned by following one or more of the
following schemes :
4.1. 1 Institutional Membership

The Central Library of the lndian lnstitute
of Technology, Madras, has introduced a
scheme of library institutional membership
for the benefit of industries and other
corporate sector organisations.
Interested organisations have to register
themselves with the office of the Dean of
Industrial Consultancy and Sponsored
DESIDOC

of Inf Technd, 1 995.15( 1)

Research of the lnstitute as a corporate
member on payment of an annual
membership fee of Rs 5,000 and above in a
graded scale, depending on the size and
business turnover of the organisation
concerned. Upon registration, each
member is entitled to make use of the
Institute's laboratory and test facilities and
also the library and information services by
paying the prescribed charges.
The library membership scheme is a
success story and so far nearly 500
corporate members are making use of its
resources and services.
There are several other libraries in the
country which have introduced similar
institutional membership scheme, notable
among them being the Libraries of the llSc
and NAL in Bangalore, TlFR and IIT in
Bombay, NCL, Pune, CFTRI, Mysore, CLRI,
Madras and so on.
4.1.2 Access Fees

Some libraries like the St John's Medical
College in Bangalore levy an access fee
each time a user enters the library for
reference and consultation. This example
can be followed by other libraries too.
4.1.3 Coupon Scheme

The British Library Document Supply
Centre, Boston Spa, UK, requires two
prepaid coupons ( priced at f 5.25 each)
per document loaned from its collection of
books, conference proceedings, technical
reports, etc.
lndian libraries may also consider a
similar scheme for loans of books etc to
borrowers.

4.2 Information Services
Special libraries and information centres,
which have all the necessary facilities, in
terms of document collections, equipment,
manpower, funds and management
19

support, should be in a position to offer
several fee-based informatian services as
discussed in the following paragraphs :

information centres may also maintain a
similar data bank of translators who are
working in their own parent organisations .

4.2.7 Reference Services

With increasing collaborations between
India and many non-English speaking
countries, like Germany, Russia, France,
Japan and several East European countries,
the demands for translation services will
increase and libraries must take advantage
of the opportunities for initiating and
marketing translation services.

This would include the following
services:
Bibliographical identification of
documents; data on Indian and foreign
manufacturers, business and trade
organisations, associations, R&D centres,
academic institutions, etc; reading lists; and
referral service.
An hourly charge for providing the
reference services may be fixed.

Sometime back, NICNET announced
plans for mass translations of selected
Russian and Japanese documents and
marketing them internationally.

4.2.2 Photoeopy Services

4.5 Other Information Products

This is a bottom line service that wery
library and information centre should offer.
The rates fixed by INSDOC may- be
followed uniformly to avoid unnecessary
competition.

4.5.1 CD-ROM Databases of Indian Data

4.3 Literature Search Services

The opportunities for creating and
marketing CD-ROM databases containing
data relating to lndian business, trade,
industry, finance, economy, etc are
unlimited.

Many libraries have already set up, or in
the process of setting up, facilities for
information access and retrieval from
CD-ROM and online databases or from
their own specialised databases.

There will also be a good demand for
CD-ROM databases of archival and library
collections in the central and state archives,
oriental libraries, manuscript libraries and so
on.

Taking advantage of these facilities,
literature search services-retrospective
and/or profile-based current awarenessmay be marketed and offered to all
bonafide users on certain uniform rates.

4.5.2 Data Compilations

4.4 Translation Services
There are many scientists and engineers
working i n lndian R&D centres,
laboratories, industries, etc who are familiar
with some foreign languages other than
English and who can undertake translations
of documents in these languages.
INSDOC is already maintaining a Data
Bank of Translators. Libraries and
20

It is estimated that there are more than
100 specialised 'information analysis
centres (IACs)' in several advanced
countries, more particularly in the USA.
These lACs collect, analyse, organise and
supply 'numerical data', 'design data',
'properties data', 'theoretical data' etc.
which can be distinguished from
'bibliographic data' to be found in many
conventional databases.
There are also some international
publishers (e.g. Noyes Data Corporation,
ESDU-Engineering Sciences Documentation Unit, etc) who publish and sell data
DESlDOC Bu&th of lnf TecnnoI, 1995,15(1)

compilations based on patents, published
journal articles, technical reports, trade
literature etc.
In India too, many data centres, mainly
in the area of finance, economy and trade,
have come up recently (e.g. CMIE-Centre
for Monitoring Indian Economy, New
Delhi). However, there is an urgent need to
set up more and more data centres in many
specialised fields and market their services.
Since lACs are generally attached to a
special library, librarians have a critical role
to play in creating and marketing data
compilations.
4.5.3 Market Intelligence Reports

lnformation service companies like the
Economic Intelligence Unit (UK), and
Technical Insights Inc (USA), bring out and
sell high priced market intelligence reports
on specific subject areas or on a specific
geographical area.
In India, such intelligence reports are not
available as saleable publications as in other
countries. One has to commission a market
research bureau to undertake a market
survey and produce a report on its findings.
Libraries should come forward and
initiate action in producing market
intelligence reports, since they have the
advantage of having the necessary
background documentary resources and
also the services of experts working in their
organisations.
4.5.4 Technology Forecasting Reports

Based on the available documentary
resources and the services of subject
experts within the organisations, special
libraries and information centres are
well-placed in the production, publication
and marketing of forecasting reports, state
of art reports, trend reports etc in
specialised areas.
DESIDOC BulIetln of Inf Technd, 1995.1S(1)

4.6 Marketing by Organisations
Themselves
Many organisations attempt in marketing
themselves and their services through
advertisements and sponsoring cultural,
social and sports activities etc. Universities
see selling themselves as a prime marketing
commodity in order to earn grants,
endowments.
Similarly, libraries and information
centres (e.g. INSDOC, DESIDOC,
SENDOC, NISSAT Sectoral lnformation
Centres, etc.) should also market
themselves and their services to earn fees,
grants etc.

5. MARKETING PLANS, TOOLS
AND TECHNIQUES
Libraries and information centres which
are required to market their information
products and services must necessarily
develop suitable marketing plans, tools and
techniques similar to those traditionally
followed in the fast moving consumer
goods sector, such as the following :
5.1. 1 Product Definition

Business organisations recognise the
value of placing a broad definition on their
products that perform well and meet the
basic customer's needs. Libraries too should
define their information products and
services emphasising the underlying
concept of marketing 'information' as such,
and not the products themselves.
5.1.2 Target Group Definition

A product definition may result in
encompassing a wider market. If so, it may
be necessary for limiting the product
offering to certain clearly defined groups
within the market. To give an example, the
document delivery service offered by the
NAL, Bangalore, may encompass a wider

market because of the strength of its
document collections but it has to restrict
the target groups to the aerospace and
defence user communities in accordance
with its basic charter of functions.
5.1.3 Product Differentiation

When a business organisation sets out to
serve more than one target group, its
marketing plan can be effective only by
differentiating its products and targeting
them to the appropriate user segments.

group-must
services.

advertise and market its

In the opinion of the author, who had a
long and personal experience of marketing
information products and services in the
Information Centre for Aeronautics in NAL,
Bangalore, and in the Central Library of IIT,
Madras, libraries should consider several
promotional measures, as under:

The pricing of information products and
services should be such that the potential
users are in a position to bear the cost and
it does not serve as a deterrent.

o Printing and distribution of library
brochures-one for each product or service
0 Printing and distribution of library
newsletter
0 Mailing samples of information products to
all potential users
0 Organising a series of seminars,
work-shops, demos etc on regular and
continuous basis on various aspects of
information products and services
o Displaying samples and/or illustrations of
information products and services in a
prominent place in the campus e.g.-lecture
hall, reception, exhibition area or in the
library entrance
o Showing round all visitors to the library and
explaining to them about the information
products and services
o Sending responses to enquiries received
from the customers immediately
o Visiting customer's offices and giving
presentations on the products and services
offered
o Putting on display samples of information
products and services in professional
conferences, exhibitions etc.

5.1.5 Promotion

5.2. Success in Marketing

Applied to marketing of information
products and services, this concept would
mean that many differentiated products and
services have to be developed keeping in
view the needs of disparate user groups like
R&D scientists, engineers, consultants,
managers, academicians, technicians and so
on. For instance, a 'patent information
service' can be developed primarily for
pharmaceutical scientists, chemists. and
chemical engineers, while a 'standards
information service' has to be targeted at
mechanical, design and production
engineers i n factories and other
manufacturing establishments.
5.1.4 Pricing

Market promotion i s essentially an
activity of continuously communicating
with the users in a way that appeals to them
and projects the right images of the
products and services. Libraries fail to
recognise the dictum that 'everything about
an organisation must talk'. In other words,
every section in a library-the circulation
desk, the reference section, the book
stacks, the services and the publications
22

The secret of success in marketing is the
ability to attract and retain satisfied
customers. Achieving this success is difficult
and needs to be worked out by going
through the following processes:
(a) Assessment: Looking at the market place
and identifying opportunities.
(b) Planning: Setting achievable objectives,
defining tasks and resources
DESDOC Buleth of Inf T8chnoll.1995,11(1)

.

(c) Implementing: Actioning the plan, getting
and allocating resources
(d) Monitoring: Comparing the achievements with objectives and justifying any
difference and getting feedback and
evaluating it and changing plans, when
necessary.
5.2.1 Marketing a Service Versus a
Product

There are some differences between
selling a product and selling a service, as
summarised below, and these have to be
borne in mind in planning and marketing
information services:
(a) Consistency: An information service
cannot be standardised in the same way
as consumer product, since it depends on
several variable factors like coverage,
accuracy, reliability, timeliness etc.
(b) Perishability: Most information products
and services are ephemeral in nature and
have a short lifespan.
(c) Pricing: Here again, there i s no
standardised pricing for information
services; the pricing has to be flexible
depending on the nature of the service.
5.2.2 Market Feedback

Feedback from the market is an essential
information input for modifying information
products and services to suit the changing
requirements of the users.
If the libraries are casual in gathering
information and feedback about the users'
perceptions, the information products and
services are bound to become stale. It is for
the purpose of getting feedback that
librarians ought to conduct user surveys
periodically.
5.2.3 Review and Appraisal of Marketing

Change is a fact of life, although it may
proceed invisibly and imperceptibly. Over a

period of time, it might be so fundamental
as to threaten the very foundation of
organisations that do not re-examine
periodically their goals and objectives.
Libraries and information centres must
be aware of this inevitability of change and
review and modify their products and
services, marketing tools and techniques
accordingly. They may have to move over
gradually from marketing print publications
to machine readable products like
CD-ROMs, magnetic media, etc and
develop their own in-house information
services rather than marketing the services
of foreign libraries and information centres.

Generally 'marketing' has different
connotations in the minds of people. One
covers the concept of 'selling' 'persuading'
'influencing' or a 'ruse' to dump things on
people who do not want them. The other is
a more broader and philosophical concept
of 'serving and satisfying human needs'.
Whatever be the perceptions on
marketing, its ultimate goal is to develop
customer loyalty and satisfaction and to
focus on customer's needs.
Marketing is a vital function in libraries
and information centres to keep themselves
in constant touch with the customers, to
understand their needs, t o develop
products and services that meet these
needs and, finally, to build up a regular
channel of communication with them. The
choice before librarians and information
centres is not whether to market their
products or services because none of them
can avoid marketing, if they have to
become &Ifsupporting eventually, but to
do i t well. This is the fundamental principle
on which marketing is based.
23

