DESIDOC Bulletin of lnformation Technology, Vol 15, No 1, January 1995, pp 3-1 1

0 1995, DESIDOC

4

National Document Delivery Service :A Proposal
MN Seetharaman*
Consultant GIST, Bangalore-560 008

1. ORIGIN
The concept of a national document
delivery service (DDS), as we understand it
today, had its origins during the World War
11 (1939-1945). During the War years, the
allied nations, particularly the United States
of America and the United Kingdom, set up
a large number of R&D groups, established
several new defence establishments to
support the war efforts, and recruited a very
large number of scientific and technical
personnel to work on various defence
projects.
The 'discipline-oriented research', which
was till then carried on in the universities
and other academic institutions, was
replaced by 'mission-oriented research', and
the 'individuat research' by 'team research'.

1.1 The American Model
In order to promote the exchange of
information among the various R&D groups
and project teams, a Clearing House for
Scientific and Technical lnformation (CFSTI)
was established by the Office of Technical
Services of the US Government during
1944.

CFSTI collected technical reports issued
by various project teams, Defence
contractors and Government agencies and
made th.ese reports available to the
Defence and scientific communities on a
'need-to-know' basis. This may be called the
first 'document delivery service' through a
national document delivery centre (NDDC).
CFSTI, which is now known as the
National Technical lnformation Service
(NTIS), under the US Department of
Commerce, in Springfield, Virginia, is one of
the largest document delivery centres
(DDCs) in the world, mainly dealing with
technical reports deposited by more than
200 Federal Departments and Agencies.
NTlS has a collection in excess of 1.5
million documents in the public domain
which are available for distribution
nationally and internationally. NTlS i s
among the 1 0 0 (or more) document
delivery centres that exist in the United
States at present. The Library of Congress,
the John Crerar Library, the library networks
like the Research Library's Network (RLN),
and several major universities ako provide
document delivery as a part of their
services.

1.2 The British Model
Formerly, Head, lnformation Centre for Aeronautics,
NAL, Bangalore and Librarian, Central Library, Indian
institute of Technology, Madras.
DESlDOC ButIetln of Inf Technd, 1995,15(1)

The British Government had also felt a
similar need to set up a national document
3

delivery system. During the War, desperate
attempts were made .to access scientific
and technical journals in German language
which were held in nearly 200 libraries in
UK in order to fathom the secrets behind
the spectacular developments in rocketry in
war-time Germany under Hitler's rule.
Soon after the War, the British Library
Authority decided to set up a separate
division, known as the British Library
Lending Division (BLLD), now known as the
British Library Document Supply Centre
(BLDSC), for the purpose of providing a
centralised document delivery service,
covering particularly articles from journals,
papers presented i n international
conferences, technical reports, etc.
The BLDSC is the most widely known
and the most widely used DDS in the world
today. It has a collection of nearly 7 million
documents, mostly in the field of science
and technology, and handles requests for
photocopies of documents from all over the
world. It is estimated that about 3 million
reprints are supplied by the British Library
annually-the highest for any DDC in the
world.
In Great Britain, all libraries having old
and rarely used document collections are
encouraged to deposit them with the
BLDSC in order to strengthen and improve
its DDS. According to the statistics
furnished by the British Library, about 80%
of all requests for document delivery are
fulfilled from the collections held by it and
by other supporting libraries.

1.3 The Russian Model
The former Soviet Union had established
VINITI-the All Union Institute of Scientific
and Technical Information in Moscowshortly after the War years, to serve as a
national clearing house for information and
also as a document delivery centre.
4

At one time, VlNln had about 4000
full-time staff and nearly 20,000 part-time
translators for preparing abstracts of
technical papers from more than 20,000
foreign scientific and technical periodicals
for inclusion in its major abstracting journal
Refertavyni Zhurnal in about 200 subject
series.

1.4 Other National Document

Delivery Centres
Canada, Japan, Australia and several
major European countries have their own
NDDCs. Several learned societies and
associations in these countries a(so provide
a DDS in the subject areas of their
specialisation.

2. CENTRALISED VERSUS
DECENTRALISED DDS
The question, whether the national DDS

should be organised on a centralised or a
decentralised basis has been the subject of
intensive debates in several fora.
The protagonists for a centralised system
point out several advantages, as under, of
having such a centralised system:
(a) The centralised system is economical,
since all journals and other documents
can be acquired by a single institution to
serve as the base for the DDS, instead of
duplicating the same documentary
sources in numerous other libraries,
resulting in wasteful expenditure.
(b) A centralised operation, in handling a
large number of requests for document
delivery will be high\y economic, whereas,
in a decentralised set up, handling only a
few such requests, the cost of operations
will be very high and uneconomical,
(c) Improvement and modernisationin terms
of equipment, manpower and delivery
mechanism can be introduced with

minimum investments in a centralised
system, than in decentralised centres.
(d) From the point of view of the users also,
a centralised system is preferable since
they know where to turn to, whenever
they need to have a document, instead of
knocking at the doors of various DDCs
without any certainty whether they can
get the required document or not.
The success of the British model is
generally cited as an example to buttress
the argument in favour of a centralised
system.
However, the model of a centralised
document delivery system has not caught
on in USA which has the largest number of
decentralised DDCs. The opinion in this
country seems to be some what on the
following lines :
It is all right to have a centralised set up
for DDS so long as it is well-organised, has
comprehensive documentary collections for
back up, and is administered efficiently
without subjecting itself to frequent
changes on account of funding,
management and government policies.
Once a cen,tralised system deteriorates in its
operations and the level of efficiency
comes down, the entire DDS will collapse
totally, putting the user communities to
serious inconvenience.

A centralised system may be
manageable in countries which are small in
size, such as, Great Britain, but not for
countries as vast as the United States,
having thousands of academic and S&T
institutions and a large user community.
Duplication of documents may not be a
bad thing, as it is made out to be, and may
be even desirable and preferable in certain
cases.
There is no centralised system as such
for document delivery in the United States
DESlDOC Bulletln of Inf Technd 1995.15(1)

but hundreds of decentralised DOCS with
overlapping documentary collections.
Owing to the size of the document
collections and the level and reach of the
'service', some DDCs in this country, serve,
in effect, as centralised international DDCs.
The Library of Congress, the Research
Libraries Network, the Engineering
lnformation Inc., UMI lnformation Store,
ERIC Document Reproduction Service,
Chemical Abstracts Document Delivery
Service, etc are the examples of such
centres in USA.

3. DDS IN INDIA-THE EXISTING

SCENARIO
The lndian National Scientific
Documentation Centre (INSDOC) was
established in New Delhi by CSlR during
1952 with assistance from UNESCO.
INSDOC's charter, ilnter-alia includes
document delivery service also among
various other functions and services.
Pursuant to its charter, INSDOC has
been providing a DDS on a national scale.
The number of photocopies of documents
supplied by INSDOC ranges from 15,000 to
40,000 per annum. In the earlier years,
many Indian libraries, which did not have
their own photocopying machines or
access to any other DDC, were mainly and
heavily dependent on INSDOC to meet
their needs for photocopies of documents.
The situation is gradually changing now
with more and more libraries having their
own reprographic facilities and access to
several other DDCs like the Sectoral
lnformation Centres set up by NISSAT, the
Department of Biotechnology, DRDO,
UGC, etc. This might be one d the reasons
for the gradual decline in the number of
document requests handled by INSDOC
over the last few years.

However, it may be pointed out that
there is still no effective or organised
document delivery system in the country,
There are still many organisations and
individual researchers, scholars, faculty,
scientists, etc., who are not aware of the
existence of the many decentralised DDCs
i n the country and who are still
approaching directly the authors or the
issuing agencies or their foreign colleagues
to get copies of the documents they need.
This situation is particularly true in the case
of the users working in academic and S&T
institutions located in semi-urban and rural
areas far removed from the metropolitan
cities.
The reasons for this situation may be
summarised as follows:

(a) Adequate document resources in the form
of journals, books, monographs, etc., do
not exist in the libraries and information
centres in the country to serve as an
essential back up for DDS.
(b) Due to financial and other constraints, it
has not been possible to increase the .
subscriptions to core journals to the
required level even in major institutions,
like INSOOC, DESIDOC, IlTs, national
laboratories and so on.

(c) While there is a NationalUnion Catalogue
of Scientific Serials reflecting the holdings
of more than 1000 libraries in the country,
it is still difficult to have access to these
holdings due to lack of reprographic
equipment and modern communication
facilities in several libraries.

(d) Many institutions are still reluctant to
participate in, and contribute to, a national
document delivery system.
fe) National union catalogues for other
categories of publications like books,
monographs,
technical reports,
conference proceedings, etc., do not exist
6

and, therefore, there is no organised DDS
covering these categories of documents,
except through the traditional inter-library
loan facilities.
The Bureau of Indian Standards which
offers a ODs for standards is not able to
cope up with the heavy demands, and
many organisations depend on private
companies for meeting their requirements.
Similarly, in respect of patents too, the
DDS proposed by the Government of
India's Patent Information System in Nagpur
is yet to take off fully.

4. A PROPOSED MODEL FOR

DDS IN INDIA
For obvious rehsons, funding being the
major one, a centralised document delivery
service similar to the British model may not
be feasible for lndia in the foreseeable
future. Therefore, we have to do with the
existing decentralised document delivery
system. However, the existing system needs
to be strengthened and structured in an
organised manner.

4.1 Outlines of the Proposed Model
4.1.1 National Document Delivery
Centre

The existing wing in INSDOC, which
deals with DDS, may be upgraded as an
'INSDOC-National Document Delivery
Centre (INSDOC-NDDC)'.
The number of scientific and technical
journals being received at present in
INSDOC needs to be increased to atleast
7500 core journal titles. This is expected to
meet 70% to 80% of the document
requests from the users. As proposed a few
years ago, the Government of lndia might
consider a one-time grant to INSDOC to
increase its core journal subscriptions.
DESIDOC Bulletk? of Inf Technol, 1995. IS( 1 )

The National Science Library, which is an
integral part of INSDOC, may also need
support in the form of increased recurring
grants to acquire and strengthen its special
collections, such as, reference books,
multi-volume sets, conference proceedings,
technical reports, theses, etc., which are not
likely to be received in other libraries.
Eventually, the INSDOC-NDDC may be
modelled somewhat on the lines of 'Ariel'
service offered by the Research Libraries
Group (RLG) in USA.
RLG has developed a BIB FILE, a Union
Catalogue containing bibliographic data on
more than 63 million items held by nearly
200 major R&D, law, medical, public and
corporate libraries in the United States,
covering everything from books, serials,
films, photographs, computer files and so
on.
The BIB FILE and another CITADEL
(article citation file), are accessible for
searching online through RLG's Eureka
search service.
RLG's clients can also use its electronic
document delivery software viz. Ariel for
scanning articles, photos and documents
and transmit the resulting electronic images
over lnternet t o each other's Ariel
workstations and print them on a laser
printer. The system which is optimised for
Internet transmission is faster and less
expensive than fax and produces images of
greater resolution and quality.
4.1.2 Regional Document Delivery
Centres

The following INSDOC Centres may be
upgraded ipso facto as the Regional
Document Delivery Centres (INSDOCRDDCs)
(a) INSDOC Regional Centre, Calcutta to
serve users in West Bengal, Assam, Bihar,
Orissa and the North Eastern states.
DESIDOC Bulletln of Inf Technd, 1995.15(1)

(b) INSDOC Regional Centre, Bangalore to
serve the users in Karnataka and Kerala
states.
(c) INSDOC Regional Centre, Madras to
serve the users in Tamil Nadu and Andhra
Pradesh states.
(d) INSDOC-WRIC lnforma tion Service,
Bombay to serve the users Maharashtra
and Gujarat states.
The INSDOC-NDDC may cover the rest
of the states not included above.
4.1.3 Satellite Document Delivery Centres

INSDOC1s National Union Catalogue of
Scientific Serials covers about 1000 or so
special libraries in all parts of India. Atleast
20 special libraries in each of the above
four mentioned regions which have sizeable
document collections, say about 50,000
documents and above, may be selected
and treated as 'Satellite- Document Delivery
Centres' (SDDCs).
An integrated network can be formed by
attaching SDDCs in the states of a region to
the respective RDDCs and the SDDCs in
the remaining states to the NDDC. All
DDCs in the network may be linked to each
other through an electronic document
request transmission system, similar to the
British Library's ARTTel (Automated request
transmission by telecommunications) for
the purpose of document delivery.
The illustrative model in Fig. 1 shows the
proposed national document delivery
system.

4.2 Institutional Mechanism
It is essential to have an institutional
mechanism for bringing together the
NDDC, RDDCs and the SDDCs into an
integrated and functional network.
For this purpose, a policy document on
National Document Delivery Service may

Figure 1. An illustration of the proposed model for national document delivery
service in India

I.ROLE O F NATIONAL DOCUMENT DELIVERY
CENTRE (NDDC)
1. Maintain, update periodicatly and distribute national
union catalogues to other DDCP

2. Conduct studies on ranked list of journals for the
purpose of providing DDS on demand.
3. Build other core documentary collections-books,
conference proceedings, technical reports, thesis, etc.
4. Plan institutional Inkages with other DDCs.

5. Plan data communication cinuits with DDCs for
transmission of document requests electronically.

II. ROLE O F REGIONAL DDG
1. Handle document delivery service in c ~ r d i n a t i o n
with satellite DDCs in the region.
2. Colleci data for input in the national union
catalogues.

3. Maintain one set of all national union catalogues
4. Maintain liaison with all satellite DDCs in the Region

and with the National DDC.

Ill.ROLE O F SATELLITE DDCs

6. Coordinate and guide other DDCs

1. Handle and service document requests received
from users, if the source document is readily available
in their own collections.

7. Establishe relationshipswith international DDCs and
handles requests for documents not available in
indigenous sources.

2. Redirect document requests to concerned satellite
DDC if the source document is not available in their
own collections.

8. Provide training facilities for personal engaged in
DDS.

3. Redirect docbment requests to National DDC, if the
source document cannot be identified or it is not
available in any of the DDCs for servicing.

9. Conduct surwys on user needs for document
delivery.
10. Publicise document delivery service nationally
through mass media.

8

4. Maintain liaison with other DDCs in the region and
with the Regional DDCs and the National RDC.
5. Maintain upto date set of National Union Catalogue.

DES/DOCBuUetk, of Inf Technol, 1995. 15(1)

be prepared and submitted to the
Government of India for approval and
funding as a development project during
the IX Plan period.
The policy document may cover,
inter-alia, the following basic imperatives:

o The selectionand identification of satellite
,
DDCs.

o The linkages to be established between
the various DDCs in the network for the
successful operation of the service.

o The obligations by the DDCs participating
in the network to offer document delivery
from their collections (to be clearly
spelled out in the form of a MOU)

Apart from the Government of India, the
following agencies of the Government haw
to be requested to commit themselves to
support this vital service with recurring
grants in the larger national interest of the
academic and S&T activities in the country:
(a) NISSAJ/DSIR
(b) UGC/INFLIBNET
(c) Aeronautical Research and Development
BoardlDRDO
(d) Major business and industrial
organisations (with eligibility to write off
125% of the grants given for this project
under the IT Act)
The suggested scale of funding the
DDCs as grant-in-aid is as under:

o The details of financial assistance that
would be made available under the
scheme

Annual recurring grant per annum.

o The reference tools to be developed to
support the DDS

(b) RDDCs (4 Nos)

(Rs. 5 lakh each)
Rs 20 lakh

o The modus operand of the DDS

(c) SDDCs (80 Nos.)

(Rs 1 lakh each)
80 lakh

o The tariff structure for the DDS

o The turn-around time for document
delivery.
It is essential that a document available
in indigenous sources is supplied within 3
weeks from the date of request and, in case
of documents to be procured from foreign
sources, within 6 weeks.

4.3 Funding
It is essential to point out that a NDDS
cannot be imagined without adequate
financial inputs to the DOCS forming the
network for strengthening the document
collections and for other requisite
equipment and infrastructure development,
such as photocopying, binding and packing
machines and communication facilities like
telephone, fax, modem, email, etc.
DESIDOC Bulletln of Inf Technol, 1995. 15(1)

(a) NDDC

Total

, Rs 100 lakh

Rs 200 lakh per annum.

The grant-in-aid scheme may be
administered through INSDOC-NDDC.

4.4 Reference Tools
For an effective national DDS, we need
to develop several basic reference tools and
uptodate them. Each of the selected SDDCs
should be required to bring out a monthly
accession list and an annual journal
holdings catalogue and send the data in the
prescribed format in floppy diskette to the
national DDC for input in the National
Union Catalogue.
Several information and documentation
centres are already bringing out Combined
Accession Lists reflecting the new additions
to the collections in various associated
libraries. Examples of such lists are :

a) Combined Aerospace Book Additions,
and Combined Aerospace Report Additions
issued by National Aerospace Laboratories,
Bangalore, with inputs from over 20
aerospace libraries.
b) DESIDOC's 'Union Catalogue of
Periodicals' subscribed by DRDO Libraries.
Under the INFLIBNET project of UGC,
university libraries may be creating machine
readable OPAC's (Open public access
catalogue) representing their holdings.
The NISSAT Sectoral Information Centres
may also be required to bring out similar
OPACs and monthly combined accession
lists in the respective subject fields.
All these OPACs and combined
accession lists may be sent to INSDOC for
input in the National Union Catalogue.
INSDOC has brought out the National
Union Catalogue of Scientific Serials in
CD-ROM format. Other national union
catalogues on books and monographs,
reports, conference proceedings, etc., may
also be brought out in CD-ROM format and
distributed to the Regional and Satellite
DDCs.

4.5 Operational Aspects of the
Service
The National Document Delivery
Service, as and when it is introduced,
should be widely publicised to the
academic and scientific communities by
extensive publicity campaigns through
leaflets, newsktters, advertisements in the
mass media and seminars, etc.
The users should have the freedom to
register with any DDC and be free to send
the document requests by one or more of
the communication channels of their
choice, viz. post, telephone, telex, e-mail,
and/or other electronic transmission
systems.

The sequence of operations in executing
a request for document delivery will be as
follows:

o The user contacts anyone of the National,
Regional and Satellite DDCs nearest to
him.

o The DDC which receives the request
should supply the reprint, if the source
document is available in its collection.

o If the source document is located in any
other DDCs, the document request
should be transferred to the concerned
DDC for processing the request and
supplying the document directly to the
user.

o If the source document is not available in
any of the Satellite DDCs, the Regional
DDCs or the National DDC, it should be
the responsibility of the National DDC to
procure the document from foreign
sources and supply it to the user.

o For the purpose of procuring documents
from foreign sources, the National DDC
may register itself with one or more of the
following international DDCs:
(a) International Photocopying Service,
Library of Congress, Washington DC

(b) BLDSC. Boston Spa, Wetherby,
England, (via ARTTel)

York,

(c) Research Libraries Croup Inc., California,
(USA) (via Ariel)
(d) Dialog's DIALORDER Service
(e) Micromedia Ltd., Toronto, Canada

(9 'Request-a-Reprint'

Institute for Scientific
Information, Philadelphia, USA (through
their Indian agents)

(g) Other major international document
delivery centres, as required.
The DDC which supplies the document
to the user shall also bill him for the cost of
DESlDOC Bulleth of Inf Technol. 1995,15(1)

the document supplied at the uniform rate
specified in the basic policy document.
Each DDC may maintain a separate
revolving account for all the financial
transactions relating to document delivery
and send an annual statement of receipts
and expenditure to the designated
authority.

5. CONCLUSION
Document delivery service plays a vital
.role in information access and
dissemination and forms an essential
element of the national information system.
While considerable progress has been
made in the country in setting up facilities
for online access to international databases

DESHWC BulIeftn of Inf Technd, 1995,15(1)

for information search and retrieval and
from a large number of CD-ROM databases
available in various libraries ahd information
centres, the problem of providing copies of
the full-text documents selected by the
users from the search results still remains
unresolved to a great extent. The users who
get copious references and abstracts from
the databases on their topics of interest are
frustrated when they fail to get a full text
copy of the document they need.
The national document delivery system
should be developed concurrently with the
introduction and use of modern information
access and retrieval facilities. Any further
delay in this regard would affect seriously
the academic and R&D activities in the
country.

