DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol 15, No 2, March 1995, pp 17-26

0 1995, DESIDOC

Selection Criteria for Library Automation Software
NM Malwad
)R D Tata Memorial Library
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore- 560 0 72

ABSTRACT
Readymade software packages are available in the market for a wide
range of applications including library housekeeping operations, and
information storage and retrieval. Their capabilities differ, prices vary
and their versions keep on changing. Selection of suitable software
package is an important factor in library automation systems. There
are not many publications or case studies discussing the criteria for
selecting suitable software. The selection is based on specific needs
of the institution, its environment, budget, users, aims and objectives.
The paper reviews some selected evaluation works, studies and
reports. Various criteria which emerge from these reviews are
discussed.

"Toerr is human, but to really foul things up requires a computer''
- Philip Howard, The Wmes, February 25, 1987
"The most damaging phrase in the language is, we have always done in this way."
- Rear Admiral Frace Murrey Hopper in an interview in Information Week. March 9,1987, p. 52

1. INTRODUCTION
Software is a computer program for
using computers and other such hardware
to their optimum capabilities. As computers
do only what they are told to do and
therefore, the instructions given to
computer should be unambiguous. Writing
step by step instructions without any
ambiguity to solve a particular problem is
called programming. A software package
can have one or more computer programmes to solve a specific problem. A
DESIDOC BulYetfn of Inf Techno1,1W5,15(2)

programming language provides a special
type of grammar and syntax to the
programmer to enable him to give
instructions in a simple and understandable
way.
Writing programmes and developing
software packages involves special training,
hardwork, time and money. For developing
in-house software to solve complex
problems, these requirements become
severe and unmanageable. Due to these
limitations, the practising librarians or

information scientists should be exposed to
some commercially available software
packages.
Software packages are generally
available as commercial products which
typically provide solutions to particular
application problems. Since they are
developed on a commercial scale in a
competitive market for use by a variety of
customers, a great amount of skill and effort
i s put in their development. Therefore, they
are reliable, easy to use and in many
instances, well-documented. Ready-made
software packages are now available for a
wide range of applications such as
management information systems (MIS),
industrial support systems, office
automation systems, library automation and
information retrieval operations.

2. CATEGORIES O F SOFTWARE
Computerisation of Library and
information services, involves non-numeric
data processing, text retrieval, manipulation
of strings of characters and information
retrieval, etc. Some general purpose
software packages can be used for these
purposes and for specific needs, special
purpose software are also available in the
market.
The various categories of such software
and their features are:
(a) Basic software for data entry, validation,
sorting and merging of files, and editing of
data
(b) Word processing software to manipulate
text-storage, recall, use and modify;
alignment o f margins, addition and
deletion of string of characters,
manipulate paragraphs, etc.
(c) Database management systems (DBMS)
for creation and management of
databases, file management systems,
relational database management systems

(RDBMS),
DBMS

network and hierarchical

(c) Text-Retrieval Packages for storage and
retrieval 'of non-numeric records (tabular
or
even
graphics).
These
are
self-contained software, require minimum
involvement of computer specialists,
records are independent of variable
length for natural language text, have
access to data by context, inverted file
access, user interfaces which makes them
simple and easy to use. Search and
indexing facilities are other important
features
(d) Software Associated with Searching
Online Retrieval System and CD-ROM
Databases. Major online systems have
their own software usually written in
command language, provide access to
external databases, private or personal file
facility, and permit editing of search files
on micros
(e) Library House Keeping Software : These
have
provision
for
acquisition,
cataloguing, circulation control, serials
control and statistical report generation

.

Library automation software or
computer based information storage and
retrieval systems cover two major functional
areas, namely (i) control and management
of library resources, and (ii) access to
documents and information. These two
areas deal with library house-keeping
systems and text retrieval systems
the distinction
respectively. Gradually,
between hem is vanishing. In latest
software packages there is provision for
both library house-keeping operations as
well as public access for information
retrieval.
In addition, there are software packages
for re-organisingand presenting information
in desired format, producing publications,
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno1,1995,15(2)

arid to control and manipulate statistical
and financial data.
Library automation software packages
can also be grouped in four categories:
(i) Word processing,
(ii) Library house-keepingoperations,
(iii)Management
support, and

communications

and

(iv)Text retrieval.
The type of software can be categorised
based on the hardware or computer
systems used. For example,
(a) Microcomputer-basedsoftware
(b) Mini computer-based software
(c) Large mainframe-based software
Each of these categories of software may
be either In-house software that is owned
and operated by the library, or shared with
other libraries through a consortium
arrangement-through a bibliographic
information network.

3. OPTIONS FOR SELECTION
In recent times, libraries are not
encouraged to develop the software for its
use. In other words, libraries are advised
not to waste efforts, time and money in
developing in-house programmes for library
house-keeping operations and public access
information storage and retrieval. Software
development is a costly, time consuming
and risky job whose results may be
uncertain. However, the options available
for selection of library automation software
are summarised below:
(i) Acquire a prbwritten, off-the-shelf
software package (e.g. LIBSYS),
(ii) Acquire a turnkey package incorporating
both hardware and software (e.g.
MINISIS, TULIS),

(iii)Write in-house programmes,
(iv)Commission writing of programmes, and
(v) Participate in the formation of, or join a
coaperative that offers access to software
and/or hardware and/or databases.
Rowley (20) discusses the advantages
and disadvantages o f commercially
available software packages. She concludes,
"It is sensible to choose a commercially
available package, -since it is too costly to
write a local software package or to
commission someone to do this, even
though a tailor-made package designed
specifically for a given application is most
likely to fit all the requirements of that
application."

4. GUIDES T O COMMERCIALLY
AVAILABLE SOFTWARE
There are a large number of
commercially available library automation
software packages. Studies that enumerate,
compare and highlight the salient features
of these software packages are also in
abundance. An effort is made here to
review some such selected studies to
enable one to fathom the length, breadth
and depth of the problem of selecting a
suitable software for one's use.
Clossbrenner (4) in his book How to
buy software: The master guide to picking
the right program describes many general
and specific application software but does
not mention the library housekeeping or
information storage and retrieval software
packages. In his coverage of 648 pages
divided into three parts with 25 chapters
and four special appendices, a number of
software packages are mentioned which
could be used for general applications and
other areas related to library automatip.
These include packages for wordprocessing, database management,
statistical manipulation, online searching of

Most of these studies are confined to
user interfaces as the principle of
comparison of software packages. They
usually give rules on how to rank the
CD-ROM publications, how to give marks
for the CD-ROM databases in addition to
the software. In many cases the
performance factors that are most
important for professional searchers are
usually missing from these collection of
rules.

databases, etc. The book is a comprehensive, user friendly master guide for
selecting suitable software for specific
purposes.
Hansen (6) in Microcomputer user's
guide to information online lists more than
100 sources of information, and their
access software. Rowley (20) lists some
text retrieval software for microcomputer
and for mainframe/microcomputer systems.
Further, She adds a list of library
house-keeping software, their features and
suppliers. Mahajan(l3) surveys some 40
software packages.

Valas (24) emphasises the performance
factors that are considered to be the most
important viewpoints for a professional
searcher. "A retrieval system may be as user
friendly as you wish; but you will not like it
if one single search steD in an intricate
query may take two hours and displaying
the hits may take another two; or if
complicated search strategies are not
possible at all."

5. SOFTWARE WITH CD-ROM
DATABASES

-

The CD-ROM databases are usually
provided with information retrieval and
public access software. Valas (24) gives a
comparison of some well known CD-ROM
information retrieval software packages.
There are not many publications dealing
with the comparison of different CD-ROM
information retrieval software packages.
Richards and Robinson (18) suggest a
model for evaluating CD-ROM software
whereas, Harry and Oppenheim (7) discuss
the various criteiia for evaluating electronic
databases. jacso (8) describes the
evaluation, selection and installation of
CD-ROM software, dataware and hardware.
Jasco (9) searches for skeletons in the
database cupboard to find errors of
omission and commission. McFaul (16)
comes out with a final report on consistent
interface guidelines. Tian-Zhu (23) limits his
formal analysis to searching capabilities and
ease of use of CD-ROM user interfaces.
Sieverts (22) and others give additional
programmes for testing, evaluating and
comparing software for information storage
and retrieval.

6. INDIAN SCENARIO
Chowdhury and Chowdhury(1) discuss
the automated text retrieval and library
management software in India. A number
of software packages have been released
recently by government and private
agencies. The authors provides a list of 20
and a brief overview of 10 selected indian
packages released upto 1994, namely,
CATMAN, CDS/ISIS, LIBRARIAN, LIBSYS,
MAITRAYEE, MECSYS, NIRMALS, SANJAY,
TULIPS and WILISYS. Considering the cost
aspect, it is concluded that CDS/ISIS along
with SANJAY (with a few modifications)
might prove to be the most suitable
package for most Indian libraries.
'

The authors compare the common
features such as cataloguing, OPAC, online
help, acquisition, circulation and serials
control of the selected packages. However,
the criteria to evaluate such packages are
not discussed. Major problem areas of
library automation in India are as follows:
DESlDOC Belleiln of inf TechnoI,lW5,15(2)

Funds, manpower and retrospective
conversion
Facilities for entering data in desired
format
Downloading facilities for data
Facilities for data exchange
Problems in creating files in packages
based on DBMS due to long fields for
longer data fields (e.g., in Oracle), and use
of repeatable fields which are common i n
bibliographic and text database (e.g.
SANJAY, LIBSYS, CDS/ISIS )

7. WHY I S SELECTION
DIFFICULT?
Selection of suitable software for library
automation is always what Grosch ( 5 ) calls,
a case of "fud" where 'f' stands for fear, 'u'
for uncertainty and 'd' for doubt. This is
because of the technical parameters
associated with the selection of the
software, such as the shape of network,
computing platform, type of operating
systems and various standards. Since
today's software investments are likely to be
for longer term than those made some
three decades ago, the overall system
architecture may now play a stronger role in
such selection. The problems are :
(a) A large number o f software packages :A
c o n ~ r v a t i v eestimate shows more than
80,000 separate software packages for a
variety of purposes-not all are for library
house-keeping operations but a large
number may include information storage
and retrieval. The number of such
packages is multiplying like 'coat hangers
in a darkened closet'.
(b) Over choice :A large number of software
packages give not only choice but over
choice to select one that is suitable for the
purpose.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol,lW5.15(2)

(c) Tall claims : Advertisements for each
software package tries to claim that it is
one up and better than others. There is
plenty of material to confuse the
selector-journal
articles, prod.uct
brochures, direct mail solicitations and
catalogues. The software producers
generously distribute lot of advertising
material.
(d) Documentation : Often the product
manual supplied with the software does
not provide adequate information for the
installation and for using the software by
the user on his own.
(e) Cost : At times, the software is costlier
than the hardware on which it is to be
used. Further, the software package is
normally purchased as a one time
investment.
Other common problems that make the
selection of software difficult, relate to :
Understanding the exact purpose for
which it is to be acquired
H Knowing the physical and social
environment in which it is to be used

Understanding the educational and
professional level, and aptitude of the
persons who are going to use the software
Knowing the compatibility, simplicity and
ease of use of the software.

8. CRITERIA TO SELECT LIBRARY
AUTOMATION SOFTWARE
To evaluate a particular software
package, a simple procedure is to read the
literature supplied by the manufacturer,
look at the reviews and advertisements
published in various computer magazines
and to ask the salesperson for a
demonstration of the programme. What is
often found to be missing in this procedure
is the basic conceptual understanding of
what a computer does on a physical level

and how the software works (4). It is not
necessary to know the details of computer
components, such as accumulators,
registers, clock signals, instruction set of
3 8 0 microprocessors or computer
programming, etc. But, when deciding on
the best suitable software, more computer
knowledge i s required than just how to
insert a disc into the slot and press a key.
However, the following general
guidelines may be useful in selecting a
program.
Locate and evaluate a knowledgeable
dealer or sales person
Thoroughly examine the documentation
for the software you are considering
Arrange for a demonstration of the
software
Prepare yourself before the demonstration
Put the program through its paces
Evaluate the quality of support you can
expect from the dealer or vendor.

8.1 Criteria for selection: Study No.1
Glossbrener (4) has given the following
twelve sure-fire rules for selecting software.
Rule 1: Do not take anything for granted.
There i s more hidden in
advertisements than it is revealed.

the

Rule 2: You are not the stupid one.
Don't ever let yourself feel foolish when
looking at, reading about, using, or
otherwise dealing with a computer
program. If its creators haven't lived upto
their responsibility, it is their fault, not yours.
Rule 3: How many and how long?
How many author names can you put in
that file? How long can each name be?
Nothing brings a program's limitations to
the surface faster than these questions.

Rule 4: Forget about the sizzle and focus on
the steak
Ask, what the program can to do and
how well it can do it? The advertisement
may say, "This program contains all the
standard word processing features". Note,
there are no widely agreed 'standard'
features of any program. I n short,
concentrate on performance and forget the
decoration
Rule 5: Whenever possible, make an effort
to visualise yourself using the program.
Visualise, how much work will be
involved putting all of your books, records,
or magazines into database management
files? Will you be able to enter each new
book record? The more accurately you
visualise
the
steps involved in
accomplishing a task .the more you know
about how a given program will deal with
those steps.
Rule 6: Read at least two reviews of any
program before you buy.
Rule 7: Get a demonstration on the
identical computer, configured exactly as
the one you will be using.
Rule 8: Life will be easier if you stick with
proven products offered by major hardware
and software firms.
Rule 9: Buy only the four 'building block'
programs to start with. It is easy to master a
program faster and comprehensively, if you
concentrate on just one at a time. The fout
building
block
programs
are
communications, word processing,
electronic spreadsheet and personal filing
or database management.
Rule 10 : Don't drive yourself crazy trying
to get something to work. Ask.
Rule I I: Nothing is impossible. But the
game may not be worth the candle.
Computers and software are so versatile
DESlDOC Bu#etinof Inf Technd,1W5.15(2)

that you can accomplish just about
anything you want. But these will not save
the time, effort and money.
Rule 12: Whenever you can-WAIT! Make
sure the rapidly changing soft\lvare market
place works for you.

8.2 Criteria for Selection: Study Np.2
There is another monumental work
discussing various criteria to evaluate and
select library automation software,
particularly for the housekeeping
operations. The eight volume series
publication entitled Library Systems
Evaluation Guide, is brought out by Jera
(12). Since, it was published in 1983, the
Guide may be a little outdated. However,
the principle evaluation criteria discussed
are still valid. The coverage in eight volumes
of the Guide is indicated in the Table 1.
The Cuide presents basic information on
the requirements and techniques of
evaluation of automated library applications
in a concise and easily usable format.
TABLE 1: Indication of coverage inLibrary
Systems Evaluation Guide

Vol.
No.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

7.
8.

Title
Serial Control
Circulation Control
Public Service
Acquisitions
Management
Services
Interlibrary loan
Cataloguing
System integration
Total

No. of
pages

No. of
reference

194
261
267
252
234

97
117
96
88

248
261
278
1995

98
168
198
922*

60

* No effort is made to identify the unique
references. The total number of references
includes a number of multiple citations.
(Source: James E rush Association Inc.., Powell,
Ohio, 1983)
OESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno1,1095,1&2)

The Guide considers 'evaluation' as
'relative in nature'. Therefore, to determine
the ability of various systems to meet a
library's requirements, the systems must be
compared with each other or to some
reference model. The latter approach to
evaluation i s both easier and more
objective, provided a reference model is
available. The Guide provides such a
reference model, which could suitably be
adjusted to represent the requirements of a
given library and then this model may be
used to evaluate one or more number of
library automation software packages. The
Guide suggests an eight-phase evaluation
methodology.
Phase 1: Setting objectives.
Phase 2: Fine tuning of components of the
methodology to agree with objectives.
Phase 3: Selection of candidate systems for
evaluation.
Phase 4: Examination of accompanying
system literature and documentation.

Phase 5: Comparison of candidate systems
with the functions and features table, and
with the checklist of data elements.
Phase 6: On-site evaluation of candidate
systems.
Phase 7: System selection and acquisition.
Phase 8: Postinstallation evaluation.

8.3 Criteria for Selection: Study No.3
Rowley (20) emphasises the need to
identify systems requirements before the
selection of either software or hardware.
According t o her, the functional
requirements are important. Therefore in
the evaluation of any package for a given
application, priority must be given to
establish whether the software is capable of
performing the tasks for which it is to be
acquired. She gives a checklist for the

evaluation of software, which is briefly
described below:
(a) General Criteria

Hardware : Compatibility with software,
its various versions and also ability to run
other necessary or useful software on the
computer system.

-

Other's experiences: Useful in indicating
the potential and problems of a software
package; some users may offer help and
advice in implementing the package.

B Ease-in-use:The quality of the operator
machine interface, menus, commands,
screen displays, documentation, etc. will
enhance ease in use of the software.

Cost :Comparisons of prices of packages
be made. What is included in the price of
the package and what is excluded should
be understood. Cost of hardware and
database creation are additional costs.

Supplied format : Software must be
supplied on disks, tapes, etc., that can be
run on the system and when required
transferred to another medium such as
hard disk.

Originator : The originator's reputation,
and experience in developing software is
helpful. An established software house is
more likely to be able to offer continuing
support.
Supplier : Sometimes the supplier is the
same as the originator, if the supplier is a
separate agency acting as an intermediary
betweenthe user and the originator, it may
hinder direct communication between the
user and the originator.
(b)TechnicalCriteria
In addition to the general criteria of the
selection, the following technical criteria
should be considered, both when selecting
between packages and also in assessing
whether any specific package is suitable for
a given purpose.
Language :The programming language in
which the software is written. Whether a
compiler or interpreter is available on the
given system to run it efticiently in terms
of machine time and storage
requirements.
H Operating System :The package must be
suitable for running under the operating
system on the hardware being used.
Whether it is a single user or multiuser
operating system that will function on a
network.

(c) Support Criteria

It is an important criteria for using the
software and to fully exploit the various
features of the software.
Documentation : It includes both printed
documentation and online help facility.
The documentation should cover
introductory exploration of the basic
features, a full account of all features, a list
of commands, an online help system,
additional tutorial support, choice to
interface at different levels depending on
user's experience, etc.

B Advice to setting up : Assistance in
installing and implementing the package
must be provided. This may cover creation
of databases, input formats, report
formats, initialisation, etc.
TIaining in the use of software package.
Maintenance : This may include removing
any bugs or errors that might become
evident in the software as i t is used for a
greater variety of applications and
improving the software so that i t
incorporates new facilities and concepts
(e.g., mouse, windows, popup menus).

B User groups : Many of the larger and
well-established software packages (e.g.,
CDS/ISIS, LIBSYS) have user groups or
DESDOC wern of /nf ~~chnol,im,
1a21

user clubs. These groups share expertise
and experience in application of the
software, discuss problems and limitations
in using the software and present a
concerted front to the software supplier
for solving problems and asking for
improvements.
For the actual checklist, please refer to
the Appendix 1 and 2 of Rowley's
contribution on automation options (20).

8.4 Criteria for Selection: Study No.4
Grosch (5) discusses some procurement
and evaluation factors together market
trends that may affect the future of library
systems. The major system evaluation and
selection criteria according to Grosch is the
availability of the capabilities and product
enhancements of the application software
at the time of its installation. The other
criteria include examining hardware
platform options, operating system
requirements, directions of the system
developers towards open systems,
conversion support, training, ongoing
software support, record of old and new
versions of the software, ease-of-use, etc.
The advice is : 'Setting realistic goals that
are attainable in your selection of a system,
biting off only what can now afford but
providing a goal enhancement base for
future years, will result in an easier systems
transition'.

the right user, the sophistication and decor
of the package is worthless.
The categories of software explained
before help in fixing the appropriate
category of the software for the purpose of
library automation. Based on what one has
i n terms of physical environment
(computer) and social environment (users,
staff) and what one can afford, suitable
software has to be selected. There are many
options and a large variety of software
packages. It is suggested to acquire a
commercially available software package.
These are developed for use by a variety of
customers. A great amount of skill and
effort is put in their development. They are
expected to be reliable, easy to use, well
documented and they are available for a
wide range of applications. Even then the
selection of suitable software is difficult
because of their availability in large number,
over choice, tall claims, varied cost,
technicalities involved, etc.
It is necessary to know the various
criteria that could be applied in selecting
the suitable software. The four selected
studies, by Glossbrenner, Library Systems
Evaluation Guide, Rowley and Grosch
provide a variety of selection criteria. This
wider perspective of such criteria wiJJ be
helpful and provide better pitch and
outfield to play the serious game of
selecting the suitable player-that is, the
required software package.

9. CONCLUSION

10. REFERENCES

Electronic spread-sheets crunch
numbers. Word processing programmes
crunch words. Library automation and
information storage and retrieval
programmes crunch information. They help
to deal effectively with information
explosion. The purpose is important. If the
selected software cannot retrieve right
information at right time in right format for

1. Chowdhury, G.G. & Chowdhury, Sudatta.
Text retrieval and library management
software in India. NlSSAT Newsletter,
1994. 3, 18. (Reproduced from
Programme V.28: No.3, July 1994).

DESIDOC Bulletln of Inf Technol,1995,15(2)
\

2. Dyer, M and Gunson, A. A directory of
library and information retrieval software
for microcomputers. Ed.4 Grower,
Aldershot, 1990.

3. Gates, H. Factors to consider in choosing
a microcomputer for library housekeeping and information retrieval in a
small library. Program, 1984, .April 18,
111-23.
4. Glossbrenner, Alfred. H o w to buy
software: The master guide to picking the
right program. St. Martin's Press, New
York, 1984.
5. Grosch,
Andrey. in Evaluation,
procurement and other factors affecting
the shaping of your library system, Ch 5:
Microcomputer LAN Based Bibliographic
software, p. 183-216 and Ch 8: Library
information technology and networks.
Marcel Dekker, New York, 1995. p
297-352.
6. Hansen, Carol. The microcomputer user's
guide to information online. Hyden Book
Co., New Jersey, 1984

7. Harry, V and Oppenheim, C. Evaluation of
electronic databases. Part I: Criteria for
testing CD ROM products. Online &
CD-ROM Review: 1993, 17(4), 2 11-22.
8. Jasco, Peter. CD-ROM databases software
and hardware: Selection and installation.
Libraries Unlimited, Inc., Englewood Co.,
1991.
9. Jasco, Peter. Searching for skeletons in the
database cupboard. Part I: Errors of
omission, Database, 1993. February, p.
38-49. Part II: Errors of commission.
Database, 1993. April, p. 30-36.
lO.Kimberley, R. (Ed). Text retrieval: A
directory of software, Ed.3. Grower,
Aldershot, 1990.
11.Leeves, J. Library System: A buyer's guide,
Ed.2. Grower,Aldershot, 1989.
12. James, E. Library systems evaluation
guide. Rush Associates, Powell, Ohio,
1983. (8 vol).
13.Mahajan, S.M. The role of minis and
micros in bibliographic information
retrieval. In: Library and information
science horizon edited by B. Guha. Allied
Publishers Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 1986. pp.
263-85.
26

14.Malwad, N.M. Role of CDS/ISIS in
computerised information handling in
India. Keynote address delivered at the
inaugural function o f the CDS/ISIS
programme at the S.K. University,
Ananthapur, 16 May, 1994.
15.Mathews, I.R. A reader on choosing an
automated library system. American
Library Association, Chicago, 1983.
16.McFauL, E.J. CD-ROM consistent
interface guidelines: A final report.
CD-ROM Librarian, , 1992, February, 18.
17.Ramsden, A. Micro software for library
and information work: An overview. Aslib
Proceedings 1988. 40(1), 9-17.

.

18.Richards, T and Robinson, C. Evaluating
CD-ROM software: A model CD-ROM
Professional. 1993. September, 92-101.
19.Rowbottom, M. First steps in choosing
information retrieval packages. Library
Micromation News. 1984. April, 13-16.
20.Rowley, Jennifer.Automation Options. In:
Handbook of special librarianship and
informationwork. edited by Pathi Dossett.
Ed. 6. Aslib, London, 1992.
21.Saffady, W. Text storage and retrieval
systems: A technology survey and product
directory. Meckler, London, 1989.
22.Sieverts, E.G. et a/. Software for
information storage and retrieval tested,
evaluated and compared. The Electronic
Library, 1993. 11(2), 73-91.
23.Tian-Zhu, L. Generic approach to
CD-ROM systems: A formal analysis of
search capabilities and ease in use. In
Interface for information retrieval: The
state of the art, edited by M. Dillon.
Greenwood Press, New York, 1991. pp.
272-274.
0

24.Valas, George. Comparison of some
wide-spread CD-ROM information
retrieval software packages. Online &
CD-ROM Review, 1994, 13(14), 2 11-26.
25.Zinkf S.D. Towards more critical reviewing
and analysis of CD-ROM user interfaces.
CD-ROM Professional. 1991. January, 16.
DESIDOC Buaetin 'of lnf Technd,1995.15(2)
/

