DESIDOC 8ulletin of InformationTechnology, Vol 15, No 2, March 1995, pp 27-30
8 1995, DESIDOC

Library Automation :Change for Productivity in Service
M A Gopinath

Documentation Research and Training Centre, Indian Statistical lnstitute
Bangalore560059

ABSTRACT
Library operations, in the context of the automation necessitate for an
integrated approach and change in the perception of library's work. It
examines the functional aspects, social aspects and system dynamics
of library automation. Some strategies for library automation are
suggested.

1.

INTRODUCTION

The introduction of any automated
system i s a challenge to the basic
administrative skills of the librarians who
must make the decisions, facilitate smooth
implementation, and achieve maximum
benefits from the capabilities of a
computer-based system.

which needs little learning in switching over
from manual operation to automation of
library processes. The built-in operator
friendliness is important. It should remove
the technophobias and training phobia from
the librarian's mind.

2. CHANGE IN PERCEPTION OF
LIBRARY'S WORK

When a system is in operation, careful
anention is necessary to ensure that
adjusted for efficient
~ r o c e d uare
~
use of available features, job design and
work.

Library operations, in the context of the
automation necessitate for an integrated
approach. The trend of rokchanges or role
accretion
in a library can be said to
emphasise a librarian as a :

Enlisting the assistance of staff using the
system to suggest alternatives in processing
methods is one useful way of improving
both operation and morale. The
contribution of library and information
professionals has to interface with the
capabilities of software and hardware
aspect of computer technology. With the
emergence of micro computer-particularly
the palm-top one-we should use a software

Document collection builder, preserver
and promoter of its use

DESIDOC BuBettn of Inf T8chmII1005,1 M2)

Content analyser of the text of documents
and assigner of descriptors to information
content of these text. Such descriptor
assignments empower the potential
searcher to browse, scan, link, focus,
appraise and select relevant information
from these text.
27

Provider of access to in-house documents
as well as from outside libraries; demand
satisfaction as principal focus and there by
demand generation for better utilisation of
library resource are extended values.
All these objectives coexist to make a
library function in an integrated manner.

3. FUNCTIONAL ASPECTS
Library automation is a phenomenon
through which computer-based information
processing is used in day-today operation
of library systems and services. A large
library works like a service industry, Library
staff, particularly professional librarians have
to consistently do their specialised work
such as acquisition, technical processing,
and delivery of documents and public
services such as circulation, reference,
retrieval, dissemination.
Many of a library's house keeping
functions consists clerical repetitive work
and a touch of professional activities.
Libraries are generally understaffed. Many a
time, the librarian gets lost in acquiring and
organising documents. Consequently he
finds less time for human aspects of library
and information services. Library
automation, particularly micro-computer
operation releases energies of library
professionals to the human aspects of
librarianship.
Current rubicon of a library automation
is an Online Public Access Catalogue,
(OPAC). An OPAC is designed to do the
following:
To provide access to literature available in
a library.
To provide multi-point and multi-person
access.
To tell about what books have been lent
and what are in the stock of a library.

One of the important aspects of OPAC
is to have public access spread out to work
stations of scholars, researchers, teachers,
managers, decision-makers and others.
Access terminals can be located adjacent to
stack and office to dormitories and homes
even. Printers can be provided to enable
the users to make hard copies of their
search results.
An OPAC provides access to data at
every stage of processing and eventual
circulation activity. The system modules are
linked in recognition that the library is one
complex, interrelated, inter connected,
multi-faceted operation. The systemmodule component covers all aspects of
house keeping such as acquisition
periodicals management, circulation
control,
shelf-management,
online
catalogue, etc. These flow-in operation, cut
away the ergonomic ducts, and reduce
fatigue of the individuals in doing respective
action. It can preserve the momentum of
professionals to plan and act continuously.
The task of creating and managing library
automation towards providing bibliographic
and physical access to end user demands
vision and mission of activity at every stage.
Computer-based technology has now
enabled the document-technical process to
be organised, and used for better
productivity. The technical service librarians
can act as system designers, providing
requirement analysis to develop dataprocessing systems. This in-house
framework for technical services would be
constantly and progressively maintained in
automated library processing. This would of
course call for adoption of compatible
standards for library-processing of
documents. One of the benefits of these
flexibilities is that it provides for an
objective assessment of an individual's or a
professional's
performance. As a
consequence the integrated approach in
library automation, the staff in each library
DESIDOCBuaetk,of Inf Technd,1995,1M2)

have the functional responsibilities to meet
the standards that are recognised' beyond
their own specialised areas of work. They
are often exposed to end-users at remote
access
level,
therefore,
the
quality-consciousness in the performance
will bring them honour and professional
pride. From the point of view of team work,
this self-esteem will help in improving the
overall performance of the library.

4. CONTROLS IN AUTOMATION
Library automation has to be consistent
with standards and. guidelines. Human
performance inconsistency should be
channelled and therefore, it is necessary to
allow structural guidelines.
Individual professionals must have a
clear sense of job identity, encouraging
professionak'sm. It should guard against the
potential of diffused work. However, the
exchange of views and thoughts should be
promoted among the professionals
regarding specifications of the automation
process to improve the quality of process
and performance of services. This should
be guarded against any loss of overall
library objectives. Scheduling of work must
be simpler and specific application time
should not be wasted in solving problems
of communication between professionals.
Such good objective specification process
would encourage development of
specialists knowledge, An erosion of tight
boundaries help in analysis and flexible
performance of jobs.

change. Defining relationships in an
organisational manual may be useful, but it
must lead to professional tolerance to work
towards mutual performance. Current
approach to improvement of designs on job
is linked to ultimate performance. The focus
is to review the achievements in library
service to end users. For example, a
cataloguing professional would contribute
inputs to OPAC, and at the same time as a
manager he would contribute to the
cost-effective use of computer applications
in bibliographic record maintenance.
He/she would also design the ergonomic
benefits of the system-models from the user
point of view as well as the staff point of
view. This i s i n consonance with
Ranganathan's law save the time of the
reader' and save the time of the staff. The
whole thing is arranged in the context of his
fifth law 'library is a growing organism'. The
current specifications of acquisition,
technical processing, and services are likely
to be merged in automation. But new
socialism of end user analysis would lead to
object-oriented services, such as the
following:
FunctionalSpecialism

Performance Analysis
Specialism
The transaction
Response time
The enquiry response time between failures
The output formats
Analytic and
integrative feedback
on services
The integrity of
Adoptive process
library systems
towards achievements

5. SOCIAL ASPECTS
The social relationship in a changed
system of library automation is to be valued.
Crispdecisions made to stale and creativity
may be blocked or discharged. But
continuing personel attention from library
management would help to recognise
individuals and teams creative buds of

6. SYSTEM DYNAMICS O F
AUTOMATION
Library automation as a systemdynamic
process incorporates changes and retains
good performance to users. A structural
base with overall mission can be used for
29

the purpose of keeping the professionaldynamics in automation. The adage form
the Dhammapada "what we are today came
from our thoughts of yesterday and present
thought build our life tomorrow"tells us to
be careful in utilising the human resource of
the library.
This calls for human focus in social
technical design. Professional adopters of
library automation should explore the
problem area thoroughly before any design
work can be taken up. The performers of
routine work are to be involved in the
adoption process. They must adopt
analytical techniques with data flow in all
operations of a library. Focus should be
built in all professional works in the flow of
events by modelling the life of major
processes, procedures and service-targets.
Subsequent steps add in the deserved

30

motivation for functional results. I t should
be object-oriented and event-oriented
analysis.
Some strategies for library automation
are suggested below:
H Reduce the number of organisation leads
H Create a matrix organisational structure
Change the unit size diameter (smaller)
H Tap creative talents on the job
H Encourage achievements
H Always keep the achievement alive

Share the total impact of efforts of the
team
H Always be innovative.
The human factor provides
socio-dynamics to library automation.

a

DESIDOC Bulletin of inf Technoi,1995.15(2)

