DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol 15, No 2, March 1995, pp 3-10
0 1995, DESIDOC

Library Automation :What is Expected of ?
IK'Ravichandra Rao
Documentation Research and Training Centre
Indian Statistical institute, Bangalore - 560 059

ABSTRACT
Although a number of developments are taking place in the field of
information technology and the hardware is readily available at
affordable prices, libraries in India have not yet gone for automation
in a big way. It is partly due to lack of trained manpower and nonavailability of suitable software. This paper attempts to discuss the
areas of computerisation in libraries, the objectives and functions of
computerised acquisition, serials control, circulation, and cataloguing.

1. INTRODUCTION
I t can be rightly said that the
establishment of the Electronic Commission
in the early 1970s was a major step towards
the development of information technology
(IT) in India. This has led to the setting up of
the National Informatics Centre, the
Computer Maintenance Corporation of
lndia and the National Centre for Software
Technology, etc, which became catalysts in
the rapid growth of developments and
applications in this field. Since then
computer applications in different fields
became not only feasible, but popular and
in some cases inevitable; for example,
computerised reservation systems in
transport sector, computer-aided design,
computer-aided teaching (especially for
children),
business
transactions,
communication (e-mail), etc., have been
well accepted by the user population in
their respective fields.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol,lW5.15(2)

In the first half of the fiscal year 1994-95,
more than 1,00,000 systems (including
servers, work stations, notebooks, etc.)
were sold in lndian market (1). It is
estimated that more than 220,000 systems
are likely to be sold in the complete
financial year. As far as software is
concerned, during the first half of the year,
the turnover was nearly 1,075 crore,
including the export component. Further,
these systems were being bought by a large
number of individuals. As such, the
corporate (or the government) segment is
not specifically responsible for the surge in
IT buying. Both the first time users and the
corporate sector are buying equally. This is
due to the realisation of the importance of
IT and high computer literacy among the
literate Indians. These figures and facts
explain the IT environment in India.
Like other professions, even among the
librarians and information scientists, many

are computer literate and have access to
adequate computing facilities. Still, hardly
any library has gone for a total
computerisation. This is partly because of
the following factors :
(a) No proper importance has been given to
library automation. If one carefully looks
at the situation, library automation is given
less importance as compared to the
library networking. It is important to
realise that the success of a network
depends only on the extent of the
automation programme implemented in
each of the participating libraries.
(b) Most of the librarians still consider library
automation as luxury rather than a
necessity for generating resources like an
industry.
(c) Library schools lack adequate facilities to
train the required skilled manpower in
computer applications.

Of course, even after having several
years of experience and involvement in the
field, quite often, we ask ourselves why
should we go for automation when there is
abundant manpower resources? It is
important to note in this context that library
automation has now become inevitable,
because of several factors such as :
(a) Emergence of activities which cannot be
done in the manual system, e.g., remote
real-time access to large databases.

(b) Availability of a nuhber of journals in
machine-readable form. Further, many
databases are available (only) in compact
discs. Such machine-readable databases
can be used for providing simultaneous
access to a laige number of local or
remotely located users.
(c) Fall in the hardware costs; availability of
more public domain software packages
for different applications.
.,
(d) Advances in the IT industry.
4

2. LIBRARY A U T O M A T I O N
Computerisation of all the library
house-keeping. operations is known as
library automation. Most commonly known
housekeeping operations are acquisition,
serials management, cataloguing and
circulation. Depending on the type of
library, all or some of these functions may
be computerised according to their priority.
Circulation control may be given first
priority in a public library while serials
control may be given a top priority in a
special library. Similarly, acquisition may be
computerised first in a university library.
However, cataloguing is important for any
library and its computerisation must be one
of the ultimate aims of the automation
programme (2,3).
Chowdhury and Chowdhury (4) have
given a list of software of Indian origin for
handling library related activities (Table 1)
and also a brief review of some common
facilities available in chosen packages.

2.1 Automated Acquisition Control
Systems (AACS)
The primary objectives of an AACS are
likely to be towa~ds cost containment,
speeding up of the receipt of materials,
improving fund control and developing
single function systems into integrated
systems. The AACS is expected to perform
certain managerial functions in addition to
some clerical functions like pre-order
searching, creating purchase orders, etc.
Systems are usually designed to handle
regular as well as the standing and blanket
orders, exchanges, regular receipts and
non-receipts, out-of-print documents with
wrong billing, unwanted documents with
right billing, prepayment, on approval, and
so on. The system should be able to handle
reorder to another vendor and should
provide retention of records under
DESIDOC Bulletln of Inf Techno1,1995,15(2)

Table 1. Software of Indian origin for the automation of library activities.
-

--

Software
Archives (1,2,3)
ACQUARS, ASCAT, ASCIR, ASIRE, SEARS
CATMAN
Golden LIBRA
LIBRARIAN (2.1 and 3.1)
Library Management
Library Manager
LIBSOFT
LIBSYS, MICRO-LIBSYS LlSTPULS
LoanSoft
MAITRAYEE
MECSYS
NlLlS
N\RMALS
SALIM
SANJAY
Slim 1.1
TULIPS
WlLlSYS

Source
Microfax Electronic Systems, Bombay
Ober Information Systems, Calcutta
INSDOC, New Delhi & ~ o l d k nAge Software
Technologies, Bombay
Soft-Aid, Pune
Raychand Sysmatics, Bangalore
System Data Control Pvt. Ltd., Bombay
Et & T Corpn, New Delhi
LibSys Corp., New Delhi; Computer Systems, Bangalore
Computek Computer System, Hyderabad
CMC, Calcutta, developed for the CALIBNET Project)
MECON, Ranchi
Asmita Consultants, Bombay
Nirmal Institute of Computer Expertise, Tiruchirapalli
Uptron India Ltd., New Delhi
NISSAT, New Delhi, developed by DESIDOC, Delhi
under a NISSAT Project
Algorithms, Bombay
Tata Unisys Ltd.., Bombay
Wipro India, Bangalore

conditions such as items out of print, items
never published, orders cancelled, etc.
Thus, functions of AACS include pre-order
searching, ordering, claiming, cancellation
of orders, receipt processing, payment,
routing, fund accounting, vendor
accounting, currency control, statistics and
report combilation, etc. The system should
be able to handle orders to variety of
documents, viz. monographs, monograph
series, law reports and statutes, musical
scores, etc., irrespective of their physical
formats like print, microfilm, microfiche,
microcard, film, videotape, audio cassette,
compact disc, audio disc, magnetic tape,
software, etc.
The acquisition record may be
accessible online by different data elements
such as purchase order number, author or
DESIDOCBulletinof InfTechnoi,1995.15(2)

corporate heading, title or part of it, subtitle,
series title, conference title, LC card
number, ISSN, ISBN, indentor, etc.
2.1 1 Acquisition File
Data stored in the 'acquisition files'
(often known as order files) may include
complete bibliographic information,
acquisition type (order, gift, exchange, etc.),
information about library, branch, copy,
fund, invoice, vendor, accounting, etc.,
indentor's name, location (i.e., destination),
instructions to the vendor and internal
processing instructions (free text-nonprinting on order form).
2.12 Vendor File
The vendor file consists of vendor's
name and address, vendor claim period
indicator, vendor performance statistics, the
5

(b) Renewal/cancellation of presently subscribed serials

number of times 'claimed' and 'cancelled',
discount percentages, etc. The system
should further keep-track of the time from
placing order to document check-in, so that
performance can be monitored.
2.13 Fund File

(c) Accessioning of individual issues, as and
when the issues are received
(d) Sending reminders, if necessary

,C

(e) Claiming the
issue (request for
replacement of defective copy, follow up
of missing copy, etc.)

The fund file consists of amount
budgeted, amount encumbered, amount
spent, uncommitted balance, starting
balance amount (carried forward from
previous year), encumbrances carried
forward from previous year, supplementary
budget appropriations, etc.

(f) Check-in, routing
(g) Preparation of various lists : List of
periodicals to be renewed; list of
periodicals received/cancelled during a
specified period

2.14 System Output

The output of the system may include
purchase order on different formats (e.g.
8.5" 11" and 3" x 5" multiple part forms),
updated report on availability of funds,
online and off-line communication support
with suppliers, and selected bibliographical
records from other cataloguing support
systems. The output may be in computer
output on microfiche and it may include all
bibliographical and order information. The
system must provide printed output of all
purchase orders or all orders for a particular
vendor, payment type, fund, order type,
order status, and location. As a function
related to listing, the system must have the
ability to perform Boolean sorts using AND,
OR, and NOT on any fixed field and to
print subsets of holdings on this basis.
Further, the system must be able to produce
a variety of reports.

(h) List of holdings with their status : In shelf,
in binding, in circulation, etc.; union listing
(the lists can be by subject, by country of
origin, by title, etc.)
(i) Keeping track of amount spent on serials
subscription, binding, etc.
(j) Estimation of budget
(k) Binding control
The system must handle all types of
serials like, periodicals, continuations, law
reports, news papers, annals, memoirs,
indexes, supplements, loose leaf materials,
etc. The system should also store all data
pertaining to serials, holdings, subscription,
vendor, current issue status, etc.-The system
should provide the ability to :
W Search serials records by title (or part of it),
call number, ISSN, publisher, vendor,
budget number, subscription number,
location, corporate, author, system
assigned number, keyword, etc.

2.2 Automated Serials Control
System (ASCS)
General objectives of an ASCS are to
handle serials and to maintain a holdings
list. To achieve these objectives, the system
must perform the following functions :
(a)Subscribing to new serials : Sending
subscription letters; keying-in serial data
and maintaining subscription file
6

.

W Show gaps in holdings
W Distinguish multiple copies from the same
or different sources
Have special instructions such as
retention, special routing, holding, special
check-in procedures, etc.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol,1995,15(2)

Handle all types of frequencies and it must
allow for easy adjustment of frequency
changes
Handle variable length record.
Here also, the system must have the
ability to perform Boolean sorts on any
fixed fields and to print subsets of holdings
on this basis and further, it must produce a
variety of reports. It must have the
advanced features to handle complicated
procedures of binding control. The data
pertaining to the vendor file and fund file
may be similar to that of AACS.

(d)Printing recall notices for items on
long-term loan, when required by others.
(e) Renewal of loans.
(f) Notification to the library staff .of
delinquent borrowers either at the time of
an attempted loan or when the borrower
is leaving the institution or on request
from the library.
(g) Calculation of fine, printing of overdue
notices, recording the receipt of fines, and
sometimes printing details of fine receipts.
(h) Calculation and printing of statistics.

2.3 Automated Circulation Control
System (ACCS)

(i) Provision to handle special .categories of
users and special types of materials.

Circulation as a library function is a very
specific and well defined operation. It is
concerned with the clerical function of
keeping track of documents taken out or
returned by the user. The scope of an ACCS
can be either traditional or broad
depending upon the design objectives
established by the library. Thus, one of the
basic considerations in the design and
selection of circulation system is defining
the role and objectives of a circulation
system in the library. A typical ACCS
performs some or all of the following
functions :

(j) Provision to print due date slips.

(a) Provision of information for the location
of items under circuhtion-either all items
in the library or only those items on loan
or elsewhere, i.e., at the bindery, on
reserve, being recatalogued, etc.
(b) Identification of items on loan to a
particular borrower or class of borrowers.
(c) Recording of holds or personal reserves
for those items on loan but desired by
another borrower, often with additional
provision for notifying the library staff
when the desired item is returned and
printing notice to the requester about the
availability of the document.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno1,1995.15(2)

Obviously, these functions are in
addition to the,primary functions of the
system-charging and discharging. To
achieve these objectives, the ACCS is
designed to record and manipulate the
following three kinds of information (who
borrowed what and when) :
lnformation about the borrower
lnformation about the document
Information about transactions
These data are collected in a variety of
ways. They may be written on a slip entered
by the borrower or by a library clerk and
then keyed into the system. Alternatively,
the minimum
possible data elements
pertaining to the documents and borrowers
may then be obtained automatically from
pre-punched machine-readable cards. The
complete information of borrowers and
documents then be obtained from
permanently stored users' and items' files
respectively. In a micro-computer system,
information about users and documents
may be appropriately displayed on the
screen by keying in the identification code
number and then the relevant information
7

may be re-written on a transaction file along
with the transaction data.
Information regarding the documents
can thus be considered either as transitory
(i.e., recorded in the transaction file when
only single item is removed from its normal
location-absence
system)
or
as
permanent-inventory system (i.e., stored in
the transaction file irrespective of where the
book is-inventory system). The data
structure and the medium to store the
necessary information may depend upon
the above two systems. Usually, in a typical
ACCS, transaction file, user file, document
file and reservation file are maintained.
Data elements in these files depend upon
the above two systems-absence or
inventory systems.

2.4 Automated Cataloguing System
(ACS)
The primary objective of an ACS is to
-create user access catalogues either by
online or CD-ROM or microform. In a
typical ACS, the following files are
maintained and operated :
Bibliographic file consisting complete
cataloguing elements, as required by
MARC, CCF, etc.)
Authority control file
Catalogue/database, often known as
online/off-line public access catalogue
Item file consisting of records for each
documents
Shelf-list which is separately maintained in
the ACS for convenience and security
reasons
Accession file, which strictly speaking is a
part of an automated acquisition control
system.
The bibliographic and authority control
files are usually accessed only by the library
staff i.e., those who are involved in

cataloguing. Users may be allowed free
access to the cata\ogue/databases; some
times users are even allowed to access
authority control file but not allowed to edit
the authority control file.
An item file is primarily maintained and
operated by the library staff to provide
services like circulation, document location,
etc. The shelf list and accession file are
usually operated and maintained by the
librarian.
The concept of main entry in any ACS is
not that important as compared to the card
catalogue, since any data element rnay
retrieve the entire record. Further, in recent
years, considerable attention has been
given to 'authority control device' in ACS,
since i t is necessary for effective use in
online public access catalogue (OPAC).
Authority control service of any other
bibliographical information system can also
be adopted, without m u c h difficulties, in
the local ACS.
In a typical ACS, cataloguing and
database management modules must have
'interfaces' with other modules. However,
editing capabilities are to be made available
only at designated staff terminals; there
must be a provision for error-check module
to detect and correct common errors.
In any ACS, the provision should be
made to share the bibliographic file by all its
components. It must have the capacity to
provide full MARC bibliographic records
and the necessary index. It must accept,
retain and output complete bibliographic
records either in MARC or Common
Communication Format (CCF) or any other
format similar with I S 0 2079 standard. It
must be able to accommodate and allow
access by a variety o f classification
schedules.
Item file consists of records pertaining to
items; items may be monographs, serials,
DESIDOC Bulletln of Inf Technol,1995.19(2)

Govt. documents, media, or any other type
of materials. Item records contain an
item-specific label number, indication of
adult or juvenile level, fine level, call
number, location, holding facility, and loan
period. It also contains the due date, last
discharge date, number of circulations since
a specified date, holds against the item, etc.
This file is maintained primarily for ACCS,
especially in the inventory system.
The system must be capable of
supporting four levels of record display:

(a) Choice of the system
(b) Mode of operation (e.g., PC-based, batch
mode, LAN-based, online, etc.)
(c) Method of inputting identificationdata (of
documents
and
borrowers)
for
acquisition, circulation, cataloguing, etc.
(d) Available hardware/software.
The major issues in evolving a policy on
library automation can be summarised as
Managing IT resources

Level 1 (Minimum) : Author, title, call
number, publication date

Data security for transborder transfer of
data, in databases, etc.

Level 2 (Brief) : Location, call number, main
entry, title, sub-title, series, edition, holdings,
circulation status

Standards (difficult to introduce, because
of the rapid growth as well as the changes
in the information technology; it is
however a necessity.)

Level 3 (Full) : The data elements as in
Level 1 along with notes, and other information normally found in a catalogue card.
Level 4 (Full MARC) : Including all tags,
indicators, subject codes, fixed field and
variable field data elements.

3.

CHALLENGES AND ISSUES

The challenges of library automation are
concerned with training programmes,
standards to be selected for the
bibliographical formats and records,
retrospective conversion of the manual
catalogue so that the library users will have
access to the machine-readable catalogue
for the entire collection, indexing policy,
hardware and software. Another important
challenge facing the profession is the design
of automated systems, especially in the
absence of computer culture and lack of
funds. One of the important factors in the
design is introducing 'interactive records',
so that transaction in one record
automatically causes changes in the other
relevant and related records. In designing
the system, the factors to be considered
are:
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol,1995.15(2)

Problems due to the international
networks (although there are many
advantages, problems are many; for
instance,
domination
of
the
multinationals, transfer of data in audio
form, cultural issues, etc.
Manpower development in' IT sector with
end-user point of view at university level
to take care of annual maintenance (a
mass programme may be required to take
care of AM).

3.1 Future Scenario
Many institutions in India (even
individuals) will participate in one or more
networks and then in Internet in the near
future. The participation in the
internationally well tested and proven
networks will enable them to have
E-mail facility at a reasonable cost; it will
enable access to several 'bulletins'

U Facsimile transmission (at nearly 1/5th of
the present cost)
Access to several library catalogues all
over the world.

m

Preview of headlines, and reviews from
certain papers
Video phone calls, movies on demand

Preparingjustification for automation

Access to many CD-ROMs

Identifying the library functions to be
automated

Getting into multimedia since hardware is
becoming cheaper. Versatile applications
make this more useful; e.g. 'Microsoft
Bookshelf' is an audio/visual version of the
concise edition of Hammond Atlas,
American Heritage Dictionary, etc.)

4.

CONCLUSION

In this current information technology
age, use of computers for library
house-keeping operations is not simply
feasible, but inevitable. It has. become a
necessity than anything else. Many
networks are now emerging in India. For
participation and also the
effective
utilisation of network resources, it is
necessary for the participating members to
automate their libraries. Although required
hardware for library automation is now
available at a reasonable cost; software
packages are however not easily available.
Before introducing automation, a
comprehensive evaluation of the library
requirements, software features needed,
and capabilities of the hardware for
implementing the software has to be made.
The procedures to determine hardware
requirements and steps involved in
evaluating the software are discusied
elsewhere (3).
Use of computers greatly whances the
productivity of a library by reducing the
time wasted On un~productive work. It
further helps in having immediate access to
upto-date information as well as to share
the limited resources effectively. It is very
important to develop standards for the
machine-readable records for bibliographical information in advance, while
preparing for automation. Some of the
10

important steps to be considered at the
outset are:

Anabsing the functions in detail from
operational point of view ;volume of data
to be handled; type of storage media
required;
outputs required and their
media
Costing
ldentifying or developing the required
software
Selecting/acquiring
software

hardware and

Understanding the hardware and software
Carrying out a pilot study
Implementation
programme

of

full

fledged

Evaluation
The success of library automation
ultimately depends upon the availability of
skilled manpower. It is not difficult to learn
the basics of computer applications, but
most important is the motivation of
librarians in using computers, to get into the
era of library automation and develop skills
and capabilities to automate library
house-keeping operations.

5. REFERENCES
1. The second coming : Cover story. Data
Quest, 16-30 November 1992.
2. Library Technology Report 1992,28(1)

.

3. Ravichandra Rao, I.K. Library automation.
Wiley- Eastern, New Delhi, 1990.
4. Chowdhury, GG & Chowdhury, Sudhatta.
Text retrieval and library management
software in India. NlSSAT NewsLetter,
1994, 3, 13-18.
DESIDOC BvHetk~ofhf Te~hnd,1995,15(2)

