   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
   
   
   
 
   
     
   
  

 
  
 
  
  
   
  
  
   
 
  
   
  
   
  
  
   
 
   
  
    
    
  
 
  
  
    
 

   
   
   
 
   
   
  
   
   
  
  
 
 
   
  
  
   
  
  
 
    
 
 
   
  
  
   
  
   
  

retrieval and library management

 ooucrrou

eighties, software development for
gained momentum and many
packages were developed for
ouse activities of the library. As
of this, recently, a number of

packages for handling
lated activities have been
in the Indian market. And now,
a position to export the software
for library automation and
g to other countries.

" ire of the availability of
ade software for library
_ most of the software are now
Ioped in India. It is because of
cost and non~suitability of these
de packages to the specific
outs of libraries. Moreover,

an oflnforrnation Ted'lnology, Vol 15, No 3, May 1995, pp 3-12

I ' Comparative Study of Software available in the
Indian Market for Library Automation

DR Patel 8: Rachna Bhargava

SAC Library, Space Applications Centre
Ahmedabad—380 053

ABSTRACT

This paper aims to highlight the present Indian scenario of library
automation and presents a brief overview of some existing software
available in the Indian market. It discusses in brief the framework, text

features available with these

‘, packages and also the pros and cons of various software and their
implications in the library environment. Brief outline of the modules
and sub-modules of some prominent library software is also given.

indigeneously developed software are
configured according to the hardware
available in the Indian market and can run

in multi-user and networking envirOnment.

Many library network projects viz, the
INFLIBNET (Information and Library
Network) of the UGC at the national level,
and regional library networks like ADINEI'
(Ahmedabad Information Network), BONEI'
(Bombay Network), CALIBNET (Calcutta
Library Netw0rk), DELNEI' (Delhi Library
Network), MALIBNET (Madras Library
Network), Poona Library Network, etc., are
in different stages of implementation and

will bring signiﬁcant improvements in the

Indian library automation scene.

Computer software for library and
information work can be categorised into
the following groups :

 

' ' oflnfTechnoI.1995.15(3)

(a) Library management functions : Acquisi-
tion, cataloguing, circulation, and serials
control.

(to) Management support functions
Statistics, MIS, accounting, and Budget
control.

(c) DBMS 8: information retrieval functions:
Database creation, database searching,
generation of SDI, indexes and
bibliographies, directory generation, etc.

2. SOFTWARE PACKAGES FOR
LIBRARIES

Some of the prominent library
automation software are brieﬂy discussed
here.

2.1 Archives

This is an integrated software package
developed in multi-user Foxbase by Minifax
Electronics (Pvt) Ltd., Bombay. It is a
comprehensive package offering acquisition
control, serials control, budgetary control,
cataloguing, circulation control, information
storage and retrieval, SDI, etc. Its 'speed
search’ facility using Norton Utilities saves
time, effort and minimises errors.

2.2 COS/ISIS

It is a menu-driven library software
package, supported by Unesco, which is
designed specially for handling
non-numerical information. To promote
computerisation in Indian libraries, this
software was distributed free of cost by
NESSAT (National Information System for
Science and Technology). Now, the latest
3.07 version of the software with manual is
available from many regional information
centres of NISSAT at a nominal cost of
Rs. 1500.

The package can perform a variety of
functions related to information storage and

retrieval. Its three main function
components are listed below.

File Maintenance : It includes dd,
preparation, entry of data, modiﬁcation?
existing data, and updation of master .4}
inverted ﬁles.

Retrieval: Data retrieval can [-
performed either with the help of 
routines or by batch retrieval routines.

    
  
  
  

for the production of catalogues, in on:
bibliographies and other specified 
output from the databases.

Main advantages of CDS/ISIS so
are as follows :

  
  
  

lSuitable for IBM or compat:
microcomputers.

Provides powerful Search capabilities. I

Makes efﬁcient use of disk memory =55)“
as it does not allocate ﬁxed space for 3i! f
ﬁeld in a record. 7

 
 
   

Is a flexible database managements

Allows a record to be linked with .
database.

Allows the use of more than one.)

entry worksheets to provide a new
entry sheet.

 
 
  

It allows the same set of co 1:1:
programs (without recompilation
manipulate various databases which]
contain different data elements. if.
facilitates interchange of infounati 3'-
conforms to ISO-2709 format.

Some disadvantages of CBS/ISIS 
listed below : ;

  
    
 
    

o A user has to use separate
modify or remove data while ‘
which is a lengthy process.

0 The software is not suitable for :z' 
information (sketches, photographs,- 

 

d

Hmings) and does not use windows,
I'lzil ' 

t“ y is no facility for viewing different
,‘rds simultaneously.

 ' Field Deﬁnition Table (FDT) can be
nly for one database , though many
 ses may have identical record
 tires.

eration of serial numbers after
g the entries is not possible.

is no facility to control the right
n in printing, printing of discrete
,bets of MFNIs), retrieval of numeric
._ etc.

J ISIS is rapidly becoming a useful
I. for library and information centres
"entiﬁc institutions in India. It is
ccepted as an industry standard for
tion storage and retrieval services
ing used for current awareness and
'ces. The LAN version of CDS/ISIS
arrived in India. It may prove much
n networking applications.

once Library Management
or

" software package is developed by
e Scientific Information and
tation Centre (DESIDOC), Delhi.
in COBOL language and supported
X operating system, the software is
into four modules, i.e.
L n, circulation, serial, and online
e. Variable field and variable record
50 2709 format and standard input
CCF) are the distinctive features of

den Libra

en Libra is a library management
e that runs on IBM PC XT
.bles. It keeps track of subscription,
storage and retrieval of

DESIDOC Bulletin oflnfTecnnoIJ' ' 

 

books/periodicals. Reports on various
matters such as overdue periodicals, list of
magazines and books, reports of publishers
and members for non—receipt of periodicals
and books can be generated.

2.5 Krvger Library Manager

It is a menu-driven and user-friendly
software developed by Blitz Audio Visuals,
Pune. It is a complete library management
package for online information. It runs on
PC XT/AT compatibles. It includes facilities
for validation of data entry, circulation
control, catalogue card printing, information
services for books, reports, articles, and
periodicals. Preparation of catalogue cards
according to AACR ll, and searches by
author, subject, accession number, etc are
possible. Circulation control allows printing
of list of books pending with members.

2.6 LIBMAN

Datapro Consultancy Services, Pune has
developed a library management software
package called LIBMAN. Creation of
Databases of books, members, issue and
return, inter-library loan, generation of
overdue lists, computation of ﬁnes, etc. are
possible with this software. It allows printing
of reports such as accession number
register, list by author, title, call number, etc.
Generation of lists of new additions, subject
bibliographies, books withdrawn, stock
veriﬁcation; compilaion of statistical data on
circulation, query search by title, author, call
number, subject, and Boolean
combinations, etc. are also possible.

2.7 LIBRA

LIBRA is a multi-user, multilingual,
user-friendly package available from Ivy
Systems Ltd., New Delhi. It facilitates
acquisitiOn centrol, circulation control,
cataloguing, and online retrieval. It also
offers data security and data privacy and

 

attain oflnfTechnol.1995. 15(3)

can be linked with Dialog and similar
services.

2.8 llBRARIAN

It is a library management softw'are
developed by a team of computer
professionals in consultation with
experienced library personnel. This
menu-driven user-friendly software operates
in single user mode. Multi-user version is
also available under Xenix and Novell
Netware environment. It provides facility
for cataloguing, circulation, serial control,
acquisition, budget, and bibliograghic
servrce.

2.9 LIBRIS

LIBRIS is a comprehensive, user-friendly
and menu-driven library management
system developed by Frontier Information
Technologies Pvt. Ltd., Secunderabad. The
system covers all the functional aspects of

library activities viz., acquisition,
cataloguing, circulation, periodicals,
newspapers, enquiries and library

administration.

Some advantages of LIBRIS are as
follows:

I Easy to understand messages and help
menus guide the user smoothly
throughout the package.

I LIBRIS is a modular package; it can be
implemented in phases. Initially, the library
can go for the required modules, and then
can add more modules to the existing
package as the requirement increases.

Both single and multi-user environments
are supported.

Selective Dissemination of Information
(SDI) facility on the latest arrivals in the
library is provided depending upon the
area of interest of various members.

Bar code facility for automatic
identiﬁcation of members and documents

5

loaned is provided. LIBRIS genera ,
bar code labels at the cataloguing 
itself. ‘

 

    
 
  

Online help is provided in almost allj
screens of the package. Online help is .1}
available for a particular ﬁeld.

Uptodate and online informal
regarding the availability of material Qlj
members and staff of the library
provided.

Facilitates generation of catalogue ca w
AACR ll format.

Various statistical reports and notices 
be generated for reviewing 5y;
performance, to analyse proﬁt and ,3;
etc. i

 

 

 
 

   
    
   
  

LIBRIS contains the following modu xi

(3) Acquisition: This module helps inaf
acquisition of books through requests,
approvals. It also helps in placing orders-:5:
maintaining invoices received for El:
documents. It also generates various re',
pertaining to this module.

(b) Periodicals : This module helps inii."

l

  
  

acquisition of periodicals for the lib . f
helps to add new periodicals, modify-7'
existing ones, etc, and to generate - L35
reports pertaining to this module. It also _ if:
in solving the enquiries made by 
members whether an issue is received or 

 
  

acquisition of newspapers for the lib ‘,
helps to subscribe new newspapers, ' 
the existing ones, delete the unwanted f 
and generate various reports.

  
   
   
  

(d) Cataloguing :This module allows to ' 
the bibliographic data whenever a docuv  =
is received by the library. It also upda 
information of the existing documents, ,' 
catalogue cards in AACR II format
generates various reports pertaining to: 

module. This module gives a 

 

’tion code (for the accession
_) to each item of the library, which
'7 circulation and handling enquiries

: =.Ihe documents.

'I  lotion: This module allows to
the library material among the
: . It also allows various tasks like
return, renewal, loan, reservation and
on of documents; identifying the
rial and enquiries about materials
y, etc. It helps in maintaining
of material lost and due with the
rs and other libraries.

uiries: This module provides online
as about the availability of material in
rary. Boolean search is also possible.
es can be made on titles, accession
. ', subject, etc.

‘ ‘7' ‘raryAdministration :This module helps

m Administrator to conﬁgure the
ccordingly to meet the requirements
library.

BSYS is an integrated library
' ment system developed by lnfo-Tek
ltants Pvt. Ltd, New Delhi. It is a
"ser system designed to run on super
ini computers under UNIX/XENIX/
vironment. It is built around its own
graphic database following
ational standard ANSI Z-39 format. It

 variable field lengths for different

of documents in the database. LIBSYS
'loped in 'C’ language. It has an index
on procedure and therefore, does
uire any separate database software.
r, if required, LlBSYS can be
ed to operate with other software
as ORACLE, UNIFY, INGRES, etc.
5 also supports CD—ROM, networking
WAN) and multilingual use. It has
us. owing features:

.‘gra'ted functions

osooocmm oflanecrnol.I995_._

 
 

Interactive and screen oriented
User friendly and menu-driven
Minimum possible data entry
Powerful data editing facility

User deﬁned security at subsystem and
function level

Database recovery procedure
Import and export facility
Retrospective conversion
’Help' facility at ﬁeld level.

LIBSYS supports all'the activities related
to library in-house functions and user
services. The various subsystems are as
follows:

(a) Acquisition ' This subsystem covers
initiation of titles for ordering, approval
process, placing order, receiving material
against ﬁrm orders, invoice processing and
accessioning, payment requisition, order
follow-up, online queries by titles, orders,
invoices, vendors, and budget heads, etc. It
allows generation of various reports such as
approval request form, order form, overdue
notices, budget and expenditure analysis,
payment requisition report, accession
register, bill register, etc.

(b) Cataloguing : Cataloguing subsystem
makes various catalogues/indexes available
online for instant reference. It has a powerful
data entry facility which also provides option
to accept data in machine-readable formats
such as CCF (ISO-2709), MARC (ANSI 2.39),
etc. It also provides facilities to generate
bibliographies, current awareness services,
SDI, and export/import of bibliographic data
in standard exchange formats.

(c) Circulation: Circulation subsystem
supports operations such as issues, returns,
renewals, reserves/holds, membership
record keeping, collection updates including
monitoring of items on display and in

 

.L-g  Bulletin ofinfTochnolJ995. 15(3)

bindery, overdue follow-up and recall facility,
intenlibrary loans, etc.

(d) Serials: Serials subsystem supports new
subscription, subscnption renewal, subscrip-
tion extension, invoice processing, recording
of issues received, claims monitoring which
include generating notices for ’not received’,
overdue, damaged/soiled issues, bindery
management, back issues regording,
reporting of duplicate issues, missing issues,
various classified and specialised
indexes/lists, and online queries on various
aspects of serials control including holdings.

(e) OPAC (Online Public Access Catalogue):
This subsystem provides various catalogues/
indexes such as author catalogue, title

catalogue, subject/classified catalogue,
KWIC/KWOC indexes, keyword-based
Boolean searches, SDI facility, online

thesaurus and various authority ﬁles. The
OPAC also provides a periodic list of recent
additions to library collection and allows
users to ﬁnd the material issued out to them
as well as to put material on reserves, etc.

(f) Article Indexing :This subsystem provides
facility to create separate database of articles.
Apart from addition, modification and
deletion of records in the database, it has
options to provide different services like SDI,
documentation, bibliographies, etc. from the
database.

2.1 1 MAITRAYEE

MAITRAYEE is a library computerisation
and netwodting software. It has been
developed by CMC Ltd. under CALIBNET
(Calcutta Library Network) Project funded
by NISSAT. The package aims to provide
library computerisation, resource sharing,
standardisation, connectivity and
modularity.

Main features of the software are as

It has been developed on INGRESf
5.0/6.0 RDBMS, supported by UNIX“
and can be upgraded with new fea 
based on ISO 2709 for internal stru '_
and netvirorking.

  
  
   

It uses TCP/IP with x.2s protocol
networking. It can be used as a . 3
communication software.

It is an open-ended software and its cl 4i;-
is such that the enhancement (bo
hardware and software) can be adap
quite easily. ‘

With little modification, CCF 
UNIMARC content designators can "
incarporated. So, the communica‘,
from one format to the other is possirfi'

SDI is developed by searching article 15
against user proﬁle.

Several hardware enhancements 
incorporating barcode reader, if”
colour workstations, LAN-WAN gat "
etc. is also possible.

The package consists of the full 
modules.

 

  

(a) Acquisition :This module is related‘to
purchase and procurement of Ii
materials. The processes include accep.
requests for item procurement, acceptin'
of items available with vendors and all j”
users to select from them, getting app 
and sanctions from authorities, formati
purchase lists, receiving items against L"
maintaining information on publisher 
suppliers.

 
 
  
 
  
  

(b) Cataloguing : This module is desi :Lw
catalogue items entered in the system i " '
or through retrospective/ofﬂine data' -' I

AACRZ level 3 access points and sel - u :71.
content designators of UNI 
Catalogue cards can be prepared using?

follows:

 

text formatting ﬂexibilily and selectable in i '

 

3

  
 
 
 
   
   
   
   
 
 
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
  
 
   
   
  
   
   
   

lation: This module includes
an of members, issue, return,
n and online integration of various
n several entities which result from
rvice.

search services : Extensive user
i . services (all available overnetwork)
-; ided by MAITRAYEE. These include
search, keyword/descriptor search,
, and Boolean search.

 i control : Serials control supports
, on process, pro-monitoring controls,
" 'on, SDI data population and

 tral host and networking services :
t ule provides very user-friendly,
J“: ' en screen to perform networking
-_ tral host services. These services
a ‘4.“ . ing of queries to any of the remote
' transfer documents, .messages,
to queries to any of the networked

MINISIS

 ‘ISIS is an ideal package for
‘phic information management and
database applications. It has been
pool by the International
ment Research Centre, Canada.
5 installation requirements are
in Hewlett Packard's System
ming Language (SPL). Therefore
5 runs only on HP-3000
puters with minimum 512 KB

 an online interactive system for
ation processing, storage and
and provides facility for online
ue, circulation control, serials
report generation, etc. It also
5 interfaces to remote online
ion systems. To facilitate
ange of information with other
tions, MINISIS conforms to ISO

ijjln

DESIDOCme oflnfTocl‘InolJm; L

 

2709. It is also compatible with Unimore
format as well as standard databases like
AGRIS, DEVSIS, etc.

2.13 SANIAY

A library automation package based on
CBS/ISIS (Version 2.3) named SANIAY, has
been developed by DESIDOC for NISSAT. It
is an integrated package that interfaces
about 25 Pascal programs with CDS/lSIS. It
is more ﬂexible, and user friendly than
COS/ISIS. A number of predeﬁned display
formats, print and sort worksheets have
been provided for generating different
types of reports. The package is capable of
interlinking two or more databases for a
single application. It is also capable of
handling numerical calculations and
carrying out some other library
housekeeping activities.

For the purpose of data security and to
provide selective access, the whole system
has been divided into two modules :

(a) Maintenance Module : Entry to this
module is controlled through a password and
its access is restricted to a set of users who
are authorised by the DBA (Database
Administrator). The main functions of this
module are entry of new data, modiﬁcation
in the existing data, updation/creation of the
inverted ﬁles, backup of the databases at
regular intervals, checking existing formats,
insertion of new formats, etc.

(b) User Module : This module provides a
number of services to help the library staff to
carry out daily routines and to assist the
library users. Acquisition module provides
facilities like data entry according to
indenter’s request, decision of the book
selection committee or receipt of the
publication, updation of ’Vendor/Budget'
databases, online query on ’Books' or
"Vendor' databases, and printing of various
reports pertaining to this module.

 

 

' if! 1mm of Inf Technol.1995. 15(3)

(c) Circulation Module : This module
provides book issue/return/reservation,
online query search on ’Books' database on
ﬁelds like title, author, publisher, class
number, accession number, keywords, etc,
and printing of various reports pertaining to
this module.

(d) Online Catalogue Module : This module
provides online query on a number of ﬁelds
like author, keywords, ISBN, accession
number and combination of any of these
ﬁelds by Boolean operators, online help to
the users of the system, and printing of
various reports.

2.14 TRISHNA

Developed by NISTADS, New Delhi
under contract from NlSSAT, TRISHNA-a
version of CDS/ISIS-supports data creation,
storage and retrieval in Indian language
scripts such as Assamese, Bengali, Gujarati,
Hindi, Kannada, Malayalam, Oriya, Punjabi,
Tamil, and Telugu. NISSAT provides free
software and technical support and training
at nominal cost.

2.15 ULYSIS

Wlpro Information Technology Ltd.,
Secunderabad offers a comprehensive
library software package called ULYSIS
(Universal Library Information System). The
package is developed in C language for use
on WIPRO PC-AT (Xenix OS), Wlpro
5-6820 (Unix OS) and WIPRO 5-386 (Unix
OS) machines.

It is a fully integrated system taking care
of acquisitions, serials control, circulation
and has a powerful query function software.
Acquisition module includes suggestions
from readers, pre-order searching, order
placement, reminders, vendor evaluation,
funds control, payment, accessionihg and
informing requesters. Circulation module is
comprehensive including calculation of
ﬁnes, circulation statistics, special loans, due

 
  
  
  
 
 
  
   
   

date slips, order letter for lost books,

checking and cataloguing. Query
provides three types of queries: (i) - 
access point when user knows exactly'_
an author, title or keyword is entered a.
the system (ii) right truncated search, 5.
(iii) any term searches.

2.16 WILISYS

WILISYS (WIPRO Integrated Lib 2;.
Information System) is an integrated 
automation software package. It aims}
mechanising the routine library a I "i
and effective dissemination of info 
to the library users. It is developed 
language. It uses UNIFY RDBMS for 
management. WILISYS also prov:
different levels of data security for the If.-
and library staff. I

 
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
   
   
  
  

WILIMAX (WIPRO Library Manag 
System) and WILITRAX (Wipro 
Abstracts System). “

WILIMAX covers the books 

order placement, monitoring the - 
the documents, accessioning, circula
maintenance, cataloguing and 
about the various docnments. It is o 

Circulation, Maintenance, Search a:
Query, and Periodicals.

WILITRAX provides an effective
of storing and retrieving abstracts. ..
functions of this package are the ex .; 
of information (abstracts) with dif
sources and databases, retrospective 
facility through a WILISYS Query :1 “j
(WQL), selective dissemination:
information, maintenance of a user n 
report generation, etc. I

 

IO

   
 

modules of WILITRAX are as

,m Entry and File Maintenance : This

DESDOCMMOI'WTMI

  

database in simple English. The output of the
query can either be displayed on the screen
or printed using print option.

enables the user to enter data
' the data entry screens; modiﬁcations
ndments to the entered data can be
:,_-u - - ugh the ﬁle maintenance module.

    
  
  
  
   
  
   
  
   

 a - tive Dissemination of Information .-
I ' tabase of users may contain abstracts
ng to any specialised ﬁeld of
"go. A member proﬁle is maintained
 - the details of the members along
,fheir areas of interest are entered. This
,. can be run periodically to generate
i,“ of the latest abstracts for all the
 ~ , based on the member proﬁle.

Retrospective Search : Retrospective
L= of the database is possible through a

ifw,

written WILISYS Query Language
 enables the user to query on the

   
  

(d) Reports : Both routine and detail reports
can be generated in a formatted manner. The
report outputs can either be displayed on
screen, listed on the printer or directed to a
ﬁle.

(e) Utilities: Some general purpose utilities
have also been provided to the user for
house-keeping tasks. These include backup
and cleanup programs.

3. CONCLUSION

Each package provides a number of
modules for performing the various
activities coming under each of the
house-keeping operations. In general, the
facilities provided by various packages are

cited below in Table 1.

Table 1. A checklist of facilities available with some chosen library software packages

 

 

 

 

 

  

I

 r - package Acquisition Cataloguing Circulation Serial OPAC Online help
- control

N Y N N N Y
' Y ‘ * Y N
Y Y Y Y Y Y
Y Y - Y - -
Y Y Y Y Y Y
Y Y Y Y Y Y
Y Y Y Y Y Y
Y Y Y Y Y Y
Y Y Y - Y Y
Y Y Y Y Y Y
Y Y Y Y Y Y
Y Y Y - Y Y
Y Y Y Y Y Y
Y Y Y Y Y Y
Y Y 7 Y Y Y Y

 be developed using the Pascal interface - Not available

 

53' , mm ofhl'l'ocl'lr'lol.1995.15(3)

  

Advantages of automation are
enormous. Many libraries in India have
made some progress towards automation.
Both the library computerisation and
networking have put a few libraries on the
international scene. However, many Indian
libraries have yet to catch up. Software
manufacturers and vendors often claim
their products as the best in the market. For
selecting and evaluating a software,
librarians must observe certain general as
well as technical criteria like language
compatability, ease of use, supplier details,
interface and integration, documentation,
training, maintenance, user groups and their
report, published reviews, etc. In general,
the exercise of developing software
continues to be characterised by constant
struggle for meeting deadlines, for avoiding
cost overruns and for maintaining, often
unsuccessfully, an acceptable level of
quality. Hence, quality of software remains
a challenge for the system technologists.

Looking at the comparison (Table 1), we
can say that most of the library software
support in~house activities and online
search facility in DOS/UNIX environment.
A library with budget constraints can opt for
CDS/ISIS package; the rest can select other
software packages which support

11

   
  
 
    
    
    

integration and networking in mul 311'
environment. '

4. BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Mohandas, M.I( & Shel, K.C. 50f . 
Indian libraries. In Thirty Seventh
71% India Library Conference. ILA, "E
1992. pp. 151-156.

NISSAT Newsletter, 1991, 10(3), 3-9. 5

and prospects for India. IASIJC Bul 
1986, 31(4), 13542. ‘

Srivastava, R.I<. 8: Saxena, SC. 50 
requirements and existing sof 
India for library automation. In A - if-
in Library 8: Information Science, - 
by CD. Shanna 8r D.C.-tha, 
Scientiﬁc Publishers, Jodhpur, 1992..
143-56. ‘

Vyasmoorthy, P. Software packa m
India for library and information.  
Advances in Library & Inform‘a

  
 

tha, v.3. Scientiﬁc Publishers, I y {‘7‘
1992. pp.157—65. "

 

l2

 

