  
  
   

 elem of Information Technology, Vol 15, No 3, May 1995, pp 1117
‘l .

Retrospective Conversion Software
for LC, OCLC, BNB and
Bookﬁnd CD-ROM Databases

ARD Prasad

Documentation Research and Training Centre
Indian Statistical Institute, Bangalore-560 059

ABSTRACT

The paper emphasizes the importance of retrospective conversion of
bibliographic data from CD-ROM databases, in building local
database of library collection. It describes a software Ida, developed
for this purpose at Documentation Research and Training Centre and
funded by National Information System for Science and Technology .

   
 
   
   
  
  
  
  
   

 of the major bottlenecks in library
Iron is the data entry for creating
Although a library professiOnal
"r any software package in a few
data entry may take years
113 on the size of the library. Small
libraries have greater advantage
' and established libraries because
quantity of data involved.

5 entry in the case of bibliographical
a involves ﬁlling of data in work
it passing them on to data entry
_ for inputting. Once the data is
-g: y 'it has to be error checked.

_.‘+=;'typical (IDS/ISIS software environ-

in CDS/ISIS. Steps (iii) and (v) may get
repeated again and again into a loop
depending on how meticulously the job has
been done.

This is an offshoot of the problem of
verbosity of the bibliographic data. Unlike
the numeric and general databases,
bibliographic databases are characterised
by large amount of textual data. That is why
software like CDS/ISIS are developed as
ﬁne-tuned database management systems
to take care of the following problems :

(a) Variable number of ﬁelds in a record,

(b) Variable length of each ﬁeld,

(c) Variable length of records, and

(d) Use of tag codes (like that of CCF,

   
  
   

.. entry involves : (i) ﬁlling the
, (ii) entering data in CDS/ISIS,
ng printout in proofmode, (iv)
 mistakes, and (v) editing the data

UNIMARC, etc.) instead of ﬁeld names.

In an ideal situation, once the data is
available in computer-readable form, one

 

«53;? oflnfTecMoIJWt'). 15(3)

  

should be able to use it in his/her library in
the required form. However, there are many
problems in converting data from one form
into another. Some of the problems can be
avoided by bringing standards like ISO
2709, CCF, UNIMARC, etc. But, the
existance of many standards defeats the
very purpose of a standard. Although there
is no contender to ISO 2709 standard with
regard to record structure, there are many
MARC standards. This situation forces many
compromises on the part of the
programmer in converting one form of data
into another form.

The software Ida can convert the tags
and format of the records downloaded from
LC, OCLC, BNB and Bookﬁnd CD—ROM
databases into a format acceptable to the
user’s local database in CDS/ISIS. Those
who own any of these databases can
download the required information and by
using relevant option in Ida, they can
convert this data into the local format. Ida is
basically meant for CDS/ISIS users. It may
be noted that CBS/ISIS follows ISO 2709
format with minor modiﬁcations.

No attempt has been made here to
describe how to download data from a
speciﬁc database. The manuals that come
along with the CD—ROM database describe
this procedure. The following steps may
give a broad outline of the work involved.

(i) Make a list of the International Standard
Book Numbers 058st of the books in your
library.

(ii) Enter these numbers in a computer ﬁle
and do thorough checking to remove any
error.

(iii) Use the interface software that comes
along with the CD-ROM to search for
bibliographic data against each ISBN of your
file and download the relevant data into a file.

However, all the books in your library
might not have been included in the the

’ 2. IMPORT FEATURES OF IDA

I3

    
 
 
  
   
  
 
  
 
  
  
   
  
  
 
  
        
   
 
 
 

database used by you and all the nu"
might not have ISBNs. Some databases -,:
aHow you to search by author and title 5:
downloading informatiOn. For some - - a}?
you may be required to enter (I
manually. In such a case, joining a ne ff?
like DELNEl', CALIBNET, or INFLIBNET <9
be useful. ‘ Your professional collea'
might have done your job to a signiﬁ-_ 1
level. .

Ida is a retrospective conversii
software for changing the tags and fo 
of LC, OCLC, BNB and Bookﬁnd coaf
databases into that of COS/ISIS format.  
converted tags need not have to con :11
with those of CCF or UNIMARC; they 
be local tags in your database. ‘

Ida is highly user-friendly and has lit;
following features :

I MS—Windows look alike interface
I Optional mouse interface

I Editor for creating TAG Files

I Online manual

I Context sensitive and online help. i 1
help options are provided with 333
facility

3. HOW TO USE IDA

3.1 Ida.exe

I
This is the main program file. To users:
type DA and press ’Enter' Key at,
system prompt in a directory you wishr
work. Ida responds with a MS-Wintl
look-alike desktop. Ida works much Li“
MS-Windows; the major difference 

Ida is an Application Program In * .-
(API) that runs in text mode w 
MS-Windows is a Graphical User Inter
(GUI). ‘

  
 
 

 

14

 

  
   
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
 
  
  
 
   
  
  
   

 allows the use of mouse. You only
click the left button to choose a
the menu. If you do not have a
you can either press ALT key and
of the highlighted letter of the menu
it wish to choose, or press F10 and
i the cursor key on to the desired
'tem and press ’Enter' key. If you still
0’ clues on how to go about, press F1
get context sensitive online help,
1 tells you what to do.

' ' ~Ida.cfg

  extension indicates that this is a
ration ﬁle. You can change the
ration of IDA, like display attributes
screen depending on whether you
monochrome or colour monitor. To
the screen attributes, select Conﬁg
3 main menu and you can save your
' ration by choosing the respective
in the Conﬁg menu. The ﬁrst screen
is given in Fig. I.

DESIDOC Bulletin of inf Technol,l995. 

 

 

 

Figure 1. Opening screen of Ida software.

3.3 Ida.hlp

The hlp extension indicates that this ﬁle
contains help messages. Help is provided in
many ways. One approach is by selecting
Help in the main menu. Another is by
pressing F1 function key, which provides
context-sensitive help messages.
Sometimes, dialog box may contain a
’Help’ button.

3.4 Input Files

The program diskette for Ida contains
four sample input files which contain
downloaded records from LC, OCLC, BNB
and BOOKFIND with the following names.

LC.IN

OCLCJN
BNB.lN
BOOKFINDJN

The extension 'IN‘ is chosen to make the
file name suggestive of its content.
However, any other name can be given for

 

 

 “Billetin oﬂnf Technoi.1995. 15(3)

15

   
    
 
   
  

means that subﬁeld IOO‘a in the 
(ID-ROM database is to be conveq,
300‘a of your local database. .

Table 1 shows the sample
BOOKCCRTAG which contains so ;--

the ﬁle and it can reside in any drive or
directory.

To supply the input ﬁle to Ida, select
’lnput’ Option from the main menu...This
can be done by clicking the mouse button
on the menu item or pressing‘ALT-l or by
pressing F10 function key and using arrow
keys. Then the menu item ’Enter Input File
Name' will be displayed. If you press 'Enter’
key or click mouse button, a dialog box will
appear. You can enter the input file name
or choose to go to the list of ﬁles in the list
box by pressing the ’Tab’ key. You can use
the arrow keys to move over file names and
then press 'Enter’ to select the required ﬁle.
If the input file does not exist, you will get
an error message, which allows you to

respective CCF tags.
3.7 Useful Suggestions

0 Always use the speciﬁc subfield. A,
using only the tag number wi II-
subﬁeld. ‘

Table 1. Sample tag file

 

 

 

reenter correctly. 00‘ 100 
' 008*l Wa ‘
3.5 Output File Dara 61%
Choose the item 'Output’ in the main 033% 222“!
menu and proceed in a manner similar to 1W3 300’“
that of Input file. 100"h 300%
. 245‘“?! 200‘?
3.6 Tag File 245% 200%
Selecting the required ’Tag File’ is similar 250"a 260%
to that of selecting input and output ﬁles. 260"b 400%
However, if you wish to create/modify a 260“: 440% '
Tag File, you can either use your favourite 260%! 333% ‘
editor or select the item ’Editor’ in the main 300% 450A;
manu- 30m: 45m: '
The tag ﬁles should be created in a. 35053 455'“
deﬁnite format. It should be an ASCII ﬁle 440*“ 43‘”
containing tags of the scurce database and 512% 600%!
corresponding tags for the target database. 700"a 300%
For example, the ﬁle LCCCF.TAG -is an 700’th 300% "
ASCII ﬁle containing two columns. The ﬁrst 700‘y 300*? ‘
column contains the tags that are used by 710% 31mg
LC CD-ROM database, and the second 505a,. gonna ‘
column contains the corresponding CCF 513xa asw‘
tags against each of the LC Tags. 6995.3 . 
521“a 901*;
For example, 040"a 905“: ‘
100‘3 300"a
is DESIDOCBMethofIntTecMotI.

 

3'". ‘ " symbol as subﬁeld indicator, even if
D-ROM database uses ’5'.

sample tag ﬁles supplied with the
are are meant for demonstration
You have to decide which tag of
- database is to be converted to
tag of target database.

   
    
   
   
   
   
   
   
  

' t-tory of Ida

'divine cow is supposed to grant
'h‘ g that is asked for. In Sanskrit
re, Ida is referred to as the divine
iwhich discovered hymns (mantras)
 'ing to Gods. In this Sense Ida is the
er of all divine hymns—reciting
nything can be achieved.

DEVAHUH MANURYACNANEEHI"
(a hymn for peace)

4. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I thank Dr A Lahiri, Joint Advisor, NISSAT
for the ﬁnancial assistance for this project. I
also thank Ms Sridevi Ravindran, Shri
Sunder Singh and Ms Kamini for their
suggestions on the ﬁrst version of Ida.

I thank Prof MA Gopinath and Prof 1K
Ravichandra Rao for their encouragement
and support in carrying out this project.

I thank my friend Prof NSS Narayana,
Economic Analysis Unit, ISI, for suggesting
the name to this package. I thank my wife
Aruna, GTRE for supplying the shareware
API. Lastly, I thank Al Stevens for his DFLAT
shareware files.

 

-  Btlefin oflnfTechnolJWS, 15(3)

  

i7

