Commercial Informatian Sewices :
A business untapped in India
PC Shah

NICTA.SflA T I M t Ahmedabad - 380 035

Abstract
The deveiopments in information technology and the economic
scenario a%!over the world pose chailenge to the present set up of
library culture. The private sector has already invaded the peripheral
areas of library activities and poses a serious threat to libraries, The
author discusses the user" behavisur and need for information in the
present context and the factors affecting optimal utiiisation of
libraries. The advantages of a private commercial Iibraq and the
problems it may face in future are also mentioned,

The future poses threats, challenges and
opportunities to the libraries. Libraries
cannot be seen in isolation, but must be
viewed as part of a much broader set of
information activities, ranging from
authorship, publishing, book selling, and
database operation to information
provision. At present the main threat facing
the government funded libraries seems to
be that of reduced financial resources.
b'hiie the annual output of published
literature is increasing, the government
funding to libraries and information centres
is decreasing in real terms. The situation
varies greatly between countries and
beween different kinds of libraries within a
country. NOW the public funded libraries
are facing yet another deeper and long

term threat caused by changes in the
information technoloat, and by parallel
changes in the economic front, Free
services for the public are under threat in
many countries. Many gsvernments, in their
social as well as economic policy, now
prefer ts transfer a%ithese services including
the provision of Information to the private
sector- TTh private sector has also been
urging the governments to pursue this
policy and to seize the opportunities that it
provides.
Large amour%&of information can :70&
be stored in machine-readabte form and
made auaiiabte quickly as online and as
packaged information for local acquisition
exploitation
using
CD-ROM
and
technologya This has enabled the private
sector to invade t h e territory traditionally
occupied by libraries by packaging and

sefiFng bibliographic databases za4d joxnals
directly tc the users, The private sector is
already flourishing in this busir~essas can be
seen by the progress made by companies
like Knight-Kidder$ SPN, Radiosuisse,
ESA-BRS, ORBIT8 etc, Ar presen", the private
sector has invaded sniy the peripheral areas
of library activities with rather deeper
incursions into some parts. The threat from
the private sector and the changing

I

economic thinking sf the government
together constitute a new situation lo which
!EbrarEes must react. In the context of
globalisation tooe8, the probsems and threat
faced by pksbdishers and authors ail uiier the
worBd is also going to affect libraries,
Infstmation is now available to more
people in more places than eves before,
and the speed at which it can be delivered
and exchanged i s unprecedented.
Empowered iwdormation professionals are
becoming the prime movers in this exciting
transformation of the world which
challenges us to explore the power of
information to change us and the world we
live in. The information professionals are
recognised as experts who employ
advanced technology for making
information a global resource, Newer ways
are being sought to manage and
disseminate information more effectively in
this fastchanging environment.

2, USER'S BEHAVlOUR AND THE
NEED FOR INFORMATION
U n t i l a few decades back, the
researchers, industrialists and technologists
were working in almost isolated worlds of
operations. Their activities depended
relatively less on what others around them
were doing or what was happening
elsewhere in their fieids of activity. Self
reliance was not only possible but was a
cherished idea of all the enterprises. Thus,
an industrialist had to bother only with
42

financial resources which by and Earge
came from his own family funds. The
technological alternatives were very fewt
the raw materials used or the produces
manuhctured also had no competition,
marketing did not pose many probiems as
the ciientele were mainly local or prsvinciaf
and ahere were practically n o restrict'lons on
the activities from government, trade or
iocal bodies (except permission to start a
business!).
In contrast to their predecessors, the
present day managers/.ltechnoiogi~ts and
ehien ordinary citizens need to know mush
more, in order to survive, jet alone progress,
Managers/%ecbahaologists, traders, etc., are
required to know what is going on in the
indlestrg/, not o d y here but all over the
world. They have to keep track of new
techno!ogies, processes as well as
management toois and policies. They have
to keep track of new events in the areas of
minerals,
shipping,
transportation,
agriculture and bank rates as well as a%!the
events taking place in the major financial
and political cities of the world. Their
concern for all these is not an obsession foe
information but because it has become
essential for them,

Further# the phenomenal advancement
of science and technology, coupled with
the corresponding high
rate of
obs~iescenceand the decreasing time-lag
beween discovery and application, has
made it necessary to have the Iatest
information, One has to either possess all
the required information or stagnate and
perish.
Information i s vital to the development
and success of industry and technology.
The shortened life of technology and
increased internationa! competition has
forced everybody in business, trade and
research to increase their awareness about
the new developments, current technology

and the policies of their compe:itor~-TRuij~~
everybody

needs timely and

correct

information conti~uously far his progress
and even for S U P V ~ V ~ O ,
Manpower, money, materials and
machines are the four major inputs to any
busifiess, industry or research organisation.
Now, one more input which has become
essential is 7nformation"a resource equal
in vahe to capital, personnel asad facilities.

3, LIBRARY AS SOURCE OF

INFORMATlON
One oC the impsrtant source for
information i s library (also known as
information centre). gn India, public funded
libraries are of various types: pubHic
libraries, academic iibraries, university
libraries, college libraries, school libraries,
special Bibraries, research institute libraries,
industrial Bibraries (public sector),
government department libraries, etc.
Almost a\%
the above libraries have huge
information resources developed from
government funding, public donations, etcHowevert due to the reasons as indicated
below! their resources are not being utilised
optimally.
Bureaucratic, unproductive procedures.

@ No pi-ioaity for prompt service,

E Resource cre?i;ch iss the library bkidget.

lack of cs-cperation/cs-ordina~iort
arnsng libraries.
B Lack of autonomy to the librarian even at
the head of iibrary level. This discourages
people from taking initiative. There is aiso
little delegation of responsibilities down
the Dine. Major decisions are taken not by
the library staff but by those outside the
library system.
&
! ! Absence of entrepreneurship qualify
among management cadre sf t h e
organisation and also of the library,
@ Lack of marketing capabiiities.

B4 Lack of accountability to the users/
customers.

Bn short most libraries wocrid like to ding
to iraditional practices as these are more
secure, safe and academic. The real
professions! approach is lacking. They do
not know or intend to know that sight and
timely inforn~ation is a key to sound
decision and the client/dser is ready to pay
for this information provided he is satisfied.
With the present process of opening of the
economy and globalrsation, the issue has
come to the fore.

Fi3 More technology oriented rather than
services orien ted.
S3. Absence of the concept of marketing and
the concept of information as a
commodity (or knowledge as a business).
@ No incentive to staff for doing good work.

EB Job security. Hire and fire is not pc~ssibie.

B Absence of modern telecommunication
facilities in most of the libraries.

I
Lack of dynamism and application of
principies of modern mmagement in
running the libraries.

4. USER GROUPS A N D

INFORMATION USAGE
-

I he con;rnunity of Information users i s
diverse.
It inter 2iia rncludes policy

makers/acdministrators,
managers:
machinery manufacturers, ancillary
eqdiprnent
makers,
technologists/
engineers, markete:s/traders, exporters/
importers, researchers, educatio~alists/
students, designers/fashion creatsrsjartists,
consumers and their organisa;ions,
entrepreneurs,
consuftants/trainers,
manufacturers of various products and

a u x i l f a r l e ~ , Government bureaucrats,
members of poiiricab badies, jourlzaiists,
writers, etc,
I

HoweverJ 2 lot needs to be done to
change the attitude of the people from free
information to fee-based information. This
would
precipitate a new dimension of
consumer protection. It is doubtful how
many traditional libraries are mentally
prepared for such risks and litigation. Under
these circumstances, o n e plausible
alternative i s the concept of 'private
commercial iibrary/inforn-iatiow centre' to
meet the huge and varied information
needs.

5. PWIVATISATION OF LiBRAWY
AND INFORMATION SERVlCES
IN l N D l A
Today,
the w o r l d e c o n o m y i s
characterised by intense competition
among companies and also among
countries. The driving force for growth in
majority of the countries i s the private
sector-catering to the needs of the
domestic and export markets. Here, both
the manufacturing and service sectors
(including library and information service)
Rave important roles to play. The chances of
success of a private commercial library are
high in India because as a private enterprise
it would:
@ be more efficient than the government
enterprise in all spheres of operation.
@ be user driven. It can customitje the
services 4 0 make these more suited to the
client's request.

B be willkg to take risk.
% have
necessary
initiative
entrepreneurial qualities.

B be more accountable to customers.
@ be more quality cowdous.

and

@ be more pro-active.

be adaptive

IG change. Private sector as
more anticipatory than the government,

kB

be efficient in manpower management.

The concept 0%fee-based service is basic
to business and Endustry,because firms are
accustomed to hiring commercial or
technical services. Another trend started by
most business organisations is of buying
expertise and hiring consultants for
particuiar tasks or projects. This method i s
readily applicable to private cornrnerciai
library. By buying services as requiredt
management is able to assess the costs
accuraeeiy and does not incur the expense
and obiigation of maintaining full-time stair.
Convenience c o u l d b e a major
consideration for using private commercial
libraries. These libraries wil! be providing s
wide range of services, bundled as a bone
stop service'. These libraries may perform
the tasks themselves, contract out the work
or even put the client in touch with another
library specialist. But in each case, solving
the client's probiern will be the main
consideration.

6 , HINDRANCES TB PRIVATE
COMMERCIAL LIBRARIES
Privatisalion would have its own
problems. Some of the problems arise from
the basic concept; some arise because i t is
difficult to satisfy the conditions that are
necessary for privatisatisn to succeed; and
still other problems appear during
implementation. Some of the problems that
may arise due to privaaisatisn are as follows:

B Unequal eompeti~onwith public funded
libraries in terms of free or nominally
priced seavics.

B Lack of easy

access to Government
prduced infosma~on.

-

U h d M

1%*1%51

R Social perception of fee-based infarmatiion
services.

E Selfing piofessiona1 services is raot easy
because it is difficult for the potential client
to see the product.
The financial investment required wilbbe
of high ordeq*with dncertain rate of return.
Normally in private sector, partoof the

profit is used for sustainable growth. A

li..$ian patent and fax $1to the party an &-a
same day and may charge Rs. 403 per
page. Business estabiishment and industry
would always be ready to pay for such
quick services as tl-iey do rtot know or ehey
do not have alternative facilities for getting
quick information.

7. FUTURE OF PREVATE

COMMERCIAL LIBRARIES

good co-operation between private
commercial libraries and pubiic funded
P%$raries/informationcentres .would be an
ideat combination for maximum utiiisation
of resources. The public funded li-braries
may earn by selling services to commercial
libraries. The resources so generated would
be utiiised for the devetopnene of public
funded Iibrarigs.

En future, private commercial iiba-lries are
expected to grow as rne whole in:'srw;iation
industry contin~es~BGexpana. r he type of
services ehey offer may change as
technology dictates, but the entrepreneuriai
skills which gives an edge to the private
sector should serve it well in fatidre
adjustments which may be required to cater
to clients.

In effect, the private commercial libraries
may subsist by buying the products from
pubiic funded libraries/Enstitutim in
whoSesaie and then retail it (generate
services) to customers. The fellowing
exanapie would qonvey the concept.

There is no guaranteed formula for
success. However, such libraries will no
doubt add to number and ~arieties of
services for the consumers of information
because the field is new and allows scope
for innovation and expansion.

The cost of lndian patents charged by
Governnlenr of irldia i s Rs. 2 only' but its
delivery to the customer takes a Few
months. A private commercial library's
representative in Calcutta can purchase the

The author is grateful Lo Shri AG G a d e ,
Director, ATiRA and Chairman, NlCTAS fsi
granting permission t s parbiish this paper.

E

Forum of Free Ente

