DESSDOC Bulletin el Infoema"iion 'B~hno!ogfp
"id.15, No. 5, September 1995, pp. 16-22
0 4 995, DESBBOC

Problems and Prospects of Privatisation of Librar). and
Information Sewices in India :

The lnformation industry View Point

The author explains the concept of privatisation and the changing
library culture of charging a fee for the service with reference to
independent- Iibraries and libraries that are part sf a bigger parent
organisation. i t discusses possibilities like partnership between
libraries and industries for effective marketing and distribution
support and the problems that may crop u p in suck a partnership.

CD-ROM by four C B publishers. Its sales
and royalty revenue is more than the

I . PRELUDE

+

British Library Document Supply Centre,
LJK, a non-profit government organisation
earned 28 per cent sf its annual expenses
of f 101 million by sales revenue through
its services (1993-94).
Technical information
USA
(a
government
Services,
-organisation) earns its entire expenses
including staff salaries by its sales revenue.
The budget support of $IS Government to
NTIS is nil. They not only sell the reports
of government funded research reslslg but
also pay royalties on acquisition.

production cost.

e OCLC, USA, a non-profit library
coaperative, wholly owns a pro-profit
company called SwformatIon Dimension
Bwc., USA-the developers of BASIS and
TECHLBB.

e NTGS-National

+I

MEDLINE is a popular database produced
by the National Library of Medicine, USA.
It is the cheapest database and has the
largest number of users from S&T
segment. It is available through 10 online
hosts (perhaps more) and published on

a National Chemical Laboratory (NCL),
Poona, generated Rs. 19 lakhs througia
sales during 1994-95 from their online and
document delivery services which is about
20 per cent of their total annual spending.

+

The procurement budget of Indian
institute of Science (IISc) Library i s Rs. 4
crores. The library has 160 external
corporate members. The only fee-based
service that they currently offer is
photocopying service from which they
earn about Rs. 3.50 lakhs per year. The

library ha. a R ambitious p h n to generate
about RS- I CFOFF. anfaually by seliing its
services.

e The National Science I ~ b r m a t i o nCentre
(NCSI), an UGC funded project Eocaeed at
disc, Bangalore, has been set up to provide
science information services to all seekers
for a price 1% operates on an annual budget
o f approx Rs, 40 lakhs. Its sales earnings
are about 4 0 per cent of its budget. NCS!
started with free services and has
cornp!ete!y moved to norniaal-fee
services.
a British Council Library, Bangalore earned

Rs.25 lakhs from membership fee and saie
of weeded out books, lt has about 9,008
members,
The scenario narrated above is an
indication o f emerging trends towards
fee-based iibrary and information services
and their market acceptance. It also
suggests the prospect ahead for the
privatisation s f library and information
services.
The prospect chasing will have its shaie
problems too. How far the privatisation
will help in their pursuit of prospects? What
are t h e o p p o r t u n i t i e s ? W h a t d o e s
psivatisation really mean i n terms o f
structural changes in the library system2
H o w does the information industry look at
this trend? These are the issues addressed in
this paper.
56

Privatisation has been extensively
debated as a policy option in reducing the
role of government in national economies.
Over a decade of experience by various
nations and several research studies by the
kVorld Bank, IMF and other agencies
confirm not only the positive impace of
privatisation but also the compulsive need
for i t I . In India, an undercurrent is buiiding

up in favour of privatisation which is
characterised by :

%i

Parttai or complete ownership chacge
from Government control to privaie
management.

@ Partial or c o m p l e t e r e d u c t i o n
Government's budgetary support.

Reduced

in

p o %ticai/bureatlcrs
i
tic

intervention.

@ kTfiJ'illingw~s/abESity$0rake

the risk.

!B A shift faom free service to either nominal
or rational pricing.
@ Letting the market farces decide the need
for a service and its continuance.

I Generating investibie srarpiaas for a
sustainable growth.

3, CHANGING LIBRARY CULTURE
Libraries d o play a distinct role in the
national economy. They have a socially
recognised responsibiiity o f archiaial and
dissemination support to knowledge and
information seekers. Libraries world over
operate as non-profit organisations. Nowp
they have started appreciating the need for
and importance of marketing the iibrary
service. The concept of charging a fee for
the service i s slowly gaining support
although there is a strong resistance to
fee-based services by the traditional
advocates of library co-operation.

With the exception o f national and
public libraries, all other iibraries are part of
a parent organisation. Let us call them
independent Libraries (iL) and Affiliated
Libraries (AL) respectively. The mission and
goals of an Ah are controlled and directed
by its parent organisation. The users of Ab
are primarily the staff of the parent
organisation. The ciienas and associates o f
the parent organisation can also become

AL if the

parent argzn9satlon
encourages such a policy. Thus the clients
of the A& wiEl fall into two groups:

t h e c[ien:s

(a) lnternai clients who are the staff of the
parent organisation.

(b) External clients whd could be:
(ij associates of parent organisation,
(iij clients of parent organisation, and
(iii)the general public.

The l i s have only external clients. Thev
have a greater autonomy and can play a
more active and Ieadership role In the
privatisation of library services.
Privafisation generally means change of
ownership, either partiai or complete, from
the state to the general public or private
investors, For libraries, change in the
ownership structure is not a feasibie option,
What the libraries can do is to privatise their
services by imbibing the spirit and culture
of a private enterprise.
The primary objective or appealing
reason for privatisation appears to be the
revenue generation to support the declining
budgetary support. While the objective is
justifiable,
the motive i s largeiy
acquisitionist. Generally, libraries want more
budget to continue subscribing to journals
and to buy more books and jdurna%s. It
could be a worthwhile research study to
find out how much money libraries have
spent over the years on collection building
and what percentage of i h has been
employed for providing efficient access
infrastructure. Even today, these are
instances sf university libraries investing
very large sums o n buying back volumes of
journals but complaining about lack of
funds for iny ye sting in IT resources and
building reliable network infrastructure for
access. Unless there is a shift in focus from
acquisition to access, the service quality
and performance are unlikely to improve. !i
it i s possible to provide access to
18

information anytime, irrespective sf its
location and time; aii that the library needs
io have i s the faciiity for access and
dedivery. The library can even avoid
competition for collection building and its
oavwerskip which is iargely a budget
dependent activity. If the client's
satisfaction i s the measure of success,
access becomes the key focus. The
emergence of Internet and information
super highways is already dismantiing the
old structure-publishing and information
ownership. The arrival of electronic journa!~
and the Enternet stibscripeions have aiready
signaled the shape of changes to come. The
libraries will have to learn to appreciate t h e
fact that they are no; even the absolirte
owners of the iniormation they buy and
build.

Thus the privarisaeion of fibrary service
would mean a paradigm shift from
information ownership to information
access and delivery which wil! need a
structural change in the current library
policies and practices, cultural change in
the library functions and' practices than
literal change in its ownership. The changes
would mean:
P Expanding the client base beyond tile
parent organisation skiff.
Developing a pricing mechanism for
charging the external clients and sharing
the resources through library co-operation
and neworking activities. The library
could charge its internal clients to@
depending on the policy of the parent
organisation.

B Marketing the service, both within an3
outside the parent organisation.
Shifting the focus from acquisition to
building IT infrastructure for access ano
delivery.

L

Looking at the 1ihraa.y as a resource sharing
node in the global nehvork of informailon
access and deiivery system.

4, THE EkFORMATlON INDUSTRY
This industry represents con3panics and
institutions who produce, market and
distribute information products and services
for the benefit of external clients. By this
definition, Ihs automatically join the
industry. ALs too can become part o i the
industry ii they are marketing or distributing
their informaticn services to external clients
-fie@ or for fee,
braiornaation industry looks at the %i@rary.
from many perspectives. For h e industryj
t h e Bibrary i s a
+D

c l i e n t who b u y s
products/services,

the

industry's

s channel to reach t h e end user for those
products/services, and
a partner in

the business of informafian

!landling.

4-1

Marketing Partnership

For a library, information industry is a
resource base. it can be considered as
librarian's library or the information centre
sf ar-i ii2formation scientist. The doctor and
pharmaceutical industry rela"lionship can be
an appropriate analogy. Bike a doctor who
prescribes the products of a pharmaceutical
company, the librarian or information
scientist recommends and delivers an
appropriate information product or service.
Additionally, the librarian acts as an internal
n-rarketing agent s f the industry (not any
specific company) and promotes the
information usage. The internal marketing
which the librarian does (and should do) i s
the greatest benefit to the industry and a
useful service to the end user. While an
information industry like Knight-Ridder
(Dialog) or Silver Platter can reach a few

people directly in ar? organization, it i s the
iibrary which can reach. aEi users in the
organisation throkigh inc-ernal marketing.
The marketing partnership can work both
ways. The l i b r a r y c a n b e c o m e the
production centre for a specific service for
which it has resource base. The industry
can provide marketing and distribution
support.

4-2 Training Support
A library which speciaiises En a specific
product can provide training " s u p p o r t t o
external c!ienrs for using that product. The
p o s i t i v e arid g a i n f u l e x p e r i e n c e of
Informatics with NCL in providing training
s u p p o r t t o D a l o g users i s worth
mentioning.

43

Support in Privatisatisn

Both the industry and the library have a
common client-the
user sf information
product/service. The industry has the
character o f an enterprise and works o n the
culture o f privatisation. To effectively
imbibe the culture of private enterprise, our
libraries wiH! have to undergo a process o f
se-engineering. They can learn a great deal
from the industry in this regard. A n example
could be that of establishing a production
and quaiity sontrdl system for database
production activity in a NBSSAT centre. The
industry can transfer the production system
and control procedure to the centre.

4.4

Problems

!n its task of privatising its services the
library may both face and cause many
problems. Let us look at some of them.
B T h e first major problem i s cultural
adaptation which wiii need time. Both the
library staff and management (parent
o r g a n i s a t i o n ) may resist c h a n g e .
Administrative issues and procedures may
create serious barriers to privatisation. For

instance, a library En a government set up
~ a be
y allowed to charge for rhe service
bur i s not ailovied to use the revenue
generated. The process requires patiencz
and perseverance on the part of library
management
@ Service marketing is tough and expensive.
It involves highty custornised, clientspecific approach. Achieving client
satisfaction i s a formidable task,
particularly with bibliographic information
service which is based on probabilistic
measures of relevance, The $ibrary
staff/profession needs to develop an
image, capability and approach of a
consultant to be effective in service
marketing.

E4 Chargingfor the service, even if it is a small
sum, will lead to a demand for better
product qua%itP//performarace
and service
efficiency, An unimaginatively Bow-priced
product/service may undermine the value
of the product, Equally, an irrationally
high-priced product may kil! the demand
for the product/service,

5. CONfLIU AREAS
5.1

Competitive Disadvantage

The externally marketed services of a
library information centre which i s a!
non-profit government agency may pose
serious and unfair competition to the
industry. The former has the advantage of
tax-free purchases and irrcomes. For
instance, a library which sets up an lnternet
host facility can offer access to a database
at a rate three times cheaper than a private
company which offers access to same
database because QSML's lnternet charges
are 2.5 times higher to a company
compared to what they charge from a
non-profit organisation.
20

z:

"B

Copyright issues

An information product is an inreliectktai
property. The information ifidsstihy draws its
strength, survivai a n d competitive
advalztage from copyright which protects
the industry's cornrnerciai interests and
ggiarantees sustainab%egrowth. When a
library widely distributes an information
product/service purchased from an
information industry company, without
obtaining copyright clearance and paying
additional license fee, if any, besides
causing copyright infringement it will be
hurting the interest of the inadejsery. in the
isng run, the library will be hurting its own
interest too as the industry may not afford
to continue pwbjishing a product if the
revenue loss i s substantial due to
widespread copyright violation, information
products are expensive t s build and
maintain, But copying and distributing
them, particulariy because of the convenience offered by lTp is chmper. The
technology available today allows easy
dupiicatlon of the entire data on CD-ROM
as another CD-ROM at a fraction of the
cost of the database. However st[-ict the law
enforcing agency may be, ultimately it Is rise
social order against widespread copying
that can prevent the damage. Copyright i s
becoming a particularly serious issue in the
context of electronis publishing and
network access. The library and the
information industry have a j o i n t
responsibility in fighting against copyright
infringement as i t affects every one
including the user.

The Government's policy option of
liberalisation and privatisation is sure ts
result in continued reduction in budgetary
support to librari6s. This can be viewed
more as an opportunity for change rather
than a threat. In explor~ngthe opportunities
DEIDOC Bulletin int'inf Technoi,1W5,9
5<5)

iies the prospects.
suggesliozs.

4,l

Here 2rs some

EDP-IT Business Model

Libraries can Book beyond charging a fee
for the service for earning money to
suppjement the shortfa;! En the budgets, Let
us draw lessons from the EDP model in
companies. Many companies had invested
EDP and c o m p u t i n g
heavily
in
infrastructure. When the expenses became
heavy no be supported by budget they
started h o k i n g at EDP investment and
experrise gained as a strategic business
oppo"unfty for diversification. There are a
good number of examples. During mid-80s
lensen & Nicho$son, a paint company,
invested in ED$ for effective cost control
and MIS. During the early 90s they looked
at the infrastructure and their in-house
expertise as an opportunity to offer BT
consultancy and software development
support to IT industry* When a very few
k n e w a b o u t e-mail, the Company
developed an e-mail softvgare for their
corporate e-mail function. Later, they
jaunched it as general purpose e-mail
package to the market after refinement.
barge and speciaiised libraries can look
at their resource base as an opportunity to

create products and to enter informa",on
industry market. ALs like llSc and I$B
!ibraries, can Isok ar their resource base
and infrastructure as a strategic business
o p p o r t u n i t y . & f weil planned w i t h
business-like approach, leaving the
academic egos behind, they can create a
niche market for themselves.

6.2

NTiS-MEDLINE Model

ILs like National Medical Library and
DESIDOC, can adapt the NTlS or MEDLlNE
mode! with required local modifications.
They can generate a substantial portion of
their expenses, as much as 50 per cent or
more, from the sales. Many of the serious

efforts Era this regard have not given the
desired results largely for lack of f~cuh;and
an enthusiasm to do too many things. A
change in work artirsde, and an incentive
based system can bring about the desired
change.

63

Redefining Library Co-operation

Library co-operation has more to its
share of failures than success. The reason
lies in what B can call Haves vs. Have-nots
syndrome. The Haves have everything to
give at the cost of their internal clients and
!he Have-nots $save nothing to give but
everything to take free-of-cost. Introducing a
pricing mechanism as a token of exchange
will radically alter the situation. OCLC
shour"d be the model for our BELNET and
the likes. It is a compietely self-supporting
library co-operative venture. Recently,
OCbC invested $100 million to enhance
their Talcum network a n d Internet
capabilities,

6-4 Marketing
Marketing is much more than printing a
brochure and a promotional news letter. It
is a fuii function activity, Even the clients
who know about the produce need to be
targeted often to retain and increase their
usage. Following are the prospects of taking
marketing as a serious and integral part of
library functions like cataloguing and
circulation:

!&
lncreased
l
client base.
E increased client demand for better and
more information products/services.

Innovation and improvement in product
quality and performance.
Prsducts/services rha: match the growing
and changing needs.

E More usage and consequently more
revenue.

OCLC3 FFirstSearch is a classic example
sf how innovation and marketing can
dramatically increase !he usage. At a time
when everyone feared and forecasted a
decline En prospects for online because of
the emergence of CD-ROM, OCLC boldly
launched re-introduction of online to
university campuses at an unprecedented
scale. The increase in usage has created
history in the information world and OCLC
has proved that online is cheaper than
CD-ROM if widespread usage can be
achieved. The siiccess is a bold matkeiBng
experience with k ~ a w ntechnoiogg9=
The libraries should also reaiise that
everything cannot be marketed. Good
marketing assumes and believes that a
product that closely meets the cIientfs
perceived needs and benefits alone wiil be
accepted by him, particularly when the
client pays for it. A Barge coilection is no
guarantee to success. A marketabte
information product weeds serious
development inputs.

The Bibiaries need to understand theli
role as a channel or i~termediaryin the
process of information rsafssfer a ~ i d
dissemination, be it non-profit or for-profae.
They act as a distribution net~vork to
publishing and information industry for
reaching the end-user. They are closer to
the end-user. Their partnership and support
is essential to the information industry in
internal marketing which is an approach to
reach a Eaige number of users with'~ t " r an
organisation. Privatisation of the iibrary
services should be reviewed as an
opportunity to introduce enterprise cuBehioe
and integrate the library with the rest of the
information distribution channels. The gains
in the process are many. Revenue earning is
one small but important gain. The most
important gain is sustainabie growth of
library services and their genuine
appreciation by the clients who pay for it.

REFERENCE
1 . Cook, Paul and Kirkpatrick. Privai-isatisn
policy and performance: %nternariona%
perspective, Prentice-Hall, f 995.

