DESIDOC BuE!erln of Infarmaiioie Tech3010gyt Vo!.$5,!do. 5, September 1995, pp. 23-26

?3 199jdBESLDOC

Prfvatisatisn of Tradeabfe Government Information
B Guha
jnri3tedte sf Social"Anaipis & Commiinication, New B e h
Abstract

The author

discusses the concepe of tradeable informatioi: and the
methods of vahe addition to the goverrmmene held information and
the possibilities sf privatisaeion in this area. i t also mentions the
outcome of the first information industsy-promoter-usermeet heid by
NISSAT in 1994 and the subseqerent work that is required to be done
in eh'1s area.

h a v e already started exploring the
Privatisation appears to be the prevailing
buzz weird in India in many fields. The buzz
is often strong enough to make the stock
market Bisdess, make workers entrenched in
sheliered public sector service organisations
feel shaken and even go s n protest strikes,
while it instilis hope in the disgruntled
consumers that happier days might come
again with privatisation. One would grant
that i h i ~is very much true for our powert
relecommunication, transportation and
several other sectors.

With the talk of privatisation going
around in everas fields, it is quite natural
that sooner or later people would start
thinking about it in the context of
information services also. in fact we have
come to that stage in India;, The information
professionals and the information industry

possibilities sf introducing better services
and products with increasing participation
of the private sector, ultimately bringing
about a complete transformation in the
information market scenario in India.
Traditionally, %he area of information
services has remained protected from the
effect of usual market forces. In most of the
de~deloping countries, it is believed that
provision o i library, documentation and
other inforaaation faciiities are the
responsibilities of the government and that
such facilities can be created mainly with
the support of pubiic funds and service
should be made available at minimum cost.
Perhaps, prevalence of such a notion
among the users has iargeiy hampered the
proper understanding of the value of
information and also the proper use of it.
Even i f a customer pays for some
information received by him, very o f t e ~the
price paid hardly reflects the cost of
production or procurement of that piece of

in~osrnation,Furthersthere is no assessment
as to whether t h e inlormatiosa pm-chased
has been properly uailised. There can be
many more instances of the effect of
market forces in the saie and purchase of
information products. However! the focws
of this paper is limited to only a single
of
information,
Erne.,
category
government-held and the associated activity
of adding value to this information to
produce new isformation products and
services.

3. THE MAHN CONCEPT
Let US have a quick rehash of the current
thinking on some of the concepts about the
government-held tradeable information and
the methods of adding value t o information.
Much of the thinking, on the concepts, in
developed countries have appeared in
4
severai publications. One such publication
from the British Department of Trade and
industry is very significant and extremely
relevant for OUI purpose.

3,1, Government-held information
Bt is we!& known ehae most government
departments usually generate and hold
large volume sf data and information in the
normal course of their work. This data
covers a wide variety of subject areas
relating to population, health and fami%y
welhre, education, manpower, trade and
commerce, industry, agriculture, science
and technologyt power, patents, natura!
resources, etc. Government departmen&
aiso suppiy vast amount of information to
the media, serious workers in various
subject fieids, officials, and the public.
Howeverpit is being increasingly feit that a01
government-held information does not
come up in the information market. Further,
recent developments in the information
market have made it obvious that such
information i s not always provided in a form
or manner readily acceptable by the users
24

(for example, information might be require0
in value-added form and in electronic
medium). Many government eiep2r:ments
are not equipped for taking up such \vork;.

3.2

Tradeable Infarmatiow

This expression is being increasingly
used to emphasise the idea that inlormation
is a commodity which has value, can be
bought and sold like any other and that iike
most commodities, value can be added to
the raw information product at various
stages sf processing. Extension of the above
idea in the context ~f privaeisaeion n~suld
mean that ineertsention of private agents wili
bring into free play the market forces and
regulate its supply as per demand. Similarly,
like a / % other markets, the information
market could also be expanded by applying
modern marketing techniques such as
market survey, demand analysi% demand
forecast, product differentiation, pricing,
advertising, etc.
3 3 . Value added Information
Value can be added to raw information
by using t h e following methods:

(a) Increasing Aeeesribi~ity: Specific
information oar a topic may be available in a
form which is difficult to retrieve. This raw
information when processed and stored as
a computer database can be accessed
easily and retrieved quickly. The ease and
speed of access to information are of va!ue
to a!! hypes of users. Such values can be
easily added by the application of
information technoiogy,
(b) Agglomeralion: The value o f
information can be enhanced by combining
it with other information. For example,
when a user of a database in a field is given
the facility of having access to a variety of
files at the same time and with the same
query formulation, the value of the
database is increased. Major database hosks
*

IM,tX51

provide such facility and extend the benefit
shopping'.

0%b n e stop

(r) Change of sbucture: VaBkee can be
added ts saw information by the ~ ~ ita i s y
structured, the way it is stored, and the
compiexity of the s s f ~ a r eused to retrieve
it. Hig%~%y
strbctured data, ho~vever,often
has ta be searched at a variety of levees
which requires complicated software
capable of manipulating the search result in
a better way

(dl Tensacdon: Very ai:en information
gaios vahe En a trading or trancact~on
process. YhEs is i'ery much true ir &hecase
of dinaficial market information.

(e> Reca~!isa~on:information csi%ected
fcr ane purpose can often acquire a
different i d u e io another context. For
exampie, information valgable in ixse8f in
hard COP) can have different and additional
uses in eiectronic form*

Tk?e above methods do not in any way
exhaust the possibilities of adding value to
information. Priweed material, with all its
!imitations, can be a tradeabIe information
tool with its own market and value. But
information te&nolow methods can add
further vaiiie to such information and can
make it suitahaie for a specific market which
may demand it on screen, through voice
linkt on CD-ROM orp sf course in print on
paper,

Against the above background it would
be worthwhile to consider the status of the
Bndian information market and then see the
possibilities of privatisation. Pike most of the
developing countries, lndian information
scenario continues to have the fo&mflowEng
characteristics:

(i) H e a y bias towards storage and
dissemination of librav based information,

(ii) Abs9nce sf indigenous databases and
(fii) Dominant role of the Govert1ment in
pr~moeing and financing the information
activity

According to an estimate by NV
'P
Satyanarayana-, composition of the lndian
information market was as fo%Bows.The
giobal market has an annual input of about
2,90,808 items of which 2,50,086 items are
ic the print media and 40,000 items in
electronkc media. As against this; India
produces about 2056 items annually, of
ddSiich oniy %O i&rr"ss are in electronic
media. E~~idently
it is far behind the global
levei,

The first information industryPromoter-User Meet, held during 7-8
December 5994 at Surajkund under the
auspices sf NBSSAT! provided a joint forum
to consider in some detail the above poinb
aiotag with several related issues, in fact one
of the recommendations of the meeting
was that "Companies and organisatiorrs,
producing and/or marketing ieeformaaion
products and services, shouid join together
to form an information Endustv association
to represent arad promote coliectively the
interes& of the i n d u s t ~at both lomi apd
international ievels". This recommendation
was so relevant and ~ m e l ythat h d s m the
delegates dispersed, some of them formalby
met in a speciatly~alledsesion to form the
required information industw asse~ciatiosa.
This has surely been an important
de~fe8opmentOwe caw hope that the newly
formed assmiation will ire course of time,
be able to provide direction and correct the
serious imbalance p r e ~ i l i n gin the Bdian
information market

4.4

Publishing in the Electronic
Media

Whew publications in the print and
electronic media have to coexist in the
information market it becomes necessaT
25

:o identify the areas where eiectrsnic
pubiications are likeiy to be suitable and
commercia&!y viable. There are various
suggestions on these poinb. For example,
the flora and fauna of India published in
CD-ROM medium w611 have good national
and international market. At the same time,
one publisher has put as varied tities as the
Constitution of India and the Bhagavad Gita
in CD-ROM medium in the market.
Generally speaking, one would like to think
that publications requiring Aequent revision
or updation would be more suitable for the
eieetrsnic media. Furthert information
which are required far reference purpose
and not for condnuous reading are also
better suited for electronic media. One can
also -add that due to the familiarity and
pubBication process of the print media most
users/readers accept the authenticity of the
information in suck media. However, most
electronic pubiications are yet to establish
such credibilitya

4-2 Directory of Government heEd

Infoamation
An important direction on publishing the
government-held information i n the
electronic media, was also provided, by the
Information industry-Promokr-User Meet.
This is crystallised in another resojution of
the Meet, which reads as "A comprehensive
directory giving details of databases
available from various government
departments/daboratorie5 with details of
access mechanism should be prepared and
published. Databases with good national
and international market potential should
also be identified".

The above recommendation clearly
points out to the necessity and also the
possibility o f opening up of the
government-held information sources and

ultimately bringing them to the information
market through the provision sf suitable
information services and p r o d u c ~ . The
basic requirement here is to have the full
knowledge of what is held by different
governmental departmen& and agencies.
Fortunateiy, NNISSAT, in the Department of
Scientific and Ind~strial Research, has
already initiated action and the proposed
directory (database) may s m n be made
available.

Compilation of the direetoy is the first
siep. This will help the represenratives sf
the information indusav and others in
locating and retrieving the government-held
information from various departments and
in turning them into commercial products
or services in electronic form. However, i:
would be necessav to go into some
administrative and finasscial aspec& before
a smooth transfer of the govemnsent-held
information to the private sector electronic
information industv is possible. En many
Goes, the existing regulations may not
allow a government department to transfer
information/da~a/fih to private sector
informtion indusw- O n the other hand, as
the information i s for c o m m e r c i a ~
exploigtiow, the quesbion of profit sharing
will naturally crop up. Such questions will
have to be answered before privatisaticja of
government-held information is made
possible.

REFERENCES
1. Government-held
information:
Guidelines for government departments
in dealing with the private sector, 2287 e d
Department of Trade and Industryt Great
Britain, 1990. 35p.

2. Satyanarayana, NV. information Today &
T~morrow,1995, 14f4 1, 9.

