DESImC BerOe~naf I r r f s m * h n T d m b ~Val.
, 15, No. 5,
@ 1995, DESBDK

wmk

W. 7-10

Privatisation of S&T Information Sewices :
The f NSDOC Experience
RPS D h a b and Kamlesh Arsm

/NSDOC New Deif~i- 7 18 0 f 6

The paper discusses the ONSDOC's experience in privatisation of
information products and services, It discusses the e l e m n b of
privatisaGow in routine jobs of data entsy, dab validation, e d i ~ n g
etc.,
for database creation and library automation projects, by
contracGn~su%s-contracting
such jobs to private parties and using the
s&ff for &king up new projects. i t concludes that privaGsation of
informaGon services is economical/y viable and has proved successfu!
in INSDOC,
government and private investment,
economic viability of the market and future
trends in the informa~ontrade,

The R&D infrastructure in lndia is fairly
well developed, The country is spending
about Rs, 6000 crore every year on its
sprakvling R&D systems. The R&D efforts
are being supported by an eqbnalSy welf
developed information infrastructure in the
country. Almost all the 3000 odd R&D
institutions in fndia have an in-house library
or information centre. Besides, there are
several large national information resource
centres catering to the information
requirements of users/orgartisations which
are not fulfilled by their in-house
information facilities.

Private investment is an index sf
economic viability of a market The private
ink~estmentis not influenced by factors iike
social obligations: the main driving force is
'profit'. investment i s made only on
activities from which there are definite
indications of adequate returns. This is true
even for hitherto social welfare servicesheaith, transport, communications,
education and training-which now attract
private investment.

Before we discuss the INSDOC
experience in privatisation of information
products and services, it is desirable to
review the various components constituting
the information market, the share of

i t i s estimated that each RgtD
organisation or a large project spends about
10 per cent of its budget on its library and
information requirement. Based on this, it is
estimated that there is an information

d .$

Infarmatian Market

market of about Rs, 600 crores in the
country and about 90 to 995 per cent of this
amount is spent on acquisition of foreign
and Indian information produc&, salaries,
equipment infrastructural expenditure and
other recurring expenditure, The share of
information sewices including new services
in this market is estimated'to be around one
to ?AVO per cent only, i.e,, six to ten crores
evey blear. This amount is shared by a large
number of government and public sector
cerganisatisns, In this contex$ the number of
orders and corresponding revenues
collected at INSDOC Qsrvarious 9aditional
sewices may be seen in Table I .
.
An important factor impeding the
grobb~thof information sewices market in
India is the lethargic information coltectiots
and use habits of lildian S&T information
The in-house library i s the
uses comm~wity~
ultimate source of information for them and
a Barge number of scholars tend to think
that what is not available in their library
does not exist. That is why they limit their
literature surwy work to the information
searched by themselves manually and
personally- The adMntages sf information
technology have not yet been asted by
them. She low {eve8 of information usage in
India explains the generation of orders of
photocopies of only 40 to 45 thouwnd as a

whole in Ewdia as compared ts 2280
thousand in UK,

The biggest hindrance to the entry sf
private investment in informadon services is
the difficulty of accessing information
resources. No private entrepreneur a n
a k r d to start information services by
acquiriprg information resolarces at a huge
cost. On the other hand, huge resource
bases have been built over the years by
libraries In government institutions. Untti
recently, there -were easily accessible as a
natisnai asset, open b everybody- N o m ~
some of the institutions are moviag tov~ards
some kind of restrictive policies. More
often, these resource bases are not easijy
accessible to private information vendors to
generate produc& and services for business
purpose or, these may be so costiy as to
render these private inbrmation services
less competitive in the atready swaaal! market
Therefore, a rapid growth in private
entrepreneurship in traditicasoaf information
services like document photocopies,
abstracting and indexing services is not
foreseen. However, a few private
ewtrepreneurs have come up for providing
on-fine search sf information, translation
and valueadded information services to a
few selected industries in a narrow band of
disciplines. The n u m k r of such private

Table I . Information services :Orders and revenue cojlected at INSDOC

Activity

Numbers

online sesvkes 56 nodes

2. Uterature search

3.

DPS/Reprography

Revenue
(Rs. in lakhs)

Numben

Rewnue

(Rs, in lakhs)
19 nods

571 1

475

19,913

21084

4. Training

12 Courser

9 0 Courses

5. Translation

5978 pages

5628 pages

6. Publications

I98 S u b x r i b ~

208 s u b x r i h

7. Printing, DTP, etc

76041 p a g e

4888 pages

8. Library services

401 members

660 members

ersterpfises is too smaii at present to be
noticed and it appears that they are not
economica%lyvery sound yet. The modern
information technology has tremendously
helped them to start their business with a
very small 'snfrastructurai support and by
increasing
efficiency and decreasing
overhead costs, they can become good
competitors to Government supported
organisations.
i

2. lNSDOCBsEXPERIENCE
INSDOC has recognised the essentiality
of introduction of a private eCement in the
execution of customer services to increase
efficiency, reduce per unit cost and to
improve timeliness. A case study of the
folfowing services of INSDOC may prove
the above point.

2.1

Translatisrs Services

INSDOC provides translation services to
customers from 18 foreign languages into
English. it has about a dozen staff mem6ees
for major languages like Russian, German,
French and Japanese. In addition, a panel of
about 100 experts is maintained and
utilised from rime to time for carrying out
translations from 18 foreign languages. The
average productivity of a staff translator
calculated on annual basis works out to
about one page per day which in other
words mean Rs. 500 per page. Whereas,
the productivity of panel translatoi.~

calculated on order-twrder basis comes to
about two to three pages a day and a
translator i s paid at the rate sf Rs. 45 to 65
per page. if the order is urgent, the panel
translator is paid fifty per cent higher rate.
Comparative data of staff translators and
panel translators is given in Tabie 2.
INSDOC's 40 years of experience
indicates that the panef translation system
has better efficiency and maintains
timeiiness of service at significantly reduced
cost.

Document Supply Service

2.2

About 28 per cent of the orders received
by INSDOC are served from its savn library
and 60 per cent orders are executed by
physically cotiecting documents from other
libraries in Delhi, Calcutta, Madras and
Bangalore. Previously a staff car used to go
along with two or three persons to cotlect
documents from various libraries. The
documents were returned to the respective
libraries after photocopying the required
articles at INSDOC. This procedure was
time consuming, labour intensive and
costly. As the actual cost could not be
recovered from the customer, the service
was provided with a considerable element
of subsidy on each order,
In view of this situation, a new system
was introduced on experimental basis
initially for a few selected libraries. In this

Table 2. Productivity of staff & panel translators (Number of pages per day)

Staff productivity

1.1

0.8

0.8

0.7

Panel productivity :
Russian
Japanese
German
French
Chinese

D E S I D K Bulletin of Inf Technol,1995,P 5(5)

9

new system, an unemployed youth has
been assigned a contract in which he
collects the order slips from INSDOC
marked for a particular library, searches the
documents in the library, gets relevant items
photocopied in the library itself, pays the
required charges and supplies the
documents to INSDOC. In each case, the
contractor is paid Rs. 5 per order plus bus
fare and the cost of photocopying; his
income comes to about Rs. 2000 to 2500
per month. The concerned library also gets
some revenue out of the service. Due to
this element of privatisation, lNSDOC is
able to execute document supply orders
within 48 to 72 hours at a significantly
reduced cost.

2.3

Database Creation and Library
Automation Projects

In recent years, INSDOC was assigned
several projects of creation of databases
and computerisation of libraries in various
organisations. Initially, the projects were
being handled by a team of staff members.
The projects were usually delayed. It
became difficult to accept new assignments
until the staff was freed from earlier
projects. Therefore, INSDOC changed the
strategy and empowered the project leaders
to get a part of assignments completed by
sub-contracting to private parties. The
project leaders were delegated financial
and administrative powers to make them
fully responsible for the execution of their
projects. The jobs of classification and
cataloguing for library automation projects
were assigned to post-graduate scholars of
universities @ Rs. 4 per record. Each student
used to earn about Rs. 1800 per month and
it was observed that the productivity of

10

these scholars was significantly high and the
projects were completed within scheduled
time. Similarly, aab
l the jobs of data entry,
data validation, editing, etc., were also
sub-contracted to private parties-mostly
unemployed youth. lt released some of the
staff members from project teams and they
were able to undertake new assignments.
The assignment of ikntified jobs to
private parties on sub-contract basis has
become one of the most popular tools with
the project leaders at INSDOC. They are no
more handicapped with the shortage of
expert manpower. For example, in one
single project o f INSDOC, namely
'Multimedia-based Photo-Identity Card'
project, about I 2 5 persons were assigned
different contractual jobs. It i s estimated
that a sum of about Rs. 35 !akhs has been
spent in such contracts and the project is
on schedule.

3. CONCLUSION
Introduction of private element in the
execution of information services at
INSDOC can in no way be compared with
private investment in information services
and products. However, i t has been
established without any doubt that even the
privatisation of information services
accomplished In a very limited way at
INSDOC did generate greater efficiency,
lower per u n i t cost and improved
timeliness. The INSDOC experience also
supports the hypothesis that information
services could become profitable business
venture provided the level of consumption
of information which i s comparatively low
at present improves further.

DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1W5.15(5)

