DESIDOC Bulktin of Information Technology#Vw!. 15, No. 6, November 1995, pp. 11-16
Q 19951, DESlDOC

Documentagon Research and 'Training Centre
Indian S u ~ s ~ c a/nsGt~~e,
B
Bangalore- 560059

In this articie the author discusses the present IT and
te!ecommunication scenario in India and the opportunity offered by
the international market. To tap this expanding market, he
conceptualises user education exercises and lnforrnacy programme at
various levels leading to developing information oriented culture in
the society.

1. GLOBAL SCENARIO
During the past decade, spurred by
liberalised economic policies, severaJ
developing countries i n Asia are
experiencing high rates of economic growtta
and emerging as newly industrialised
economies (NIEs). in this process, the NIEs
find it necessary to be competitive both in
the domestic and global markets for
sustaining their economic growth. Thus, a
strong information and communication
technologies (ICT) infrastructure at the local
and national levels is a crucial enabling
factor. They are realising that investment in
ICT could not only improve productivity
" Honorary Visiting Professor
Address :
21 6, Fourth Main Road
16th Cross Road, Malleswaram West
Bangalore - 560 055
Tel:(080)3341657; (088)3440093
E-mail:ndrtc@isibang.emet.in

and efficiency in various sectors of the
economy but the ICT industries by
themselves could contribute significantly to
national product, and a favourable balance
of trade.
Internationally, in the past year,
'Information Superhighway' (ISH) and
'Global Information infrastructure' (Gllj
have become new buzzwords in the
information industry. These are an integral
part of the US Administration's plan to build
a seamless web of communication
networks, interconnecting computers,
databases, and consumer electronics.
Everyone irrespective of his or her
geographical location, occupation, <tge,
race or creed, can access a great variety
and vast amounts of information when
needed. The creation of this network of
networks is seen as a prerequisite to
sustainable economic progress for all
members of the human family [II.
II

The rapidly growing Internet has become
the backbone of the ISH, the eventual goal
of which is to enable the effective transfer
of data in the form of audio, text, and video
in real-time, across computer networks and
make the services evailable to everyone.
Thus, the lSH and GI1 are emerging
realities. The trends and developments in
ICT strategies and policies of developed
countries affect informatics and telematics,
and public policy formulation in developing
countries in ICT and other sectors. The
countries of Asia that are already building
up their respective national information
infrastructures find it necessary to build
highways and 'footpaths' to the ISH to
derive optimal benefits from the GI!.

2. ICT IN INDIA
The Information Technology (IT) Industry
in lndia grew by some 44 percent, the
software industry by 55 percent, and the
domestic market exceeded software
exports in 1994-1995. The growth has been
impressive during the last five years [2].
However, we form only a miniscule part
of the global IT market, and the domestic
computer per person ratio is also quite
small in comparison to other NlEs in the
region [ 3 ] .In the telecom sector also we are
making progress, but the use o f
telecommunications is largely confined to
the urban areas and concentrated in a few
cities. It has yet to make headway among
the vast rural population, so that the
telephone per person ratio can compare
favourably with the corresponding figures in
the industrialising economies of Asia or the
world average [4, 51.
There are several reasons for this
scenario. One is the very large population
with over 75 percent in rural areas, and all
its implications. Secondly, the surge in IT
development in lndia is hardly five years
old, since. economic liberalisation was
12

launched i n mid-1 991. W i t h the
consequent globalisation, the country has
found it necessary to become competitive
at global and at the domestic levels.
Widening the scope of the applications of
IT in the manufacturing and service sectors,
and development of telecommunications
are now crucial in this competitive
environment. Also, the Indian IT industry by
itself i s n o w shown to contribute
significantly to the national product, as has
been noted in other NIEs. Yet, IT is not
affordable to the vast majority of the
potential single user/home user in India.
Another important cause for the relatively
slow spread of IT and telecommunications
use i s the absence of a dynamic
information culture in the country. Creation
sf an informative society 161 is largely
dependent upon a supporting dynamic
information culture. The development of
such a culture is an integral part of human
resources development.

3. USER EDUCATION EXERCISES
Libraries, information systems, centres
and services at various levels try to
contribute to information culture
development at various levels through user
education programmes. However, these
programmes are not adequately planned in
most cases, and turn out to be feeble and
ineffective. This is partly due to lack of clear
perception of the different aspects and
levels of building up information user
capabilities, and partly due t o the lack of
expertise and other resources.
Firstly, it is necessary to understand
clearly the different types and facets of user
education, and as to who should do what,
where and how. For instance, the term user
education is sometimes interchangeably
used with "user sensitisatisn', 'user
orientation' and 'user assistance. (see
Anppendix).
DESIDOC BulleHn of Inf Technd,1995.15(6)

Secondly, a holistic and integrated
approach to developing a dynamic
information culture through the promotion
of informacy at all levels is essential if
people are to cope with and benefit from
the emerging information environment
Provision of user orientation, and user
assistance relate to some particular
information system or service, whereas user
education relates to a more general
educational activity. However, the three
are interrelated and mutually synergistic.
The term 'user sensitisation' is used when
the target group to be oriented is
composed of decision makers, planners,
policy makers, managers, and others in the
higher echelons of organisation's
management.

person must be cultivated, refined and
fine-tuned from early childhood so that the
person fits in and contributes to a
sustainable information society. Such
transformation of the human being may be
termed informacy (cf. literacy and
numeracy).
An
include

informacy programme should

a developing the motivation, propensity
and potential of the individual for seeking,
processing and using relevant information
for various purposes,

e creating an awareness of the information
availability and information sources to
meet different needs and situations,

e creating an awareness of the availability of

The distinction and defining the scope of
the different terms can help in identifying:

different tools for and approaches to,
information searching and accessing,

e the differences in the attributes of the user

e developing the ability to extract,

groups
for
preparing
the
sensitisation/learning/orientation
exercises,

synthesise and repackage information to
'
suit individual needs and convenience,

a the expertise needed to conduct such
differentiated exercises,
a the appropriate time and place for
conducting the exercises, and
a the appropriate methods and approaches
necessary for performing the exercises
(7, 81.

As indicated, user education i s
essentially an integral part of the education
of the individual rather than a purely
library/information centre activity. User
orientation and user assistance on the other
hand, are essentially activities of the
information centre or library.

Every individual collects, processes,
generates, communicates, receives and uses
information. These natural abilities of every
DESDOC BuUefln of lnf Techno/,lP95.15(6)

e+ developing communication skills,

s computer literacy, and
o improving the ability to use different
media for information gathering,
dissemination and communication.
Implementation
of
inforrnacy
programmes should begin at school, in
formal and informal settings, graded as per
the relevant educational and psychological
principles. The propensity to seek and use
information will get strengthened in the
higher classes, and through college. An
informate individual will need minimal
orientation and assistance to use new
information sources, services and facilities
effectively and efficiently. And, later in the
person's career, whatever be the chosen
line of work, i.e., teaching, research,
technical, managerial, business or any other
profession--he/she will perform better in
-

-

mobilising and using relevant information,
besides being a better communicator of
information, and comfortable in using
modern ITC. More subject specialists will
be attracted to a career in the information
area including ITC, in which they will find
opportunities to challenge the best
intellectuals in the country.

4.1 Programmes in Schools
Apart from the library orientation and
user education exercises carried out by
library and information centres, some
schools
in the country are providing
courses at higher levels designed to
introduce students to computer use. At the
national level, the Department of
Electronics of the Government of India, has
introduced an accreditation scheme, known
as the DoEACC Scheme in collaboration
with the Computer Society of India and the
Institute
of
Electronics
and
Telecommunications Engineers. Various
types of courses available are: 0 Level
(Foundation), A Level (Advanced Diploma);
B Level (Graduate); and C Level'
(Post-graduate).Close to 450 institutes have
been accredited under the scheme.
Recently, the DOE has set up a new society
for implementing the scheme.
There have been suggestions that
computers could be installed in all high
schools,
using the
constituency
development fund of one crore rupees
which is available to each Member of
Parliament, so that the next generation of
school children will be computer literate.
The advantages of using multimedia in
teaching and learning, in Indian schools and
colleges and in distance education, has
been pointed out especially where
adequately trained and experienced
teachers may not be available. This
realisation implies the augmentation of
facilities for media literacy. However, only a
14

few schools have adequate resources and
expertise
to
train
children
in
communication skills.
lnformacy programmes should be an
integral part of the national human
resources development programme, and
particularly embodied into the national
education policy, plans and programmes.
Implementation of an integrated informacy
programme will enhance the use of
information products and services, and also
the demand for a wide range of innovative
products and new services. The demand
will pressurise the providers to obtain
and/or design and develop new systems,
products and services. This synergy will
eventually lead to a higher ratio of the
number of computers per person and the
number of telecommunication facilities per
person in the country, that may be
comparable to that in other NIEs.

5. REFERENCES
Gore, A.L. Remarks prepared for delivery
to the meeting o f lnternational
Telecommunications Union. Office of
the Vice President, The White House,
Washington D.C. [I 9941 p.9. and Gore,
A.L. Remarks (as delivered) by Vice
President
via Satellite to the
lnternationalTelecommunications Union
Plenipotentiary Conference, Kyoto,
Japan. Office of the Vice President, The
White House, Washington D.C. 1994.
p.3.

3. jussawa4la, Meheroo. Adding value to
information: A case study of the Asian
NlEs development. lournal of the Society
for International Development 1993, (3),
32-35.
4. Vittal, N. Through the Crystal Ball.
Dataquest, 1995, 12(32) 49-50.
DES/D06&rlletln of lnf Technot,1995,15(6)

5. Sachitanand, N.N. Behind the IT industry
figures. The Hindu, 14 August 1995, p.18
col3-6.

Training Policy and Programme, Paris,
October 1982, 4-6.5th Session Unesco,
3 7 August, 7 982. (PGI/E.T.V./4)

6. Zuboff Shoshana. In the age of the smart
machine. Heinemann Professional
Publishing. 1988.

8. Neelameghan, A. 'User Education' in
library and information studies
curriculum: Some aspects with special
reference to developing countries.
Presented to the Unesco Ad-Hoc
Committee on Education and Training
Policy and Programme. Paris, Unesco,
1983.

7. Neelameghan, A. improving the Use of
information system, services and sources
through user education and orientation:
Some issues with reference to developing
countries. Presented to the Unesco
Ad hoc Committee on Education and

DESIDOC &kPeiin of Inf Technol,1995,15(6)

15

IDIFFRENTIATION OF USER EDUCATION,USER ORlENTATlON AND USER
ASSISTANCE: EXAMPLES OF OBjECTlVES A N D TASKS

User Education

and situation

suit individual requirements
and convenience.

User Orientation

User Assistance

