DESIDOC Bulletin of I n b m a b n T&nobgy,

V01. 15, No. 6, N w m k 1995, pp. 5 9

0 1995, DESlDOC

Education in Information Science : Some Basic Issues

Depament of Library & InformaGon Sciense
Universiy of Madras, Madra 608 805
email :kwsa&unimad.ernetin
Abstract
This paper addresses the implications s f technological changes
occurring in information sector on the education and training of
information professionals. The author presents objectives, contents,
organisation of information, manpower development and other
issues in current perspective. The paper stresses an information
technology oriented approach towards customer and the need for
satisfying the end user. The information professional has to be
constantly in touch with technological changes and be able to
design, develop, and implement different types of databases. The
author has proposed a mode! structure of curricula and courses for
information sector.

1. INTRODUCTION
Education has been defined by The
Chambers Twentieth Century Dictionary as
"ringing up or training, as of a child;
instruction; strengthening of the powers of
the body or mind; culturen. More simply it i$
the process of acquiring knowledge and
skills, and includes efforts to evolve
relationships between the knowledge units
acquired. The overall objective of education
is societal advancement by which we mean
the ability to apply knowledge to solve the
problems of the society. Libraries and
information systems have always been
influenced by the technology of the time. In
fact, the modern library is largely a product

of printing technology. Any technologica!
change has a direct impact on education
and training.
The impact of IT on the education and
training of information professionals,
however is distinct and marked both by the
rapidness with which the technology has
developed and also by the width of its
impact. It is difficult to think of any area of
information work that is not affected by IT
in some way. Every aspect of information
processing from generation of information
through its storage and dissemination is
affected by IT.
The goals of information science
education should be derived from the goals

of libraries and information Systems.
Broadly, the five laws of library science can
be taken to provide a statement of the
objectives of a librarylinformation system.
Before that, it is however important to
interpret the term 'library' as inclusive of all
varieties of institutions with the objective of
providing and facilitating access to
information (information systems) and the
term %books' as synonymous with data and
information. Once we realise this, it is not
difficult to understand that the objectives of
a library/information system are not likely to
change in the immediate future. What have
however, changed significantly in the last
decade are the ways in which these
information systems operate, function, and
are managed; e.g., the means of storing,
accessing and disseminating information
have changed enormously and will
continue to change due to developments in
IT. All these factors have implications for
education and training of information
professionals.

2. THE CONTENTS
The term 'information science' today is
used to refer to a discipline that has both a
pure science component and an applied
science component. This discipline has
'information' as its core entity of study and
therefore necessarily examines the
properties and behaviour of information,
the .forces governing the flow and
tra~smission of information, and the
methods of storage, the techniques of
processing and representation of
information, the means of accessing and
the factors governing the use of
information.
Information science is essentially an
interdiscipliriary science and covers all
phenomena involved in the transfer of
information from the point of generation to
its use.
6

2.1 Objectives
The subject of information education
should deal with all these components of
the information transfer process.
Additionally, the major objective of any
information education programme for
developing skills and knowledge should
include:
(a) Understanding of 'information' as a
commodity, and information flow as a
process,
(b) Understanding the user of information
and information systems,
(c) Design of information support systems,
databases; their maintenance and
management,
(d) Available information systems, resources
and services, and techniques of accessing
these; etc.
There cannot be two opinions that in the
years to come information systems,
resources and services are going to be
increasingly driven by technology.

2.2

Caring for the User

One major issue that concerns
information professionals in general and
particularly those concerned with designing
and implementing educational programmes
is the mechanism of integrating aspects of
IT into our library/information school
curricula; and identifying through a national
survey the modules in the existing curricula
that need to be strengthened and new
modules that need to be introduced.
Secondly, it is important that in future,
the library/information system should
become more responsive to the needs of
the information user-both actual and
potential. In our preoccupation with IT, it is
easy to mistake the means for the end.
There are differences of opinion regarding
whether or not and, if yes, the degree to
ofhfT8chnd,I%,\

5(6)

which IT has helped in improving the image
of the information professional. But the fact
remains that libraries still rank pretty low
according to surveys on use of information
sources by a wide variety of communities. If
this situation has to change information
professionals must be capable of offering a
higher level of information service than
they are offering today. This is possible only
through a better understanding of the end
user and his requirements and by
developing abilities to adapt to the
information behaviour of the user rather
than expecting him to adapt to the kinds of
information systems we design. Mick, et a1
address this vital issue as:

access to resources, but they have not
brought about any significant qualitative
improvement in subject access to the
resources of libraries and information
systems. Improvements in information
handling, while being effective in meeting
the demands of the growth of literature,
have not necessarily improved the quality
of accessibility to the literature. These
points suggest that it is even more
important than ever before to refine the
tools and techniques of subject analysis and
representation. Thus, organisation of
knowledge will continue to be the major
area in contents of educational
programmes in information science.

"Effective transition into the information
age will require switching from
information systems that are technology
and content driven to information systems
that are user driven".

Knowledge of information resources and
their reference value is essential for the
effective functioning of any information
professional. The range of information
products and services that are available
today is so wide that knowledge of 'where
to find information' on a subject of interest
to the end user becomes important. It is no
longer enough for the library/information
professional to be familiar with the
information resources physically present
within the four walls of a library. For
example, a computer connected to an
online information system can provide
access to thousands of databases many of
which may potentially satisfy the needs of
the user. Any education programme should
give adequate attention to this vital area if
we are to develop manpower capable of
exploiting the vast and wide range of
resources available in machine readable
form.

if this has to happen, understanding of
information users and their needs should be
viewed as important components of our
education programmes in information.

2.3 Organising Information Resources
It is important for the information
profession to be both innovative and
imaginative in exploiting the technology to
enhance the quality of services provided to
end users of libraries and information
systems. For example, while many libraries
have switched over from card catalogues to
OPACs and from manual book circulation
systems to automated circulation systems,
these in themselves should not be viewed
as the ultimate goals of libraries and
information systems. With reference to
OPACs it is not difficult to realise that
almost without exception libraries and
information systems continue to use the
tools that were designed for manual
systems. In fact, while OPACs and online
union catalogues have vastly expanded user
DESIDGC BuUeffn of Inf Technd,1W5,15(6)

2.4

Designing lnforrnation Systems

While recognising the importance of
knowledge of a wide range of databases for
the effective and efficient functioning of the
information professional, it is equally
important for the information professional
to be able to design, develop and

implement different types of databases. This
issue requires much wider discussion
among those concerned with designing
and
implementing
educational
programmes.
It has been recognised that the
information professional who is in constant
touch w i t h information .user and
information usage is in an advantageous
position when it comes to designirtg
databases and information systems. If we
look around it is not difficult to realise that
there are a variety of situations in a wide
range of institutions and environments in
, which the knowledge and skills of the
infdrmation professional can be effectively
deployed. Systems for the management of
patient records in hospitals, land records,
databases of experts, institutions, etc. are
only a few examples of situations in which
the information professional could be
particularly effective. It is therefore
important to examine the need for broadbased educational programmes so that our
products fit into positions even outside the
traditional information institutions.

information professionals should be
capable o f managing information
institutions of all kinds including the
implementation and management of
technological changes. Knowledge of
principles, theories and techniques of
management will be an important
component
of
our
educational
programmes.
2.5

Lastly, it is extremely important to take a
%olistic\iew. Each one of the components
identified in the foregoing paragraphs needs
to be related to and viewed from the point
of view of the overall goals and objectives
of information systems. The mission should
be to generate manpower capable of
enhancing and improving access to and use
of information and information resources
and capable of functioning in a wide variety
of operational environments. It is important
to be able to view all these activities and
components within the broader context of
the inforrnation transfer process starting
from generation of information to its
dissemination and use. Therefore, the
interrelation between information and the
society
constitutes an important
component providing the proper context
for all the components that we have
mentioned earlier.

3. PROPOSALS
If we broadly examine the existing
curricula in many of our information
science schools, it will become obvious that
there is an immediate need for redefining
our goals and objectives and restructuring
our programmes in the emerging context.
The proposals made here are based on the
following widely accepted assumptions:
+R

The nature of work and activities in all
kinds of
infomation
systems and
institutions is changing rapidly and will
continue to change.

+B

The information sector is emerging as a
.major player in the socio-economic
development of the society at the
individual, institution and government
levels.

+R

Situations exist outside the traditional
information institutions that lend
themselves fpr the application of the
knowledge and skills of the information
professional.

Research Methodology

For educational programming it is
important to give due attention to the need
for developing manpower capable of
carrying out research on information
problems. For this, a thorough knowledge
of research methodologies including the
emerging area of quantitative techniques in
the information area will be necessary.

D E g w 6dbhof Inf r6'Chndhnd
1495.15(6)

The structure of the curriculum
proposed here involves both the theoretical
principles forming
foundations of the
discipline, and the specialised knowfedge
and skills unique to the profession, and
necessary for effective functioning.
Courses can be grouped under seven
major areas identified earlier, viz.

e Foundations

and the
courses o n "information
community'
and
"information
communication' can be accommodated in
the 'foundations' area. It is also possible to
think in terms of 'core'
and 'elective'
courses in edich one of these areas. For
example, in the 'information handling' area
elective courses on 'design of indexing
languages' and 'organisation of special
materials' can be offered.

5

lnformation resources and services

4. CONCLUDBNG REMARKS

5

information user and use

5

Information handling

The purpose of this paper has been to
take a fresh look at the design of course
contents in educational programmes in
information science. The report of the UGC
Review Committee (Chairman: S R
Ranganathan) have influenced discussions
on this subject and the contents of
educational programmes. It is necessary to
realise that in the three decades following
the submission of this report there have
been fundamental changes in the ways in
which libraries and information systems
operate and that information technology
has come to pervade every information
related activity. It is therefore vital for us to
review the situation in the light of the
emerging environment.

e Design of information systems
G+

Information technology

e Management
5

Research methodology.

It should be clearly understood that
these are only broad areas and it is possible

to identify a few courses in each one of
these areas. For example, courses on
classification, indexing, cataloguing, design
of indexing languages, etc. can be
conveniently accommodated in the
'information handling' area. Similarly

DESIDOC &rlletbof Inf Technd, 1995.15(6)

P

