DESlDOC Bulletin of k\tom\ation Technology, Vol. 17, No. 4, July 1997, pp. 1 1-16
0 1997, OESIOOC

Copyright Issues Relating to Database Use
VK Gupta*

Abstract
Databases are being created for dissemination of information in various
sectors such as industry, tourism and hotel, culture development, planning,
agriculture, health, environment, science and technology, geography,
population, etc This paper focusses on issues related to copyright protection
of these databases.

1.

INTRODUCTION

During the past few decades, institutionat
infrastructure has been created in the country
for collecting collating and disseminating
information in a variety of sectors such as
industries,
tourism and hotel,
culture
development planning, agriculture, health,
environment,
science
and
technology,
geography, population, etc. As a natural
consequence, issues concerning database
protection have become important.

1.1 The Central lssue
The intangible nature of information
products and services makes it difficult to
protect them by traditional means of protecting
physical properties. Legal mechanisms are
required to be established to ensure that these
are not copied and used without legitimate
permission.

The key issue in the protection of databases
is the conflict of interests between the
developers and authors of the databases on the
one hand and the users of the databases, on the
Scientist
Natiional Institute of Science T'lecnology and
m

t W i e s {NISTADS)

Or KS. Krishnan Marg
New Delhi

other. Authors or developers are interested in
receiving renumeration from databases which is
based on their iotellectual and skill inputs. Thus,
they want to restrict copying from databases
while users are keen to make use of the
information either without payingfor it or would
like to have copying rights at a relatively lesser
cost.

1.2

Approaches of Protection

Three broad approaches used for database
protection are

1.2.1 Protection of Databases Through

Contracts
Protection of databases through contracts
permits a user to use the database under a
license from the database owner on payment of
a fee, based upon the amount of usage and or
royalty. License does not pass the ownership of
the database to the user. A contract may be
used in addition to the protection oi database
under the copyright laws.

1.2.2 Database Protection llrrough
Copyright Laws
Most countries have accorded protection to
databases under the copyright laws. Definitions
of databases and legal interpretations of the
protection under copyright vary considerabjy

from one country to another. The question of
intellectual skills involved in the creation of
databases has been debated. Many databases
do not qualify basic conditions for being
protedable under the copyright laws.

rule is that the copyright is owned by the
employers. Copyright will belong to the
employer only if it is part of the employee's
duties to produce the work.

a No formalities such as registration are required

1.2.3 Sui generis System o f Protection

to protect a work under copyright. No
copyright notice need to appear on any work.

for Databases
Sui generis protection of databases is largely
guided by the European Community Directive
on the legal protection of databases. The
Directive was passed by the European
Parliament on 11 March 1996'. A similar
proposal, based on the bill (H.R.3531), was also
introduced in the 104th United States Congress.
The emerging focus is on the proposed WlPO
treaty on intellectual property in respect of
databases which is due for discussion in 1997.

2.

COPYRIGHT PROTECTION

2.1

Key Principles Concerning
Copyright

Following are key principles concerning
copyright protection:
4 Copyright protects the manner of expression

of information, not the idea or information
itself.
9 The work need not to be of very high quality

for protection under the copyright. It only
needs to be original.

+

In principle, it is the ski#, iabour, and
judgement of the author that i s protected
under the copyright laws irrespective of the
form in which the product appears.

a The copyright in literary, dramatic, musical and
artistic works belongs to the author of the
work.
tb The author has to

be a person and not a

corporation.

e In case, a work is produced with the aid of or
is generated by computer, the person who
undertakes the arrangements necessary for
the creation of the work i s considered as the
author.

a Incase, a work is produced by someone in the
course of his employment, then the normal

a The copyright owner can give a license to use
the work by others. Any assignment of
copyright is to be in writing.

a Copying or making adaptations, of a work or
verbatim reproduction of a substantial part of
it done without the permission of copyright
.. owner, is a breach of copyright.

*

Use of copyright works for the purpose of
research and private study is generally
permissible. There is no requirement of
sufficient acknowledgement.

2.2

Salient Aspects Concerning
Database Copyright

The salient aspects concerning database
protection under copyright are:

a Under the copyright laws, databases are
protected as collections or compilations of
literary and artistic works. The essential
requirement is that a database should be the
result of its creator's own intellectualeffort and
that it achieves a sufficient level of originality.

a The intellectual skill involved in copyright
protection i s the conceptual approach to
classification and data organisation, which
facilitates quick retrieval and various analyses
of the data.

*

Many databases do not satisfy such stringent
requirements of originality and the
interpretation of the law varies in different
countries. A minimum expenditure of time,
money and labour (the Sweat-of-the-brow
theory) in compilation of databases was once
considered eligible for protection under the
US Copyright Laws; negated in 1991 in the
Fiest case. In contrast, a similar effort in India
could receive protection under copyright laws.
These limitations have implied the need for
new initiatives for protection of the databases.
DESIDoC Bulletin d I n f Techd, 1997,17(4)

2.3

Protection Under lndian

WlPO Draft Databases Treaty of December
1996 aims to harmonise national laws in
respect to protection of databases4. The
treaty recognises increasing risks due to the
possibilities of making exact copies of whole
databases or parts thereof with little costs. The
treaty establishes a new form of protection of
databases granting rights to enable the makers
of databases to recover the investments
made.

Q.

Copyright Act
The Indian Copyright Act was amended in
1994 to extend more effective protection to
computer programmes as literary works and for
the protection of computer generated works.
The meaning of 'literary work' induded works
such as computer programmes, tables and
cornpibtions including computer databases2.
The meaning of 'publication' induded
making a work available to the public by issuing
copies or by communicating the work to the
public. The act provides for certain exemptions
which do not constitute an infringement of
copyright. For example, a fair dealing with a
literary work (not being a computer
programme) for the purposes of private use and
research and preparations of criticism or review.
Purposes of teaching, research or scholarship
indude (i) purposes of instructional activity at all
levels in educational institutions including
schools, colleges, universities and tutorial
institutions, (ii) purposes of all other types of
organised educational activity.
Purposes of research does not indude
purposes of industrial research, or purposes of
research by bodies corporate (not being bodies
corporate owned or controlled by government)
or other association or body of persons for
commercial purposes.

2.4

International Conventions

t~ The Berne Convention provides for the

protection of collections and compilations of
literary or artistic works by reason pf the
selection and arrangement of their contents
constituting intellectual creations. The
protection is without prejudice to the
copyright in each of the works forming part of
such collections. WlPO Copyright Treaty
adopted by the Diplomatic Conference on
December 20, 1996, extended the provisions
of the Berne Convention to the compilations
of databases following the same principles of
protection3.
dr The TRIPS Agreement under World Trade

Organisation (WTO) provides protection to
the databases on similar lines.

3.

KEY ISSUES IN COPYRIGHT
PROTECTION OF DATABASES

3.1

Digital Agenda

A work is copyrightable if described as being
fixed in a tangible medium of expression when
its embodiment in a copy or phonorecord is
sufficiently permanent or stable to permit it to
be reproduced, or otherwise communicated for
a period of more than transitory duration. In
other words, if a work is created on a word
processor so that it i s projected briefly on
screen or captured only momentarily in the
memory of a computer that work is not fixed
and cannot be protected by copyright.

+ There is a view that taking a database and
simply rearranging the data, and creating
something new is not infringement of the
original database copyright. The other view is
that, now a days, the data in a database are not
placed in the computer memory in any
particular order, and is simply available for
retrieval; so the rearrangement of data implies
an infringement of the original database.
Another view states that if there was no skill in
selecting the individual items that go in a
compilation of database and if there is no skill
involved in the arrangement (no addition of
keywords or indexing terms, simply a listing),
then such a compilation should not justify
copyright protection5.

a The emerging new technologierlike CD-ROM,
multimedia and cyberspace have enabled
storage
and
transmission,
of
informationfdatabases and made thefn easily
accessible for a variety of users. The key issue
is that of downloading.

3.2

Issue of Downloading

Databases are treated-whether in online
form, CD-ROM form, or any other form-as
standard copyright works. Such compilations
should not be downloaded or copied in any
other way without prior permission (except for
small portions only for fair use purposes such as
research or private study); They should not be
distributed through local or wide area networks
to multiple key stations without prior
permission. 'Downloading' is the electronic
transfer of information from one database to
another including that from an online database
service through one's own local microcomputer.
The key issue is whether downloading should
be permitted. The issue is not settled. One view
is to work out ways to pay reasonably for the
use and reuse of the information resource in
case downloading is permitted, while others
oppose it.
Remote access through telecommunication
links is also becoming important for commercial
online databases. This technology gives users
remote access to a database stored in a central
computer system. There are copyright issues
involved in transmission of data through
satellites which are not yet settled.

3.3

Computer Generated Works

Ownership of the works that are generated
by computers is an important issue. Are these
works proper subject matter for copyright?If so,
who owns the copyright-the person who runs
the computer program or the person who
developed the software?
Does 'fair use' apply to computer-generated
works? This means that the user could retrieve
and use information derived from the database,
such as a citation, just as he wouM with any
other copyrighted work. The act of storing a
computerised database in the memory of a
computer is the exclusive right of the copyright
owner.

3.4

Protecting Personal Information
in Databases

These days many databases are established
which contain personal information about

individuals, e.g., members of a library or
business card holders. Such databases have
raised issues regarding protection and misuse of
personal information of individuals. Many
countries have responded to privacy concerns
of such databases by introducing data
protection legislation allowing individuals the
right to know what records are there about
them and the contents of those records6.

3.5

Databases of Abstracts of
Published Articles

A lot of debate has ensued whether a
database of abstracts infringes copyright of
original authors. In this case, two questions are
asked:

(i) Do the abstracts simply report facts?
(ii) Do the abstracts act as substitutes for the
original texts?
In case of (i), there is no copyright in a fad
or set of facts. If, on the other hand, the original
item included some lengthy text, which is
faithfully reproduced in the abstract, then it is
likely to be considered a copyright infringement
The abstract should be significantly shorter than
the original text, and should not act as a
substitute for it.

4.

ISSUES RAISED BY W l P O
DRAm TREATY

The WlPO draft database treaty has
introduced new principles to cover protection
to all databases that represent a substantial
investment in the collection, assembly,
verification, organisation or presentation of the
contents of the database. The protection is
irrespectiveof

- whether the database is in itself innovative or
copyrightable

- the form or medium in which the database
is embodied.
The 'substantial investment' means, any
qualitatively or
quantitatively significant
investment of human, financial, technical or
other resources in the collection, assembly,
verification, organisation or presentation of the
contents of the database. The introduction of

investment as a new ,norm for the protection of
intellectual property dilutes the well established
principles of intellectual property that stimulate
creativity and aim at the social objectives of
sharing of information with public

The central issue is to develop mechanisms
of protection for databases which are otherwise
not amenable for protection under copyright
laws. The laws of contracts could be used for
such database protections.
Another contentious issue that the draft
WlPO treaty has raised is that of the Fair Use
Principle. This principle has raised doubts about
the freedom of sharing information amongst the
scientific community.

Free flow of information/data underlying
scientific theories amongst scientists is essential
for the development of science. The scientific
community in the United States and elsewhere
has voiced concerns that the proposed treaty
timits any public-good exceptions-such as the
fair use exemption traditionally enjoyed by !he
research and education communities. It is felt
that the treaty is likely to inhibit researchers
seeking to reuse and combine data for
publication or for research as well as educators
wishing to use portions of the data sets for
instructionai purposes and may even restrict
uses by libraries and private users7.
Another implication of the proposed treaty
in Indian context relates to the public
dornain/government owned information.
Government organisations are the repository
to a vast amount of information of social and
cultural value. The questions about utilisation of
the public domain information or making the
government owned information available to the
database vendors are of central importance. The
key issue is how the public interests will be
protected once the information is made
available to database vendors, particularly in
case of transfer of information in electronic or
digital form for commercial purposes?

The treaty also needs to be looked in the
context of its importance in the development of
information services and industry in the country.
In the field of science and technology
information, S&T organisations and institutions

have extensive capabilities for development and
exploitation of S&T information resources. The
growing capability as a producer and as an user
of the database, products and services is to be
complemented with the similar services and
products available from outside the country. h
the absence of protection mechanisms at par
with the international standards, it may be
difficult to attract the foreign investments by the
database vendors. Equally important is the need
to provide protection to domestic databases
from being copied by others.

5.

CONCLUSION AND
SUMMARY

The
paper has examined different
approaches to the protection of databases. The
issues raised by protection o l databases under
copyright laws have been discussed. I t considers
attempts to evolve sui generis system of
protqction for those databases which are not
amenable for protection under copyright.
In an open market economy, transparent and
effective commercial laws are aimed at reducing
interventions of the government into the
working of the business. The economic policies
in India are being liberalised for a competitive
market economy. This has called for new
relationships between science, law, commerce
and trade.

The central question for database industry is
the prevention of outright piracy or illegal
commercially significant use of the databases.
The laws for database protection would require
a sufficient degree of certainty in their
application to be effective in supporting the
commercial activity. Equally important are the
needs for scientific and technological enterprise
for free exchange of information and that data
and information in the public domain should
not be lost to the private interests. Both interests
should be balanced by any legal treaty or
instrument for protection of databases.

REFERENCES
1.

Directive 96/9/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 11 March
1996 on the legal protection of databases,

Official Journal of
Communities, 1996.

the

European

2.

Indian Copyright Act with amendments in
1994, 1994.

3.

WIPO Copyright Treaty. Final Document of
the Diplomatic Conference on certain
Copyright and Neighboring Rights
Questions. Geneva, December 2 to 20,
1996.

4.

Basic Proposalfor the SubstantiveProvisions
of the Treaty on Intellectual Property in
respect of Databases: Background Papers of
Volume 1. Seminar on Implicationsof WlPO
Copyright and Performances and
Phonograms Treaties, Vol.1. February 78,
1997. Organised by the Ministry of Human

Resource Development, Government of
India, New Delhi.

5.

Sathyanarayana, NV. Copyright for
Databases: India vs. USA. U&l Newsletter,
November, 1995.

6.

LISLU(:Legal Issues of Concern to the
Library and Information Sector. journal of
InformationScience, 1995,21(4), 300-04.
Reichman, JH and Samuelson, Pamela.
lntellectual Property Rights in Data: An
Assault on the Worldwide Public Interest in
Research and Development: Background
papers of Seminar on Implications of WlPO
Copyright and Performance and
Phonograms Treaties, February 7-8, 1997.
Ministry of Human Resource Development,
Government of India, New Delhi.

