DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 1 7, No. 5, September 1997, pp. 1 1-16
0 1997, DESlDOC

Bibliographic Databases: Software Issues
Sreedevi Ravindran*
Abstract
The success of any information centre lies not only on its own resources but
also in identifying and enlisting the various sources of information and
developing the requisite tools and systems for tapping those resources. The
minimum requirement for ensuring such sharing of information is a common
format for the maintenance of databases and the requisite technology inputs
including software packages. This paper presents an overview of various
software available for library automation and management of bibliographic
databases and the various considerations in selecting a software.

Information Technology, an invention of the
twentieth century, has already entered in every
fieM of human activity. The transformation of
reading rooms and libraries into sophisticated
information centres is aiso the result of this
development. The primary objective of any
information centre is to make available the
required information within a reasonable period
of time. The information thus made available
should also be reliable and up to date and in a
form and format that i s convenient to use. It is,
however, not possible even to imagine that an
information centre could acquire and maintain
every conceivable piece of information in its
area of specialisation and become self-sufficient.
The su&ess of any information centre,
therefore, lies also in identifying and enlisting
the various sources of information and
developing the requisite tools and systems for
tapping those resources.
'Department of Scientific & Industrial Research
Ministry of Science & Techndogy
Technology Bhawan, New Mehrauli Road
New Delhi

The minimum requirement for ensuring such
sharing of information is a common format for
the maintenance of databases and the requisite
technology inputs including software packages.

2.

CHARACTERISTICS OF A N
IDEAL SOFTWARE

The desirable characteristics of an ideal
software package are:

D Easy to !earn.
Easy to use.
Well designed on-screen help messages.

0 Well printed manuals and documentation.
0 Fast and efficient mrformance.

0 Flexible and malleable.

tl

Compatible with other software products.
Cost~ffectiwas compared to the features.

The software which i s easy to learn and
requires least training is the beit choice of the
people who have to use the package but do not
have much computer experience.

The ease of use is another important criteria
which is provided by logical consistency in the
applications of function keys and availability of
shortcut keys that allow an experienced user to
bypass menu choices and jump directly to the
action required to be performed. Ease of use is
very important in circumstances when a
program has to be used often and for long
periods of time by experienced programmers.
On-screen help messages are essential for
understanding the working of various on-screen
options to resolve any possible difficulty while
executing a program. The software which
incorporates such help messages to provide the
necessary explanations for each of the options
are, therefore, generally preferred.
Printed manuals are the backbone of good
software. They often have:

0 A reference section explaining the individual
commands and/or menu choices,

tl A tutorial section demonstrating step-by-step
use of the software, and

0 A good index to help easy location of the
required command. Such manuals are presently available on disks instead of/or in addii
tion to the medium of print on paper.

The efficiency and completeness of a
package in performing a task to be completed
in the existing environment determines its
performance. The organisations using the same
software for similar applications in comparable
environments can provide valuable information
on this aspect
The capability of a software to perform
efficientty in different situations determines its
flexibility. It is a c h i i by providing a sequence
of choices in the configuration section.
The compatibility of a software with others
in terms of data transfer, ability to establish
real-time links with other programs and visually
similar display and identical responses is another
major consideration in the choice. The
minimum expected compatibility is in terms of
data transfer from one package to another
without any serious hassles.

Above all, the software packages has to be
cost-effectii which is determined on the basis

of a comparison of features and performances
on one hand and p'rice on thc other side.

3.

SOFTWARE SELECTION

The choice of a software package has to be
based on a clear evaluation of its desirable
features as objectively as possible. A few useful
steps in this regard are the following:

3.1

Consult Software Guides and
Directories

There are a number of software guides and
directories which enumerate different software
products and describe their features and
characteristics. Many of them even provide
references to reviews and abstracts of product
reviews. For the most up-to-date information
one can consult an on-line software database
like 'Buyer's Guide to Micro Software' from
Online.

3.2

Reading of Reviews

Informed critical reviews about different
software packages often appear in standard
magazines and publications. These reviews can
give a good understanding of the strength and
weaknesses of a package.

3.3

Word of Mouth

Interactions with the existing users of a
package can give valuable information about its
practical pitfalls and advantages. However, one
has to use interpretive filters to ensure that the
views of the informant are reliable 'and
objective.

3.4

Site Visits

A visit to one or more libraries already using
the software under consideration is an essential
prerequisite if the application is important or
the cost is high.

4.

LIBRARY AUTOMATION
PACKAGES

A number of software packages are
presently available in India for handing
bibliographic databases and library management
systems. They can be categorised into three
DESlDoC &rHetin of Inf Technd, 1997,17(5)

groups based on the functions being performed
by them as listed below:
Library management functions-acquisition,
cataloguing, circulation and serial control;
Management support functions-statistics,
MIS, accounting and budget control; and
Database and information retriwal functions
database creation; maintenance; retrieval;
generationof SDI, Indexes and bibliographies;
directory generation; etc.
Some of the major padcages available in India
and brief details about them are given below:

4.1

Archives

This package, developed in multiuser
Foxbase, is useful for library acquisition control,
serials control, budgetary control, cataloguing,
circulation control, information storage and
retrieval, SDI, etc.

4.2

LIBRA

It is a multiuser, multilingual package for
acquisition
control,
circulation
control,
cataloguing, and online retriwal. It can be linked
with Dialog and similar Services.

4.3

GOLDEN LIBRA

This library management software running
under DOS can be used for automation of
subscriptions, storage and retrieval of
books/periodicals. It has the facility for creation
of reports on overdue periodicals, list of
magazines and books, list of publishers and
members, non-receipt of books and periodicats,
etc.

4.4

LIBRARY MANAGER

This

menudriven library management
package on DOS environment for online
information has facilities for data validation,
circulation control, catalogue card printing,
information services on books, reports, articles
and periodicals, etc.

The package is developed to create
databases of books, members, issue and return,
inter-library loan, overdue list, etc.
DESIDOC Bulktin of Inf Tedmd, 1997,17(5)

4.6

LIBRARIAN

It is a library management package for online
information of any library. It is developed in
Foxbase and C and works on DOS, XENIX or
Nowll Netware. It is used for computerising
cataloguing,
circulation,
serial
control,
acquisition, budget control, inventory control
and bibliographic services.

4.7

LlBRlS

All the functional aspects of library activities,
viz,
acquisition,
cataloguing, circulation,
periodicals, newspapers, enquries, and library
administration are induded in this package and
can be implemented in phases. Both single and
multiuser environments are supported. LlBRlS
generates the bar code labels at the cataloguing
stage.

4.8

LIBSYS

It is an integrated multi-user library system
designed to run on a wide spectrum of
hardware/software
under
platforms
in
client/serwr environments. Built around its
own centralised bibliographic database based
on ANSI Z39:50 format, LlBSYS supports
almost all activities in the areas of acquisition,
cataloguing, circulation, serial control, articles
indexing and abstracting, OPAC and union
catalogue.

Integrated Library Management Software
(ILMS) is developed by DESlDOC and
INFLIBNET for cataloguing and circulation.

Minisis is a multilingual, multi-platform,
relational database management system
designed to manage text-based collection. The
package was earlier designed on HP-3000
mini-computers for bibliographic information
management and textual database applications.
Now the package is available in DOS
environment also. It is an online interactive
system for information processing, storage and
retrieval and provides facility for online
catalogue, circulation control, serials control,
report generation, etc

4.1 1 7'ECHLlB plus
TECHUB pkrs is a comprehensive library
automation package based on BASISplus, the
mrld leading document DBMS and text
retrieval -tern. It ako provides direct access to
informationin current contents.

lhe padrage ULYSlS (Universal Libran/
Infomution Syszem) is dedoped in C language
for use in WlPRO series ofcomputers based on
opeating systems. The Cour
,
c
r
ic
u
a
lw maintenance
and quer)F-perborm al the library management
functiims.

XeniqlUnk

,-

..

WlllSYS is also devdoped in C bnguage for
integrated library automation. It can be used for
mechanising the routine library activities and
effeaiw dissemination of information to the
library users. It uses Unify RDBMS fw data
management

4.14 DELMS
Defence Library Management System
(DELMS) is a COBOL based software package
develaped by Defence Scientific Information
and Documentation centre (DESIDOC) for
automating acquisitkm, circulation, serial and
online catabgue. It is supported on Unix
operating system.

4.1 5 MAITRAYEE
The package, devdoped by CMC Ltd. for
CAUBNET under NISSAT funding, enables
library computerisation, mmurces sharing,
standadisation, connectivity and modularity. it
has modules Cor acquisition and fund
accounting, cataloguing, ke!yvmds, circulation,
serial control, SO1 services, OPAC, budgetary
control, periodic job, network services and
central host services. It uses TCP/IP with X.25
protocol for networking and supports MARC
communication format.

various functions of a large academk library like
acquisition, technical processing, serials control,
circulation, user services, current awareness
services and retrospective conversion of
catalogues. The user services are available
through terminals situated in the library and
other campus-wide localarea networks.

The acronym CDS/ISIS
stands
for
Computerised Documentation S-flntegra
ted
Set of Infomation Systems is designed to store
and etrbe structured variable length iextual
information. It was devdoped by the United
Nations Educational Sdentific and Cultural
Organiition (UNESCO) and released in 1985. \t
is a generalised information management system
defined by databases and programs. The
databases are user defined md contain the
i n h t i o n . The program are provided with the
system and are gel&d
to opeate on a large
variety of user defined databass.

4.18 NIRMALS: Library Management
Software
Nirmal Institute of Computer Experts, Trichi
has introduced NIRMAtS, a library management
The
software
has
five
package.
sub-system+acquisition control bibliographic
control, circulation control, desktop information
services and serials control.

5.

BlSLlOCRAPHlC DATABASE
AND CDS/ISIS

The fundamental requirement of any
bibliographical information and storage
package is that it shoukl be capable of handling
the folkwing complexities of bibMograpMc
data:
(i) In bibliographical deJuiptlons of documents,
a few of the data elements my occur for
some, but may not occur for other. For
example, 'series statement' may be present in
the description of some documents, but not

in dl.
(ii) The length of each data dement can be
variable and unpredictable.

The Indian Institute of Technology-Kanpur
Library Automation System (iit-KLAS) supports

(iii) A data element may be repetitive in nature,
and it is not possible to visualise before hand
its number of repetitions ( e.g, author fieM).
CDS/ISIS is one of the most widely used
software in lndia which incorporates all the
above features for bibliographic database
managemenh The notable features of this
software are that the software package enables:

e Definingdatabases with user sdected variable
length feMs with or without subfields (about
200 fidds per record and about 36 subfields
per field, maximum length being 8% the
maximum number of records per database
being 16 million);
e Making all or selected fields as repeatable
fields;

e Entering records as per the definition of the
user, guided by user defined help messages;
e Modification, correction and deletion of
existing records;
e Creationof fast access inverted index files from
user specif4 fidds and/or subfields;
e Search terms to be selected from the inverted
index file and/or by keying-in to form search
queries;

e Retrieval of records on the basis of search
queries formed using AND, OR, NOT, other
proximity operators and field restrictions;

e Display and print out of records according to
user defined formats;
e Recalling of queries, their modification and
resubmission to different data bases without
rekeying
e Sorting of records in desired sequence before
printing
e Printing of records or indexes as per user
defined formats from the whole database or
from selective lists saved after search;

+

Exportinglimporting of records in 150-2709
compatible format;

e Working in LAN environment and

o Development of specialised applications in a
restricted Pascal language.

Due to these features, CDS/ISIS has been in
great demand world-wide, especially in
developing countries. Moreover, there has been
quite an amount of developmental work on the
part of the users in exploiting the potential of
CDS/ISIS b sdve special local needs. As a
result, a number of useful utilities and extended
applications have been developed, as
stadalone programs and programs integrated
with CDS/ISIS u h g its Pascal compiler. In lndia
alone, the number of registered installations of
CDS/ISIS has exceeded 1400. Because of the
demand from various countries, a network of
national, regional and special distributors has
been set up to manage the distribution of
CDS/ISIS and to cater to the needs of users of
CDS/lSlS.
An important aspect of the application of
CDS/ISIS in lndia is that a large amount of
developmental work has taken place to solve
special problems or for exploring the full
potential of the package.
SANJAY is a package developed by
DESIDOC for NISSAT using CDS/ISIS for library
automation. It is an integrated package and
interfaces about 25 Pascal programs with
CDS/ISIS. The package is capable of interlinking
two or more databases for application and for
handling numerical calculations and library
housekeeping activities.

TRISHNA is a version of CDS/ISIS which
supports data creation, storage and retrieval in
major Indian languages. It has been developed
by NISTADS under a contract from NISSAT.
NlSSAT provides CDS/ISIS, SANJAY and
TRISHNA softwares along with technical
support and training at nominal cost.

6.

CONCLUSION

There are several software packages
available in lndia for library automation and
bibliographic database management. These
packages support internationally recognised
bibliographic formats like CCF. The choice of
any particular software by a user has to be
based on the specific applications, previous
experience in computerisation, and the trained
personnel available. The other considerations
are ease of training, ease of use, compatibility

and vdue to money. CDS/ISIS and its
applications and variations like SANJAY and
a d a b l e at nominal
TRISHNA are the &ares
cost from NlSSAT who also provide technical
support and training CDS/ISIS has, therefore,
become wry popular and is being widely used
in India

FURTHER READINGS
1. Patel, DR and Bhargava, Rachana.
Comparative study of software available in
the Indian market COC library automation.
DESIDOC Bulletin o f lnformation
Tedmology, 1995, 15(3), 3-12.
2. Chakravarty, Bipul Kumar. Impact of
micro-processor based software package to
library applications : An overview with
CDS/ISIS. lnfotek Conference on
applications of mini and micro computers in

16

documentation, information and libraries,
2830 Sept 1988, Madras.
3. Hopkinson, Alan and Simmons, Peter (Eds).
CCF/F : The common communicahon
format for factual information. Paris, 1992.
Reprinted by NISSAT/DSIR.
4.

Mahvad, NM. Selection criteria for library
automation software. DESIDOC Bulletin of
Information Technology, 1995, 15(2) , 17-26.

5. Chowdhury, GG & Chowdhury, Sudatta,
Text retrieval and library management
software in India. NlSSAT Newsletter, 1994.
13(3). (Reproduced from Program, 1994,
28(3)).
6. Neebmeghan, A. Designing an integrated
database using CDS/ISIS minimicro version:
A case study. General lnformation
Programme and UNISIST, UNESCO, 1987.

DESIDOC Bulktin d l n f Tcchnd, 1997,17(5)

