DESIDOC Buk* of
01 9 9 7 , ~ E S l ~

Technobgy, Vd. 17, No. 5, September 1997, pp. 17-22

Bibliographic Databases and Exchange Formats

Abstract
Computers play an important role in the development of bibliographic
da&ases. For generation and exchange of bibliographii data at defferent
lwels-international, national, regional and local-exchange formats are
needed. This paper discusses about the formats available at national and
international level for adoption by national, international agencies and,
individuals/organisations as per their requirements.

1.

INTRODUCTION

The advantage of computer is that it can
rapidly and efficiently manipulate, retrieve any
information/data
which
is
stored
in
machhe-~eadableform. Their use in creation
and development of bibliographic databases has
raised the hope of dewloping a universal
bibliographic system through the cooperation of
several national and international organisations.
Generation and exchange of biblioraphic data
takes place at d i i t levels, i.e., international,
nations\, rewd and M.Thus there is need
for exchange h a t s that are designed
specifikalty for the transfer of machinereadable
bibliographic data between systems.

2.

BIBLIOGRAPHIC RECORD
FORMAT
In the Unisist Reference Manual, a

(machinereadable) bibliographic reuxd is
defined as a collection of information which
pertains to a single ctocument and which is
stored in machinereadable form as a
selfcontained and unique bgical structure.
'Nationd Infarmatior) S y s m Ibr Science &
Technology (NISSAT), New Delhi

Format conveys the notion of a formalised
framework or structure w h i i will hdd records
of varying content according to certain set of
rules or
conventions controlhng the
representation of the data. These rules may be
unique to. a system, or shred with other
systems.

Bibliographic record formats are used to
describe the arrangement or structure of
computer readable record of bibliographic
items.

Formats can be of two types: hr&m&lod
k
t and w - i

Cwmat

2.1 Internal Format
Intemal formats am so called because they
are internal/kml to a sohware system. They can
be changed smc+
as per the n&
of the
local system and do not haw to conformto any
external standards.

2.2

Ex&ange/Communication
Interchange Format

Exchange formats are ako known as
interchmge/c~municationformats. M a n g e
formats are used for exchange of records
between systems. Systems should be sufficiently

flexible to cope with the needs of many
different software systems.

International
Standards
Description ISBD(G).

A major problem for Mignws of exchange
format is the lack of international agreement on
standards COT constmcting bibliographic records.
Although IS00 is amkbk, it is not accepted by
many wganisations.

tSBD(C) lists within its frame, all
bibliographic elements which are required to
describe and identify all types of materials
which are likely to appear in library colkttrbn. tt
assigns an order to these elements and
prescribes 9 distinct punctuation system to
differentiate them from each other. It also serves
as the basis for speciaiised ISBDs.

2.3

Exchange Fonnab

Bibli4raphic data formats adopted for
exchange of data consist ot three basic
components.
(a) A defined physical structure: rules for the
arrangement [on a computer storage

medium) of data to be exchanged.

(b) Content designators: codes to identify the
diHerent data element in the records (e.g.,
author, tit&, scale of map, starting date of
jourml, etc)

fc) Content of the record: w r n e d by rules for
the formulation of the different data elements
very closely tied up ~4th
content designators.
The data elements ~ r a t e i identified
y
by the
codes in the exchange format are to be
& f d , not only in tenns of content but also
in form, if the records are to be suitable for
use by another agency.

3.

STANDARDS fOR RECORD
FORMAT

Stadadisation of the record format implies
standardisation of the rrecod structure,
directwy, content designator a t national,
regional and international levels. Design and
implementation of a standard record format is
uniformty acceptable to all bibliographic
agencies involved in inhmation transfer i s very
essential and urgent but it is very difficult to
reach a consensus in this regard.

The lntematlonal Conference of
Cataloguing Principles (ICCP) held in Paris 1961
has set up standards kw the headings of author
and title f i l s in catalogues and bibliographies.
The first standard dedoped in 1974 was meant
for the description of monographs. It was
foliowed by a series of qxcidised SBDs for
various forms of documents, caHed General

Bibliographic

Development of lSBD may be termed as the
greatest achievement contributing to the
standardisation of bibliographic records for the
following reasons:

O

It facilitates records from various sources interchangable

D It assists in the interpretationof records across
language barriers

D It assists in the conversion of bibliographic
records to machine-readable form

3.1

I S 0 2709-The International
Standard Exchange Format

I S 0 2709 is an international standard format
for bibliographic information interchange on
magnetic tape. It was developed for the
exchange of bibliographic records on magnetic
tape, originally in the Library of Congress (LC)
MARC format.

3.2 Machine-Readable Record
Format
MARC is an acronym for Machine Readable
Catalogue or Cataloguing. This general
description is misleading, implying that MARC is
a kind of catalogue or method of cataloguing
whereas MARC is more accurately defined as a
group of formats employing a particular set of
conventions for the identification and
arrangement of bibliographic data for handling
by computer.

The original MARC format, from which
current formats originated was developed at the
LC in 1965-66. Since then more than 20 formats
have appeared which are known as MARC.
Their common characteristics are: ,

0 Adherence to Ehe Is0 2709 record stfuckrre,
or its e q u h k n t national standard inchding
option which dlows use of indicators and
SUM
identifiers in data fields.
0 Most are national formats based on national
l i i or national bibliographic agency and
are designated communication formats for
exchange of bibgraphic reuords with other
similar organisations.
MARC records have many other library and
nodibrary related uses, though it is generally
identified. with the produaion of library
catalogues & n a t h d bibliographies.
LC was the first to design and experiment on
a MARC record format for the purpose of
communicating bibkgraph'i information to a
hrge number of libraries. When MARC4
commenced as a pibt project in 1966 in LC,
there were no established MARC formats
available. Libraries had reached no consensus as
to what all access points were required to take
full advantage of an aukmated cataloguing
system.

The MARC-II format was considerably
improved in the light of experiences and
opinions of important libraries and a specific
survey was carried out for studying the
requirements of the users. MARC-II format
developed in 1968, was the result of
Angk&nerican cooperation. The new format
was intended to be hospitable to all kinds of
library materials, sufficiently flexible for a
variety of applications in additions to catalogue
production, and usable in a range of different
computer systems. Despite AngkbAmerican
cooperation, there were tm, versions of MARC
i.e., LC MARC II and BNB MARC II.

USMARC Format

3.3

There are three USMARC communication
formats:
(a) USMARC Format for BiMigraphic Data
(UFBD)
(b) USMARC Format for Authority Data (UFAD)
(c) USMARC Format for Holdings & Locations
(UFHL)
-

-

DES/DoCBuUetin d l n f T c d n d , 1997,17(5)

All the three USMARC formats are
implementaaiom of ANSI Z39.2, American
national standad for bibliographic information
interchange on magmafc tape which conforms
physical structure of the
with the IS0 2709UKMARC recordalthough there are some
differences in tennindogy and in definition of
fields.

3.4

UKMARC Fonnat

British National Biiography has shown
active interest in the possibilities of MARC from
1966. Cooperation with Aslib and OSTI within
the country and with U abroad, enabled it to
develop a MARC format in 1968. There were no
considerable changes in the format until the first
edition of UKMARC Manual appeared in 1975.
But later, the advent of BLAISE and the
increased use of n o h k materials in the
educational field and publication of lack of
standardisation in cataloguing as the major
obstacle to a standard MARC format.
UKMARC is a single, unitary format
designed to accommodate all types of material
with some material s p e d i i fiekls. The physical
structure of UKMARC is based on I S 0 2709
and BS 4748. UKMARC format specifications
and structure are set out in UKMARC Manual,
Ed.2, 198067.

3.5

Other Formats

After the joint work of BNB and LC on the
MARC format, other countries quiddy started
development of their national formats. They are
Canada (CANMARC), Australla (AUSMARC),
Italy (ANNAMARC),
Germany (MABI),
Denmark (DENMARC), Spain (IBERMARC),
Sweden (SWEMARC), etc
Growing enthusiasm on the part of national
bibliographic agencies to develop their own
MARC records resulted in the wide-spread use
of the MARC format. But the only area of
standardisation in these national formats was
the r e c d structure effected through the
adoption of I S 0 2709. They still showed wide
variations in respect' of content and content
designators. These differences necessitated
suitable programmes to be written for one
agency to use the records of another. Within

the LC MARC lbelf the vuiety of material

added

b

dre u m p h d t y

of interchamge of

records.

Federation of
Library
lnsaitutions (IFLA) Committee
on Mechanisation spwKared the IFLA Working
Group on Content Designators, and as a result
an international standard iw content designators
was taken up and this led to the development of
UNIMARC
International

Asociatiom

3.6

and

UNlMARC

IFLA W d n g Group on Content
Designators recommended in 1973 a
SUPERMAUC which was based on ISBD. This
was later called MARC lntemational Format
(MIF) from which the UNIMARC was
developed. The final format was published in
7977. The grwp fecopised the hck of
standardisation in catatoguing as the major
obstacle to a standard MARC format.
UNIMARC is a communication format which
necessitates writing and maintaining of only two
conversion program5--one from the national
format to the UNIMARC and the other from the
UNlMARC to the national format It was
decided that each country can have its national
format but, it should be the responsibility of the
national bibliographic agency in a country to
-translatethe records from the national format to
the UNIMARC for purposes of interchange.
ISBD was accepted as the basis of descriptive
data elements within this f m a t The second
edition of UNIMARC was published by IFLA
International Off- for UBC handbook with the
intention of guiding the usen in its application.

4.7 UNISIST Reference Manual
The UNISIST-tCSU/AB Working Group on
bibliographic Description, set up in 1967 as part
of the UNlSlST programme, decided and
developed the UNlSlST Reference Manual for
machine readable bibliinraphic
- . descriptions.
The major feature of the format is that it
gives equal prominence to bibliographic
records whether they relate to a n w ~ c s(i.e.,
journal artide and contributions in journal, work
published somewhere also), monographs or
serial tides.
20-

The h a t was designed to do thk because
it was devebped from the secondary sources
which nive wual importance b the different
bibliog&phical' levels.- The record contains no
distinctive feature to permit a hierarchy to be
indicated; instead, different tags are allocated to
Fidd at a partkular kvel.

3.8 Common Communication
Format
Although Unesco had developed the
Reference Manual with the Mp of \CSU/AB, it
had not been accepted by many organlsations.
These organisations continued to approach
assistance in developing
Unesco for
bibliographic information system.
In April 1978, the Unesco General
Information
Programme
(Unesco/PCI)
sponsored an lnternational Symposium on
Bibliographic Exchange Formats which was held
in Taormina, Sicily, organised by the UNISIS
lnternational
Centre
for
Bibliographic
Description (UNIBID) in cooperation with
others to study the desirability and kasitrility of
etablishing maximum compatibility between
existing bibliographic exchange formats. As a
result of this symposium, a resolution passed at
the symposium for Unesco to set the ad hoe
group for the establishment of the Common
Communication Format (CCF).
The objective of CCF was stated to provide a
detailed and structured method for recording a
number of mandatory and optional data
elements in a computer readable bibhographic
record for exchange purpose between two or
more computerised systems. It is also useful to a
single bibliographic agency engaged in
structuring its own format and simultaneously
CCF.
keeping compatibility with
the
No~omputerisedsystems also can use CCF
data
elements
because,
it
simplifies
computerisation at a later state.
The first edition of CCF was pubhshed in
1984 and the second edition in 1988.
Bibtiographic agencies around the world
dveloped national & local formats based on the
CCF. The first CCF User's Croup meeting was
hekl at Geneva in 1989 and users
recommended some minor changes in the later
OESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1997,17(5)

editions. The CCF dso contains mechanisms for
providing three kinds of links between or within
records and two different types of
vwtical/horizantal rdatiomhip. The record
structure of the CCF constitutes a spec if^
implementation of the international standard
I S 0 2709.

3.8.1 CCF/F: Common Communication
.Fumwat (Factd'
This is Common Communication Format
for Factual Information, published in 1992. For
this, there is separate set of data elements
identifd, as shown in the CCF(F) document:

3.8.2 Evaluation of CCF
ReJathsMp with existkg fonmtr: CCF is
not meant for record of an institution for
internal storalpe and processing purposes.
Processing formats vary from institution to
institution and also within the same institution. It
is based on major exisiting international
exchange formats and specially designed for
transfer of records between systems which were
already capable of providing output in these
major exchange formats.

CCF am an exchanv format: The CCF is
intended as an exchange format and as such has
to contain bibliographic data for exchanging
between systems.

The CCF is intended for exchange of
bibliographic records that were needed for the
identification of a document in a catalogue or
bibliography. It does not contain fields that
would be required for library circulation systems
or inter-library ban, etc Any system that wants
to exchange data elements other than those
provided by CCF, is free to allocate unused tags
to those data elements.
By using an exchange format like CCF, each
system has to design onty one conversion
between its format and the common exchange
format and back again.

4.

INDIAN STANDARD

Standardisation of record format has not
received due attention in lndian libraries. At
national level, lndian Standards Institution (ISI),
now renamed as Bureau of Indian Standards

(BIS), had wolved a standard for bibliographical
references in 1963 for use in noncomputerised
systems.
In Juty 1986, IS1 pubiished a standard IS:
11370.1985 titled 'Guide for Data Elements and
Record
Format for
Computer
based
Bibliographic Description of Different Kinds of
Documents! During the late 1980's NISSAT
organised a tripartite meeting (CALIBNET,
DELNET, INFLIBNET) to sort out the difference
in choice of formats: Comon Communication
Format (CCF) visa-vis UNIMARC. Finally it was
decided that a database producer can use
either.
NISSAT also constired a group to draft the
INDIMARC guidelines based on the framework
prescribed by the CCF. The progress made by
the group is very slow.
Another effort by INSDOC, as SAARC
national focal point on information, had
produced a format lor use by the participating.
countries of SAARC. Further progress on this is
not known.

5.

FUTURE TRENDS

During the last 25 years, a radical change
has occured in the mechanism for transfer of
bibliographic data. The current situation is both
success and failure; success, because millions of
records structured according to I S 0 2709 are
now available for exchange, and failure, because
there is multiplicity of implimentation of I S 0
2709 and the full potential of computing has
not been harnessed to make the necessary
conversion between each.
Among national formats, UNIMARC is a
prious contender for the role of international
format, but has been accepted only by library
community. Some national formats, for example
USMARC, have become virtually international.
I S 0 2709 will remain as a universally
recognised standard for MARC. It is however a
standard available in tape and the use of tape
for bibliographic data exchange will decrease as
time passes. Finally any change in record
structure will lead to the change in conversion
softwares from exchange format to systems
internal format and vice-versa, but will be of
little concern to MARC users where MARC is a

set of codes defining the data dements of a
record in automated systems.
It is estimated that MARC and other
exchange formats will continue for some time.
As bng as organisations wish to exchange
record or derive bibliographic data from central
agencies, and until computer technologists
devise cost effective and relatively simple ways
of transferring bibliographic data in different
formats between systems, exchange formats
remain necessary.

10. FURTHER READINGS
t. Credley, Ellen and Hopkinson, Alan.
Exchanging bibliographic data (MARC &
other International formats). 1990.
2. Simmons, Peter and Hopkinson, Alan. The
common communication format for bibliographic information. 1992.

3. Lahiri, Abhijit An Indian model for database
services. 1991.

