DESIDOC BuUeain of lnCwnult&mTechnology, Vd. 17, No. 5, September 1997, pp. 23-31
0 1997, DESIDOC

Publishing on CD-ROM: lndian Potential
Arun Kumar Chakraborty*

Abstract
CD publishing in lndia and on lndia is increasing rapidly. In India a few
organisations have already started storing their data on CD-ROM and a few
libraries/infomation centre(s) have also started catalogue/bibliographical
data on CD. This paper investigates into a variety of CD-ROM products
being published in India, and provides information 'about some lndian
CDROM producers. It concludes that for generating an intrinsic strength in
the market, lndia should have indigenous CD-ROM databases for national
and international usage.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Optical information storage technologies like
CD-ROM are now well entrenched in lndia as in
other countries. Their usage has gained
popularity mainly due to easy availability of
CD-ROM titles and also due to declining prices
of CD players. Where large amount of data is to
be stored, CD-ROM is the right medium. Since
the CD discs are replaceable, the technology
offers an off-line alternative for search.
We consider the imported CDROM
products, their usage in lndia has grown rapidly.
However, indigenous CD-ROM publishing is still
in its infancy. About 20 vendors are now
marketing CD-ROM databases, drives, software,
networking facilities and provide maintenance
services. (A selected list is given in the
Annexure-I).

'Foundation for Innovation and Technology Transfer
(NTT)
Indian Institute of T ~ b n d o g (/IT)
y
Hauz Khas
New Delhi 1 10 0 16

-

2,

INDIAN CD-ROM
REPOSITORY

As per the Delivery of Books and
Newspaper Act (Public Libraries Act 1954,
amended in 1956), a copy of any books
published in lndia is to be deposited in the
National Library, Calcutta; Connemara Public
Library, Chennai; Central Library (Asiatic
Society), Murnbai; and Delhi Public library, It is
not clear whether the Act also covers book-like
materials on media other than paper. Therefore,
the National Information System for Science &
Technology (NI~AT), DSIR, Government of
India, decided to set up a National Centre for
CD-ROM Databases at Foundation for
Innovation and Technology Transfer (FITT), IIT,
Delhi with following objectives:

+

To systematically procure all CDs produced in
lndia and on India, and build a National
repository.

+

To act as a single window information service
centre for !ndiin CDs.

a To organise workshop/training programmes
on CD-ROM databases and CD-based
services.

+ To

compile union catalogue of CD-ROM
databases and CD based services available in
lndian Ebariesfinformation centres.

REVIEW OF PRODUCTS

3.

A variety of CD-ROM products are being
published in lndia and on India. Information on
some of these are given in the Annexurdl. A
brief review is given here.

3.1

Full-text Data&ases

FulCtext and bibliographic database on
Environment & Health kry and Wealth Asia
published by NISCOM/CSIR in collaboration
with IDRC, Canada is the first of its kind in India.
The inputs are provided on cooperative basis by
the countries in Swth East Asia. The CDs have
powerful search and retrieval engines. Features
like hypertext links, image viewing annotations,
full-text index and keyword index, calculator and
printing options haw also been incorporated.
Such joint venture would help lndian
institutions to build up innovative databases that
would be made available across the globe.
Collection and preparation of an authentic
database in machine readable format is a
formidable problem. Its conversion to CD is
easy.

3.2

Bibliographic Databases

The medium of CPROM is the right choice
for publication of a public database like a union
catalogue such as the National Union Catalogue
of Scientific Serials in lndia (NUCSSI) of
INSDOC. A beginning has been made in this
case with the SUCHAK database on CD-ROM
which is jointly undertaken by SNDT University,
Mumbai and the Pioneer Infovision (P) Ltd.

3.3

Dictionaries

number of secondary sources of
information like dictionaries, etc. are also being
published in lndia on CD-ROM (e.g.
Hindi-English Dictionary on CD-ROM). Using a
number of different input formats, this could be
used as an online reference tool.
A

3.4

Budneu/Company Information

Sewn1 CDs providing lndian Company
information, their products, business needs,
reports, export import data, financial expansion
plans, etc are in the market. These CDs give
directory or registry type of information about
companies, such as location type lists, selective
type lists (citywise, industry-wise, product-wise,
sales-wise, etc). These could provide
information on expenditure pattern (R&D),
advertising, raw materiak, industry performance,
financial information background, raw material
consumptions, etc One can also find profile of
Indian stock market, and names of senior
executives. Some of the CDs can also be used
as a guide on buying and selling. Some
examples are:

+ Electronic Corporate Directory (ECD)
e Business Atchives on CD-ROM
e Investment Decision Support System (IDSS)

+

Script Watch

e KOMPASS lndia '96

+

Super All lndia Yellow Pages on CD-ROM 1996

Other compilations include: policies,
procedures and tariffs of the Gwernment of
lndia with regard to foreign trade (e.g., Exim
lndia on CD-ROM). For Tax rules one can look
up the full-text of the Income Tax Act, 1961
with amendment rules and circulars, exhaustive
commentary on Income-tax law (e.g., DM
Harish on income-tax on CD-ROM, legal &
taxation, export import issues). One can find
higher court decisions in the lurix Database.

3.5

Hi-Tech Magazines

Some popular magazines are also being
published on CD-ROM media (e.g., Business
K-QUEST on
lndia on CD-ROM-1995,
CD-ROM).

3.6

Multimedia CDs

Multimedia products use a combination of
text, graphics, video and sound to present its
information content. Apart from lndian users
these CDs are useful for non-Indians as well as
DESlooC Bulletin d l n f Tcchnd, 1997,17(5)

for NRIs for knwing about lndian culture,
language, etc Publications like Mystics Indh
and Karishrna give an interesting account of
popular beliefs, customs, practices, colourful
ceremonies and rituals that pervade the daily
lives of most Indians. These are also full of fun,
games and puzzles, apart from loads of
information. The mukimedii introduction to
Bengal, Banga Parichayit developed by an NRI,
explores the cdourful history and culture of
Bengal from 2000 B.C. to the present, through a
combination of text, sound, slides and video
which could be help the second generation of
Bengali NRls to learn about Bengal. All about
Sikhism, on Sri GUN Granth Sahib, indudes the
teachings of Sri Guru Nanak in the original script
of Gurumukhi and translations into Punjabi and
English. This product would be useful for all
including Sikhs and Punjabies who are not
staying in Punjab but would like to know about
Sikhism. Similar products are available on
Jainism, Buddism, Christianity and great
personalities like Mahatma Gandhi.

3.7

Tourism

Information centres and travel agencies store
and display various attractions and facilities
available in different centres along with images
and music for luring tourists; what else could be
better than an interactive system with text,
images, graphics, video, audio combined (e.g.,
Coa, Taj Palace on Wheels,Rajastban).

3.8

Corporate Presentation

This is becoming more popular in Corporate
Industry, making their company profile
presentation in multimedia CDs. Several
Organisations have also started to present their
strengths and activities in multimedia CDs. (e.g.,
TlFAC).

3.9 Educational CDs and
Professional Materials
A lot of educational CDs e.g., Innowart?
Educational CDs are being published by
different developers targetted to children from
kindergarten to senior students in colleges,
including those preparing for JEE for admission
to IIT's. Some products, like Multimedia
Compact Disc on Heart 81 ECC;, are also useful
DESIOOC Bulktin of Inf Technd, 11997,17('(5)

for doctors.
.%me are targetted towards
corporate executives (e.g, infuse Inc. Products
on Management).

3.10 Profile of Publishers
Asian Health, Environment and Allied
Databases
(AHEAD),
an
international
consortium sponsored and supported by the
International Development Research Centre
(IDRC), Canada, has developed CD-ROMs
containing health, environment and natural
resources related information contributed by
leading Asian organisations. NISCOMM is
involved in collecting data, writing on CD, and
also marketing and selling the products, but
replication is done outside India. SUCHAK on
CD-ROM is a partnership between SNDT
Women's University and Pioneer lnfovision
Technologies
(P)
Ltd.
whereas,
the
Hindi-English Dictionary on CD-ROM is
published by a foreign company, Gateway
Multimedia lndia Ltd.,
Electroson BV
Amsterdam.
lndian private companies like the Corporate
& Electronic Research Centre (CERC), and the

Centre for Monitoring of Indian Economy
(CMIE) has brought out a set of CD-ROM
of
lndian
databases
in
the
area
business/company information. The lnforrnatics
lndia PLrt Ltd. has brought out a CD on
export/import and the Premiumpower Software
Ltd. on taxation. On the other hand, Reed
lnformation Services, Teledirect, a subsidiary of
Reed Elsevier PIC, of UK with its office located in
New Delhi, has dso brought out a CD on lndian
Company information. A few lndian companies
also publish stock market data on CDs. Leading
publishers bring out their magazines on CD,
which could gives information with multimedia
presentation (e.g., Business lndia Group).
Several lndian and foreign publishers have
brought out multimedia CDs. For example,
Mystica lndia by the Magic Software Pvt. Ltd.,
New Delhi-a
joint
venture between
Milpitas-based AMS International and Katra
computer centre, Ludhiana, Candhi by Walnut
Creek, California, USA, Yoga by Krea
Technology, Santa Clara, USA. An individual NRI
Gautam SenGupta, USA has developed a
multimedia CD on Bengal. Kirloskar Computer

Services Ud., Bangalore on their own has
published several multimedia CDs.

Manufacturing Technology
Informatics lndia Ltd.

Cashing on its best experience of computer
education, the N a W Institute of Infamation
Technology (NIIT), Mi,has published a set of
20 Innaware Educational CDs. Even some
enteqmmeurs thought it worthwhile to develop
CDs to help preparing students aspiring for
admission to Ills.

4.

Publishing on CD media is not difficult
today. The first and docemost requirement is that
the data should be available in machine
readable format. The data is to be synchrocrised
with sound, animation, picture and video.
Search engines are available off-the-shelf for
bundling with the database. CD replication at
present is being done outside lndia because
appropriate infrastructure is not available in
India.
There is an easy way out for databases with
commercial potential. The database producer is
responsible only upto the stage of machine
readable database devdopmenc with a formal
tie up, a commercial firm would do the rest
induding integration of search engine,
presentation, CD mastering, replication and also
marketing of the product. Similar arrangement
has been worked out for the SUCHAK between
the SNDT University and Pioneer Infovision, and
the Metal Working Database of Central

26

Institute

and

CONCLUSION

To werate an intrinsic strength in the
market, lndia shwM have indigenous C M O M
databases for national and international usage
and also have hieups with global database
producers for Indian or partial database input
support. The scientific and techndogical
information alone is not sufficient to sustain a
healthy Indian CD-ROM market. Keeping up
with the giobal trend, other components of the
market such as business and finance should also
come up.
CD publishing in lndia and on lndia is
increasing rapidly, and demand for information
on Indian CDs is also increasing. In India, a few
organisations have already started storing their
data
on
CD-ROMs
and
a
few
libraries/information centre(s) have also started
storing catalogue/bibliographicaI data on CD.

ACKNOWLEGEMENT
The author in his capacity as the coordinator
of the FI'IT-NISSAT C M O M Centre, on behalf
of FITT, expresses his heartfelt gratitude to
NISSAT, DSIR, Govt. of lndia for supporting and
instituting the Centre af FIlT, IIT Delhi.
The author is grateful to Dr AK Sengupta,
MD, FlTT for his anstant support and giving
permission to write this paper.

DESrrXK Bulktin of lnf Techno/, 1997,17(5)

CD-ROM Database Vendors

CD-ROM Drive Vendors

Dr Gautam Sengupta
135/4SE/8 1st Place
Renton, WA 98058
USA

Digital Equipment (India) Ltd.
Product: Alpha Workstations
Price: 3-30 Lakh
Manuf: Digital Equiptment Corp.

Director
ABI Books Pvt Ltd.,
404, Skipper Corner
88, Nehru Place
New Delhi 110 0 19

HCL Frontline Ltd.
Product: Beanstalk HPC Series
Price: 50,000 1,00,000
Manuf: HCL Frontline Ltd.

-

DCM Data Systems Ltd.
Product: Gateway 2000
Price: 1,38,627 1,55,364
Manuf: Gateway Systems

Regional Manager
Informatics India (P)Ltd.
D-285,2nd Floor
Defence Colony
New Delhi 1 10 024

-

Wipro lnfotec Ltd.,
Odin Comp. Ltd.,
Unicorp lndus Ltd.
Product: Mac Performa Series
Price: 84,900 - t,34,500 above

Pioneer info Vision Tech (P) Ltd.
2&3, Karnani Mansion .
Gopi tank Road, Mahim
Mumbai 400 016
Head, Marketing Division
Indian National Scientific Documentation Centre
14, Satsang Vihar Marg
New Delhi 110 067
Asst. Manager
Allied Health Environmental & Allied Databases
(AHEAD)
Dr K.S.Krishnan Marg
New Delhi 1 10 024
Regional Manager (North)
M/s Global Information Systems Technology Pvt.
Ltd. (GIST)
Post Box No. 8
18-19 Comm. Centre
Malviya Nagar (Ext.)
Saket
New Delhi 110 017
Director
Premium Power Software Pvt. Ltd.
Kasturi Building, 2nd Floor,
30, Popatwadi, Kalbadevi Rd.
Mumbai 400 002.

Pertech Computers Ltd.
Product: Prodigy
Price: 55,000 1,19,400
Manuf: Pertech Computers Ltd.

-

Wipro Acer Ltd.
Product :Aspire
Price : 80,000
Manuf: Wipro Acer Ltd.
Unicorp Industries Ltd.
Product: Compaq Presario
Price: 90,000 2,00,000
Manuf: Compaq Computer Corp.

-

Silicon Graphics Systems (1) Pvt. Ltd.
Product : lndiglo 2 etc.
Price : 10-40 lakhs
Manuf: Silicon Graphics Inc
Wipro lnfotec Ltd.,
Fujitsu lClM Ltd.
Product: SunSparc Workstations
Price : 4.5-20 Lakh
Manuf: Sun Microsystems.

k

DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technd, 1997,17(5)

27

Annexure - 11

A. Full-text Databases
The AHEAD CD-ROM published by
NASCOMM (PID) and IDRC, Canada, contains
the following titles :
Environment & Health Asia. It comprises full
text databases on collection, treatment and
recycling of waste water and solid wastes;
water supply management; water resources
planning hygiene, education and community
participation, pigwaste management and
recycling, etc. It provides bibliographic
information with abstracts on water supply
and sanitation, water borne diseases, list of
experts on water supply management,
resource planning and community
participation contributed by Asian Alliance of
Appropriate Technology Practitioners
(APPROTECT ASIA), Manila, Philippines,
besides bibliographies and list of projects.
2. Wealth Asia. It contains full-text databases on
lndian raw material resources including
plants, animals and materials. It is a
bibliographic database on world literature
covering all aspects of medicinal and
aromatic plants, and databases on tropical oil
seeds, crop protection, economics and
marketing and oil product quality.

B. Bibliographic Databases
1. National Union Catalogue of ScientificSerials
in lndia (NUCSSI). INSDOC, New Delhi. It
provides valuable reference information for
resource sharing, and covers 350 libraries
with nearly two lakh holdings data. It is
updated annually.

2. SUCHAK on CD-ROM. SNDT Women's
University and Pioneer lnfovision
Technologies (P) Ltd. It is a comprehensive
bibliographic reference database covering
the fields of sociology, women's studies,
home science, library science and special
education. It includes cumulative
bibliographic reference to articles published
in more than 900 lndian and foreign journals,
books, thesis, dissertations, reports,
conference papers, etc. At present the
references are restricted to materials in
English, Hindi, Marathi and Gujarati.

C. Dictionaries
Hindi-English Dictionary on CD-ROM.
Gateway Multimedia lndia Ltd., and
Electroson BV, Amsterdam. This CD helps in
translating Hindi into English, using a number of
different input formats. One can enter an
English tvord into the description field, and the
system will translate the code into the
respective Hindi word and also generate the
corresponding codes in the other field. Every
entry consists of a title in transliteration and
Devanagari, followed by an English description
of the tides' meaning. It is useful for verifying
meanings or pronounciations of words.

D. Business/Company Information
1. Electronic Corporate Directory (ECD).
Corporate & Economic Research Centre

(CERC), Bangalore and marketed by Cyber
Mart(l) Ltd. It provides corpoi.ate information
on over 20 ready-to-usereports, information
on board-ofdirectors, key financial expansion
plans, export-importsdata, avaitability of raw
material and finished products, plants, and
locations of on and around 4000 companies.
It also provides information on expenditure
pattern (R&D), advertising, raw materials,
industry performance, financial information
background, raw material consumptions, etc.
2. Business Archives on CD-ROM. CERC. It is
comprehensive collection of four year's news
clippings on almost everything related with
business. It has been classified on the basis of
industry, company, business group and
miscellaneous news Items and is updated
quarterly.
3. Investment Decision Support System (IDSS).
CERC. It tracks over 4000 lndian companies
over the last five years on a day-today basis.
It is crammed with more than 2000 balance
sheets. Innumerable newspaper clippings. A
powerful 'Nostradamus' to analyse and
forecast the effect of various events like
raw-material price fluctuations, changes in
duties and taxes, etc. CDs are updated
fortnightly.

4. Script Watch: Profile of lndian Stock Market.
CERC.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1997.1 7 ( 5 )

5. Kompass India1%. Reed InformationServices,
T e l e d i i a subsidiary of Reed Elsivier Plc,
UK. [Its regional office at New Delhi]. This
CD-ROM lists over 58,000 companies,
40,000 product codes/names and 100,000
executives. Provides search & retrieval based
on company name, geographiclocation, type
of business activity, type of company,
exporter/importer, annual turnover, number
of employees, etc. It has got facility to
browse/download to a filelprint.

-

6. Business lndia on CPROM 1995. Business
lndia Group. This C M O M is a collection of
one year's contents of the Business lndia
magazine, publishedduringthe calender year
1995. It also contains data from the Bombay
stock exchange.
7. MetaStock. DART. It provides information
about financial position of companies listed
in the Indian Stock Exchanges.The exhaustive
information can be updated daily simpiy by
using free access to DART'S Bulletin Board
Services.
8. Super All lndia Yellow Pages on CPROM
1996. Super Media Ltd., Mumbai. This

CDROM is a guide on buying and selling, by
offering the business entries of more than
6,000 product & services index (business
activities) in over 500 cities of India, 1000
locations/places in India.
9.

Exim lndia on CD. Informatics lndia (P) Ltd.,
Bangalore. This CD provides compilation of
policies, procedures and tariffs of the
Government of India, comprising of both
imports and exports with regard to foreign
trade. It is updated quarterly.

10. DM Harish on Income-tax on CPROM.
PremiumPawerSoftwarePvt Ltd, Mumbai. This
CD-ROM contains the fuU text of the Income
Tax Act, 1961 with amendment, full text of rules
and circulars, exhaustive commentary on
Income Tax law by Mr DM Harish, eminent
lawyer and author. Supreme Court, high court
and tribunal decisions, and much information
on income tax has been induded.
11. Tax Expert Odyssey Technologies Ltd. It is a
comprehensive electronic reference manual
covering direct tax decisions of various high
courts and the Supreme Court It contains full

DESlDoC Bulktin of Inf T e c h d , 1997,17(5)

unabridged text of 12,000 decisions which
are fully indexed on every attribute of the

case.

E. Multimedia CDs
1. lndia Mystica. Magic Software Fvt. Ltd, New
Delhi. This interactive multimedia
encyclopedia explores the myriad of popular
beliefs and practices, and colourful
ceremonies and rituals that pervade the daily
lives of most Indians.

2. Karishma; The Wonder that is lndia. Padmini
Multimedia Ltd., New Delhi. It is a journey
through time, i.e., India-past and present.
lnformation about the temples of sthe
sun-gods to the places of the kings, etc. has
been included with 500 pictures, 10 minutes
colour video, 2 hours of digitally recorded,
specially komposed music and effects in 500
megabytes.
3. Banga Parichaya-A Multimedia Introduction
to Bengal. Gautam SenGupta, USA. It
explores the colourful history and culture of
Bengalfrom 2000 B.C. to the present through
a combination of text, sound, slides and
video. In this programme one can find history
of Bengal; over fifty biographiesof prominent
people of Bengal; Musical instruments of
Bengal that will come alive at the touch of a
button; examples of songs from Nazrul,
Rabindranath and others, and much more.
4. All about Sikhism: A new CD-ROM. AMS
International, Milpitas, and Katra Computer
Centre, Ludhiana, Punjab. It is a new
CPROM on the Sri Guru Granth Sahib and
includes the teachings of Guru Nanak in the
original script of Gurumukhi and translations
into Punjabi and English. Over 250 questions
and answers about Sikhism, and over 100
hymns are also included. It contains different
computer games about Sikhism, the lives of
the gurus and saints, events in Sikhism history,
details about nearly 100 gurdwaras, and
background music to enhance learning are
also included.

5. Fables from India: The Panchatantra. Padmini
Multimedia, New Delhi. This CPROM is
based on the world's oldest known collection
of fables/stories with a moralwhich date back
to 2000 B.C.

6. Gandhi: Aposfk of Reace and Non-violence.

Walnut Creek, Calibomi USA. It depicts the
life urd message of Mahatma Gandhi.
Gandhi's role as the liberator of Indian from
British rule was only one of his many
achievements. His life and teachings have a
universal meaning for all humankind of all
time. It has 45 minutes of setected movie
dips. Out of 175 photos, some taken from the
collections of the Gandhi National Museum
& Library, New Ddhi are rare. Letterscopies
of original letters in Gandhi's handwritingare
also included. Interactivetimeline, interactive
maps, hypertext are the other special
attraction of this CD-ROM.

G. Educational CDs and Professional
Materials
Many educational CDs are pouring into the
market by d i h t developers taqpted to students.

1. LOTUS Software on CD-ROM. Padmini
Polymers Ltd, New Delhi. The software Lotus
Smart Suite;comprises a pack of five i r t d i i
softwares induding Lotus 123 spreadsheet
Lotus Amo Pro, Lotus Approach, Lotus
Freeiance Graphics and Lotus Organizer.

2.

7. Yoga: A Multimedia Guide to Yoga. Krea
Technology, Santa Cbra, USA. It is fantastic
to watch yoga postures, generated in the
computer, using the latest 3 0 animation
techniques in the form of mannequins.
8. Buddhist Texts Being Revived: The precious

ha
e
tg
ire
of Dhamma Vachana. The words of
Dhamma or teachings of Lord Budha is
transcribed into Devanagari from Burmese
script and put in C D ROM, so that valuable
words of the great master are preserved for
future generations.

.

9. Exploring Bible. Religious texts and religious

books publisher. It has got four sections: The
King Jamesbible, biblical timdine, sights and
sounds, and lessons and inspiration. It has
almost 40 minutesof video dips depictingthe
dramatic incidents from Bible.

4.

F. Tourism
1. Coa-The f b d of Asia Kirloskar Computer
Services Ltd., Bangabre. It covers the history,
people and place of Goa in informative and
entertaining modules. It is an illustratedtravel
guide covering the facilities available in Goa
in detail, and is an entertainment in itself.
2.

3.

Taj MahaLA Lithic Poem. Kirloskar Computer
Services Ltd., Bangalore. Besidesthe historyand
architectural detaik of the Taj, there is data on
accommodation and transportation to Agra.

Palace on Wheels. Multimediainteractive CD
with information on seven packaged themes
on Rajasthan are amongthe four new features
added to the newly developed Palace on
Wheels CD.

PIXEL. Pixel Multimedia has plans to widen its
gamut of activities from multimedia for
providing training on multimedia and
executing offshore projects. The media
service would include multimedia
presentations, graphic design, audio visual
presentation and image grabbing and digital
photo editing. Pixel also plans to prepare
software packages for school and college
students as well as for those preparing for JEE
for admission to IITts.
Quicktopix CD Publishing Software. This
software for windows is a CD authoring
system for databases, multimedia
applications, audio tracks and backups. The
software supports a number of write once
recorders; CDs can be produced from data
on local disks across networks.
Multimedia Compact Disc on Heart & ECC.
The Electronic Research and Development
Centre (ER&DC). It contains a trilingual
multimedia program on heart and ECG. The
first disc was formally released at Trivandrum
on November 22,1995.

5. lnnoware Educational CDs (20 CDs). NIIT,
New Delhi.

H. Miscellaneous CDs
1.

The World of Plants

2.

The Hunt for Setonica

3.

Digital Geometry

4.

Learn with Woody: More about Plants

5. Learn with Atomio: Atoms, Elements and
Compounds
6. Leming Internet: The First Step.

