-

SHORT COMMUNICATION

MMX Technology
Or CK Ramaiah*
Multimedia Extensions (MMX) is a new
enhanced Pentium processor released by Intel
on 8 January 1997. This P55C-based CPU has
already attracted multimedia users because of
its better performance with its image processing
capabilities and handling of MPEG video and
audio. It uses an enhanced 80 x 86 instruction
set that allows multiple bytes of data to be
packed onto one register on a chip and
processed in parallel. lntel claims that this CPU
will give ,boost to image processing, 3-D
graphics, video and audio applications because
of its parallel processingapproach.

only in multimedia operations but not in other
types of computing or operations.
To take full advantage of MMX technology, a
program must be specifically written in that
environment, otherwise there may not be any
speed difference with or without MMX chip for
applications or software that are available in the
market, such as Adobe Photoshop, MS
Powerpoint and Macromedia Director. Several
users have found that these applications
performed 50% faster using MMX chips. MMX
CPU is also useful for the WeMased
applications such as virtual reality markup
language (VRML) sites, 3-0 graphics and
animation to run smoothly on the existing
Pentiums.

MMX technology has extended the Intel's
existing CPU architecture and improved the
performance of multimedia, communications,
graphics and other applications. It uses Single
Instruction Multiple-Data (SIMD) technique and
applies parallel processing in many algorithms to
produce 1.5 to 2 times faster application
performance on the same processor without
MMX. It is fully compatible with PC operating
systems and applications.
Many users have already tested its
performance by running complex 3-D
animations on various types of PentiumPro
Systems. Resub showed that 166 MMX PC and
8500/180 PowerMac performed equal (2.2),
whereas 200 MHz MMX PC ranked as number
one (2.7) and 9500/200 PowerMac as number
two. This dearly shows that MMX significantly
improved its performance over the Pentium,
however, it couldn't surpass PowerMac clones.
MMX systems came very close to PowerMac
'Scientist D
DESIDOC

.

By mid 1997, other chip manufacturers such
as AMD and Cyrix will also manufacture
MMX-compatible chips.
Other software
companies are also working hard to rewrite the
compatible software to MMX chips. Now the
question in the hand of multimedia users is to
buy a MMX CPU for the existing machines or
new computers with MMX CPUs. lntel has
already planned to release all their desktop
(starting 160 MHz to 200 MHz) and notebook
CPUs (150 MHz to 166 MHz) with MMX
processor this year. It is also incorporating MMX
technology in the forthcoming P6 CPU, an
advanced version of PentiumPro processor. By
the end of this year, if not by next year, users
may find only MMX processors in the market as
lntel has already decided to take off the
non-MMX CPUs from their shelf. Overall, MMX
technology is a boon for the entire PC
multimedia Industry, and particularly in
advanced multimedia designing.

