DESfDOC Bulletin of lnformation Technology, Vol. 17, No. 6, November 1997, pp. 7-14
0 1997, DESIDOC

Digital Library: Content Preservation in a Digital World
Richard P Hulser*
Abstract
There is a growing need and worldwide trend to collect, organise, manage,
protect and distribute information in digital form. In this paper, a brief
discussion about information services trends and directions expands on this
point and i s followed by a description of IBM Digital Library whose
components enable institutions to addresses digital content management
issues. The description includes the integrated functions of create and
capture, search and access, distribution, storage and management, and rights
management. Guidelines and considerations which are important when
contemplating implementation of a digital library project conclude this
discussion.

1.

INTRODUCTION

The increasing use of the Internet and World
Wide Web (Web) has developed awareness and
concerns about access and retrieval of
information across networks. What about the
content travelling across those networks?
Where does it come from! Where is it stored,
and how i s it managed? Are there ways to
ensure quality and protection of the information
being transmitted and made available to others!
Fortunately, there are now technology solutions
which can address these and other questions.

1.1

lnformation Services Trends

Institutions, libraries and end-users are all
affected by, and at the same time, influence
information industry trends. People are
becoming increasingly aware of the usefulness
and capabilities of computer technology for
work, research and recreation. Users are
demanding a broader variety of information
services which can be tailored to their wants
'Digital Library Consultant
IBM Corporation
rhu/ser@vnet.ibm.com
-

DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/, 1997,17(6)

and needs. They also are demanding better
quality of such services and a single point of
access which requires a minimum of training to
use them effectively.
In order to address some of these
requirements, libraries, archives, publishers and
businesses are providing electronic access to
information to augment or substitute for
information previously provided only in print
and other physical forms, such as films and
videotapes. Institutions are converting such
analogue information collections to digital form
to enable faster and easier access to them. This
requires robust networks in order to provide
adequate bandwidth, or space, for information
to flow through the world-wide networks. Fig. 1
depicts the emerging trends.
In addition to the technical challenges these
requirements present, there is the challenge of
copyright and ownership verification which will
be referred to here under the general term of
rights management. Laws and regulations
related to rights management can affect the
availability of content regardless of format, but i s
particularly evident in the digital arena.

1.2

Why Digital Libraries?

Why is there a need for digital libraries?Just
as a room full of books requires some kind of
organisation in order to effectively find and
access them, the same i s true in the digital
world. One reason for using digital library
technology is to manage large amounts of
digital content such as thousands of images or
hundreds of audio clips. Advances in storage
technologies have enabled large amounts of
content to be made available locally at
increasingly affordable costs. While discussions
previously centred on megabytes (MB) of data,
now it is not unusual to consider gigabytes (GB)
and even terabytes (TB) of storage. The scanned
pages of one million books as images, for
instance, would require SOTB of storage if those
books are assumed to average 500 pages per
volume and one side of each page required
50KB (kilobytes) of storage. In contrast, 635MB
is needed for a typical one-hour, stereo-quality
audio compact disc and 720MB for a standard
one-hour videotape.
Documents and other materials housed in
collections are deteriorating at a rapid rate.

While much work is done to conserve and
preserve these collections in their original form,
digitising this content enables it to be preserved
in an additional way. Libraries and archives with
unique collections are digitising these materials
to not only preserve them, but also provide
more extensive access to their content. This is
difficult with traditional printed materials in
many cases due to physical limitations of library
facilities and the fragility of the materials in the
collections.
Another reason to use digital libraries is the
need to be able to perform searches that are
impractical manually. The vast amounts of
information being created and stored each day
makes it that much more difficult to find specific
information later. Adding to this are images and
multimedia content which present even more
challenges for retrieval. For instance, finding all
the images with blue skies and white sandy
beaches can be done manually if the images
were indexed with colour and other parameters
in mind, and given enough time and patience.
There are electronic tools which enable this to
be done quickly and easily by text search and

Current Environm

Physical Library

Books

Images

Future Environment

information
Highway

--

,

Video
Audio

Text

- - --

CLIENTS

SERVERS
Fig. 1 From Physical Library to Digital Library
8

DESIDOC Bulletin of lnf Techno], 1997, 17(6)

also by actually searching on the colours,
textures and even shapes in images.
While local ownership of materials has been
the practice for centuries in libraries, this is
becoming impractical and unaffordable. Digital
libraries enable greater access to content, are
capable of managing content from multiple
locations, and provide a way to enrich the
teaching and learning environment. As a result,
there is less need to own everything and more
emphasis on providing access to it, whether
available locally, from a distant source, or even
from multiple sources.
There i s already a great deal of information
available on the world-wide networks, though
still only a small portion of what exists in print.
There have been instances where some of that
information was proven to be false. In other
cases, information has been changed without an
owner's permission or even reproduced and
claimed by others as their information. Thus,

protection of the content owners' information is
important and skills in information literacy
become imperative. Whether in analogue or
digital
form,
identification
of
original,
unmodified information is critical. In addition,
the owners of information may want to be
financially compensated for the use of their
ideas and work which have been described.
Rights management tools as part of digital
library
technologies
provide
ways
to
electronically identify an owner and deter
misuse of digital content. Fig. 2 shows the four
key features of a digital library.

1.3

Digital Libraries: A Definition

There is currently no consistent, world-wide
agreement on the definition of a digital library.
There are many descriptions, definitions and
varieties of digital libraries. The size of files, the
format of content housed, and the access
restrictions (or lack of restrictions) are some of

Manage very large amounts of data
Preserve unique collections

Perform searches that are impractical
manually

Protect content owners' information

Improve access to information
Deal with data from multiple location
Enhance the disfribukd learning environment

Fig. 2 Digital Library : Key Features
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno!, 1997,17(6)

9

I

software contained on a CD-ROM is described
as a digital library as well. A series of digital
audio or video clips or full-length movies can
also be thought of as digital libraries.

It is important to note that any and all of
these can be considered digital libraries which
can be implemented individually or in
combination with each other.

One kind of digital library often discussed is
that of content managed and accessed on a
Web server. Browsers which enable access to
the Web are growing in popularity due to their
relative ease of use, thus contributing to Web
servers as a typical warehouse for digital
content. Information which is for broad
distribution, has little or no rights management
requirements, and is relatively small in size (no
more than a few megabytes) can be stored,
managed, and accessed using Web servers.
Work is underway by many companies to
enable protection of sensitive information
transmitted over the Web, such as credit card
data, so that electronic commerce can be
conducted in a secure way.

1.4

There is often a need to collaborate on
development of content and to share
information during that process. Whether it is a
group working on a research project or
developing a product or discussing a topic,
collaboration is taking place. Groupware such
as Lotus Domino combine an ability to do this
while also taking advantage of the ease of use
of Web browsers. Digital libraries manage this
information. There is a limit on the size of files
which such software can handle, typically
several megabytes.

IBM Digital Library: Content
Access with Protection

ISM Digital Library is a solution for storage,
management, and distribution of all types of
digital content, including text, images, audio and
video. It is the incorporation of creating &
capturing, storage & management, search &
access, distribution, and rights manageinent of
digital intellectual content in an open, scaleable,
multi-platform environment such as AIX and
Windows NT. The four functional units of the
IBM Digital Library are shown in Fig. 3.
The key i s the integration of these functions
into a single management system. Sophisticated
enhancements of the individual functional areas
give further utility to such systems. For instance,
IBM Digital Library has the capability to
incorporate search technologies such as text
mining, federated search, and image content
search seamlessly with the base parametric and
natural language text search.
It also has
multi-language development tools, integrated
multi- search capability, and Java-based
capabilities as well.

It is a challenge when there is a need to limit
access to a variety of content, perhaps charge
for access and delivery of such content, and
manage content which is many megabytes,
gigabytes or larger in size. Scalability for later
growth is also important. Digital library i s a
relatively new technology and one of the ways
to ensure success using this technology i s
through development of a technology strategy
plan and implementation of a proof of concept.
From this proof of concept the implementation
can be enlarged to incorporate more content
and application of requirements as needed.
Products such as IBM Digital Library can
provide management of content with these
requirements and characteristics.

Fig.3 I B M Digital Library :Key Functions
DESIDOC Bdlelin oflnf Techt~ol,1997,17(6)

1.5

IBM Digital Library Architecture

The IBM DL triangular architecture (see Fig.
4) enables flexible and scaleable storage and
management.
It is based on a triangular
client/server model comprised of a Library
Server, one or more Object Servers, and one or
more clients.
The Library Server i s the core of the
infrastructure and manages the catalogue
information, locates stored objects using a
variety of search technologies, provides secured
access to the objects held in the collection, and
communicates with the Object Servers. Client
communication through the Library Server helps
ensure the integrity of the data objects.
Digital content is stored in the Object
Servers, which can contain a wide range of
digital formats such as text, image, audio and
video content. These can be available n a single
location or distributed across an institution's
network to provide convenient user access.
This i s important for delivery of large multimedia
objects such as audio and video.
The end user (or client application) receives
direct access to the information requested from
a collection regardless of where the data i s
stored. Many clients can be connected to the
IBM Digital Library system, including supported
Web browsers.
A multi-search Internet
application is included with the system, along
with sample content.

1.6

Digital Library Positioning with
Library and Collections
Management Systems

While digital libraries are being used as
standalone systems, the focus is on integrating
them with existing systems such as on-line
catalogue systems (integrated library systems
and collection management systems) so that the
user can access the content through a single
interface.
Support of the 239.50 communications
protocol is one step in this process and will be
included in the future release of IBM Digital
Library. This will enable search of IBM Digital
Library using a 239.50 compatible system.
IBM Digital Library i s not a replacement for
automated library or collection management
systems, but rather a complement to them.
Automated library and collections management
systems were built and optimised for managing
physical objects and they do this well. While
many of the vendors of these systems have
been working on developing systems which also
manage digital objects, such work i s still in the
early stages.

,_,._
.,.--.

--..

-.,_
---/_

.',

,.,f"

Create and Captura

The IBM Digital Library architecture is
scaleable and can be implemented across
multiple platforms allowing both integration of
additional Object Servers on the same or
different platforms, and scaling up from one
operating environment to another. The system
can grow from a single workstation to a
networked enterprise-wide implementation.
Collections can be maintained on a single
personal computer hard drive, then grow to be
managed by storage servers that can contain
terabytes or even petabytes of content. This
becomes increasingly imfjortant as more and
more content is added and the number of users
of the system expands.
Fig. 4 IBM Digital Library : Architecture

DESIDOC Bulletin oilnf Technol, 1997,17(6)

1.7

I S M Digital Library Collection
Treasury

There are
institutions with
archival
collections that have either already been
captured in electronic form or have plans to do
so in the near term. For various reasons, these
collections may not initially require a
sophisticated management system yet there is a
need to store and access their content quickly
and easily. The IBM Digital Library Collection
Treasury (DLCT) solution was developed in
conjunction with several customers to meet this
need.
The IBM Digital Library Collection Treasury
solution enhances and works in conjunction
with the base IBM Digital Library. This solution
extends world-wide access to special collections
by providing high quality image storage and
management, batch load capability, and the
ability to create and store derivative images. It
takes advantage of the IBM Digital Library
triangular architecture, scalability and other
components while providing additional tools for
management of digital collections.
Archive materials are very delicate, to be
accessed with a minimum of handling, and may
only be able to be used a few times before they
crumble. Such materials require digital capturing
with the highest resolution possible as that may
be the only time to do so ever again. In
addition, the high resolution enables careful
study of the image not otherwise possible,
sometimes even better than examining the
original. There are an increasing variety of
capture devices, including digital cameras,
which provide a way to digitise images with
high resolution.
Once an image i s captured, DLCT provides
tools to create derivative images of the original
scanned item. Usually three or four derivative
images are created. One is a thumbnail, a small
image with low resolution typically used in Web
pages. The second is what is known as a screen
size image, one that fits the viewing screen and
suggested to have a digital watermark integrated
with it to designate ownership. The third is a full
image, one that is higher in resolution and
enables the user to look more closely at the
details of the image and spills over beyond the

size of the screen. Sometimes there is a need
to provide users with a very high resolution
image which is a duplicate of the original
scanned image which is not made generally
accessible.

If a collection of images has already been
captured in electronic form, these can be batch
loaded with associated metadata which is
defined by the individual institution into the
DLCT. This saves a great deal of time and work.

1.8

Rights Management

Rights management has a variety of
characteristics and is an important issue, that is
why it is treated here at length.. It can include
ownership designation, billing requirements, or
royalty management. There are technological,
sociological and cultural issues that affect rights
management and these will be reviewed before
addressing some of the technologies enabling
rights management.
There are a number of non-technical factors
affecting rights management. Legislation, laws,
regulations and licenses are developed to
protect intellectual property rights of their
owners. The strength of their enforcement
deters improper access and use of intellectual
property. Societal behaviour and culture
influence the creation of such laws and
regulations, but also determine how closely they
are followed. While much work is underway to
have global agreement on intellectual property
rights, there continue to be many differences
among countries in interpretation
and
enforcement of these agreements. This is
becoming increasingly important as world-wide
access to information occurs through networks
such as the Internet and World Wide Web.
Billing costs and pricing policies are
additional factors to be considered. In some
cases, use of intellectual content may not
require any fees to be imposed. However, there
is high interest in being able to efficiently and
securely manage access to contents for a fee.
The fee may be a pay-per-use, pay-per a pre-set
number of uses, or perhaps a site license for
unlimited use by a specific group for a specified
period of time. Alternatively, i t may be more
expensive to collect the money for use of a
DESlDOC Bulletin o f Inf Technol, 1997,17(6)

particular item or piece of that item (such as a
diagram or image within a larger item) than to
simply grant permission to use it. Pricing policies
are developed by institutions which address
these concerns and then implemented using
various methods, including technology tools.

an image. This is called LBC (Least Significant
Bit Coding). Text or bitmaps can be hidden to
the least significant bit of each pixel on every
colour plane (blue, green or red). The user only
sees the image and does not have access to the
information encoded within the image.

There may be risk trade-offs to consider
when providing access to digital content. Is i t
worth time, effort and money to implement
safeguards around a collection of information,
or should the information simply be provided
globally and challenges made on ownership
when violations of use have been detected?
The user is expected to accept and adhere to
policies and procedures to protect intellectual
property as set up by an owner or manager of
that information. The user may be unwilling or
unable to pay for access to a particular piece of
information. Related to this is the perceived or
marketplace value of information as a product.
This may be intrinsic, but may also exist based
on its timeliness or longevity. The modularity of
information for distribution may also affect its
value.

Packaging information in secure containers
for transmission across networks i s another way
to protect intellectual property. Cryptolope
technology enables such secure distribution of
content over networks. A cryptolope is an
envelope or package which uses cryptography
to protect its contents from unauthorised access
or alteration. It can have the content
description, content usage rules and authorised
actions such as view, print, copy, etc.; as well as
price per usage type. This technology has been
further enhanced to bind code and data
together into a single object which can be
programmed to govern how the enclosed
information is used and other capabilities.

1.9

Before embarking on implementation of a
digital library, i t is important to develop a
strategic technology plan. This plan should
address current and future needs and align with
the mission and goals of the institution and
department. Such a plan is usually developed
by a team representing a cross-section of the
institution and includes people responsible for
information
management at the institution,
such as librarians and computer services
personnel.

Technology Factors for Rights
Management

Technology which addresses some issues
related to rights management has been
developed. Marking technologies enable
designation of ownership of digital content and
deter misuse. IBM has developed visible and
hidden marking technologies as part of IBM
Digital Library. Visible watermarks utilise a
patented process called variable random
brightness alteration (VRBA). The brightness of
the picture elements, or pixels, of an image is
increased or decreased in a random way to
create a watermark based on a black and white
bitmap. The bitmap can be a logo of an
institution, a person's name, an accession
number, or even a machine readable barcode.
It can be positioned across the entire image or
just a portion of the image. In addition, i t can
be adjusted to be clearly visible or almost
transparent.
Another marking technology is data hiding.
Data hiding i s done by adjusting one of the
eight bits representing a byte of information of

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/, 1997,17(6)

1.1 0 Digital Library Planning And
Development

Considerations should include issues related
to
physical
resources,
personnel
and
organisational structures, as well as policies and
procedures in place for management of
intelfectual content.
Some initial points to
address include: examination of current and
future information services and resource
requirements of people throughout the
institution;
the quality and procedures of
current information services to meet institutional
needs; and the priorities for current and future
information services.
Physical resources issues should include
space, application systems currently installed

such as an automated library system,
appropriateness of centralised and decentralised
technology placement and support, as well as
identification of areas where outsourcing
services may be appropriate.
Personnel issues can include the training
needs of current and future staff as well as
identification of the changing role of
information
professionals
within
the
organisation and skills assessments. Just as there
is a significant change in technology capabilities,
so too is a need for additional or different skills
within the staff responsible for information
services within an institution. Plans need to
include an understanding of skills and talents
that are readily available across the institution,
regardless of department, so that there is a
maximum use of these skills. This will enable
identification of needed skills and prompt
review of providing training to current staff or
hiring new staff with those required skills.
Co-operation within and across departments
becomes imperative in order to maximise use of
skills and available technology. Organisational
structures and management styles may need to
be evaluat ed and possibly changed to enable
such co-operation to occur. Creation of formal
and informal teams to tackle projects is one
example of how this could be done.
Careful assessment of current policies and
procedures on information access and sharing
within and beyond an institution should be
done. Technology provides means of access to
information previously not possible and may
require adjustment to the current ways of doing
business. In addition, budget planning for
long-term maintenance and replacement of
systems should be included throughout the
planning process.

2.

SUMMARY

Digital library technologies can be applied
broadly across all kinds of institutions. These
technologies were almost unheard of just a few
short years ago and now the pace of
development and application of these continues
to accelerate. Advances such as high resolution
capture devices, sophisticated search engines,
and affordable large storage of digital content all

contribute to the ability to implement a digital
library. Some of the resulting benefits include
access to intellectual content not easily
obtainable previously and an ability to create
content and distribute it to many people or have
it accessed by many people at the same time.
Regardless of the features that may be
possible with digital technologies, it is important
to ensure implementation through the
development of a strategic technology plan
which is tied to the needs of users and fits
within the mission and goals of the institution.
The strategic technology plan sets the blueprint
from which the institution can implement an
appropriate and successful digital library project.

3.

RESOURCES F O R FURTHER
INVESTIGATION

Additional information about some of the
topics presented in this article can be found on
the Web as follows:
IBM Digital Library
www.software.ibrn.com/is/dig-lib/
IBM Digital Library Version 2
www.software.ibm.com/is/dig-lib/v2factsheet
18M Digital Library Collection Treasury
www.software.ibm.com/is/dig-lib/dlctprod.html
Cryptolopes
www.cryptolope.ibm.com
Safeguarding Digital Library Contents and Users :
Digital Images of Treasured Antiquities
www.dlib.org/dlib/july97/vatican/07gladney.html
Watermark Technology Overview
www.research,ibm.com/image~apps/waterma
rk.htm1
IBM, AIX, Cryptolope, and Collection
Treasury
are
trademarks
or
registered
trademarks of International Business Machines
Corporation. Lotus and Lotus Domino are
registered trademarks of Lotus Development
Corporation. Windows NT i s a trademark of
Microsoft Corporation. Java i s a trademark of
Sun Microsystems, Inc. All other product and
company names used in this article are
trademarks or registered trademarks of their
respective owners.

DESlDOC Bulletin of lnf Techno/, 1997, 17(6)

