DESlDOC Bulletin of InformationTechnology, Vol. 17, No. 6, November 1997, pp. 15-21
0 1997, DESIOOC

Digital Library Projects in the United States
Padmini Srinivasan*
Abstract
This paper surveys select Digital Library projects i n the United States.
Representative projects such as those from academia, pubkstting agencies,
and the Library of Congress are included. The projects indicate a variety o f
strategies and emphases. It is clear that this is a very active and opportune
time for Digital Library research and development. For every project
surveyed there are at least 10 other up and coming projects that are not
surveyed. A new entrant in this area has a number o f models and
approaches from which to select. At the same time, the field of Digital
Libraries is young enough to support entire\y new approaches.

1.

INTRODUCTION

In recent years we have seen rapidly
increasing interest in Digital Libraries (DLs).
Academia,
libraries,
publishers,
system
developers and diversive user populations are
collaborating in exciting new ways to create DL
models, technologies, test collections and
prototype systems. The subject area of DLs
offers many theoretical and practical challenges
that are best addressed by interdisciplinary team
work. The aim in this article is to present a brief
survey of representative DL efforts in the United
States. A few years ago the area became highly
energised when the US Government invested
almost 25 million dollars into several DL
initiatives. However DL research in the US
predates this event. In addition to the
aforementioned initiatives, this paper surveys
sample projects conducted by universities and
organisations such as Xerox, the Library of
Congress, OCLC and RLC. The plan is to give

"School of Library and Information Science
The University of lowa
lowa City, Iowa 52242, USA
padmini-sril-ivasan-uiowa.edu
DESlDOC Bulletin oflnf Technol, 1997, 17(6)

the reader a flavour of the different directions of
investigations in the area of Digital Libraries.

2.

NSF/ARPA/NASA JOINT DL
INITIATIVE

in 1994, the joint Digital Libraries Initiative
(DCI) sponsored by the Nations\ Science
Foundation (NSF), Advanced Research Projects
Agency (ARPA), and the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA) was
established as a project of the US Federal
Internet
Infrastructure
Technology
and
Applications Working Group of the High
Performance Computing and Communications
Initiative. The goal of this four year initiative is to
explore the technical requirements for future
digital libraries. The )oint initiative funded DL
proposals from six universiries. Each proposal
though initiated by a University involved several
external collaborators.
Both the University o f Michigan at Ann
Arbor and the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign are funded to augment
scientific and engineering education by placing
journals and other media on the Web. While
the former takes an image-based approach, the
15

latter
explores
SCML-based techniques.
Stanford University is funded to explore inter
operability
challenges
between
various
third-party vendors of information services.
Carnegie-Mellon University is funded to explore
search and discovery from video collections
using speech recognition and image analysis
technologies. Finally, the Universities of
California at Berkeley and at Santa Barbara are
funded for geographic/spatial systems and their
interfaces to environmental databases. Each
project is ongoing and has far more complex
features than can be fully described in this
paper. Instead we present a few examples
of significant features regarding their goals,
their test collections and their external
collaborators.

2.1

Joint DLI: University of Michigan

This
effort
derives
from
previous
collaborative work on a 1991 DL project called
TULIP, described later in this article. The current
goal is to study a complex array of technical and
socio-economic issues through the design,
implementation and evaluation of a DL test bed.
Their test bed collection focuses on earth and
space sciences and is intended to serve a
variety of users. Key contributions of the
Michigan DL project include an agent based DL
architecture founded on a 'conspectus', i.e.,
formalised description methods for information
objects and services in the DL test bed4. An
agent represents an element of the DL, i.e., a
collection or a service.
Agents are autonomous and negotiate with
each other for access to resources and services
using a common communications protocol.
Three classes of agents with subtypes are
defined: user interface, mediator and collection
interface agents. Agents negotiate to build a
collaborative team in response to a query goal.
Agents communicate using messages containing
performatives such as ASK and TELL. This type
of agent communication via performatives is
modelled after efforts such as KQML". As of
July 1996, more than 2000 titles were included
in their prototype31. Examples of external
collaborators are IBM, Elsevier Science. UMI
International and Kodak.

2.2

Joint DLI: University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign

This emphasis is on developing a
professional quality information infrastructure to
effective1 search technical documents on the
lnternet9'
They are building repositories of
indexed
multiple-source collections
and
federating them into a single virtual collection.
More than 20 technical jourqals provided by a
variety of publishers are made available in full
text, SGML format. Open Text Corporation's
Open Text Search engine i s employed to index
and search the collection. Their prototype
allows comprehensive search and display of
articles, including text, figures, equations and
tables. For example, a user could execute an
equation while browsing through a document.
UI UC i s collaborating with the University of
Michigan DL team in interface technology, with
the UC Santa Barbara DL team in semantic
concept space technology and with NCSA on
designing appropriate software. Examples of
partners
are
IEEE
Computer
Society,
Hewlett-Packardand john Wiley and Sons.

3'.

2.3

joint DLI: Carnegie-Mellon
University

The focus here is on search and discovery in
the video mediumZ5. Called the lnformedia
Digital Video Library Project, its goal is to
integrate speech,
language and image
understanding technologies to support both the
creation of and retrieval from the digital library.
They use Sphinx-11, a speech recogniser
developed at CMU to automatically transcribe
narratives and dialogues from each video or
broadcast
into
a
technical
transcript.
Close-captioning information i s used for this
when available. video sequences are partitioned
into segments at CMU's Image Understanding
Systems Laboratory to support retrieval and
manipulation. Machine vision techniques are
used to determine the boundary points of
scenes. The initial focus is on several thousand
hours of raw and edited video from public
television programs with test beds in K-12
schools and CMU. Industrial partners include
DEC, Bell Atlantic, Intel Corporation and
Microsoft, Inc.
DESlDOC Bulletin of lnf Technol. 1997,17(6)

2.4

joint DLI: University of
California at Berkeley

The aim here is to provide a large test bed of
data pertaining to the environment, including
documents, reports, image collections, maps,
sensor data and related collection^.^^^^^ Most of
the sensor data is unnumbered. As of July 1996,
they had 268 GB, with an expected size of 3.5
TB. The goal is to offer WWW based access to
this data with CGI used to provide interactions
between WWW clients and other software
systems. A significant contribution of the
Berkeley initiative is the concept of 'Multivalent
Documents'. This new concept allows one to
view a document with complex content, as
having multiple 'layers' of distinct but intimately
related content. Moreover, small, dynamically
loaded program
objects
(also
termed
'behaviours') activate the content and work in
concert to present the user with a unified
document. Thus, documents are perceived as
interacting layers of content and functional
behaviours.
This scheme allows the later (and optionally
local) addition of appropriate content as well as
behaviour. Each content layer and behaviour
unit is kept simple. The multivalent document
concept has lead to a number of interesting
applications. For example, an image based 'cut
and paste' mechanism is implemented by
linking a page image to a layer containing the
corresponding ASCll characters and another
layer representing the characters' geometric
positions on the image. (Note that these ASCII
and
positional
layers
are
generated
automatically).
Other behaviours may be associated with
the same content such as a search function
where the user interacts with the page image.
Interestingly, the multivalent document concept
naturally supports a distributed document
model where the document parts may be
geographically and temporarily distributed. In an
application employing the distributed model, for
example, a user may select a word from a page
image which is then sent to Encyclopaedia
Britannica's web site. The definition, returned in
HTML format, is filtered and sent to the user.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1 997,17(6)

Partners
Agency.

2.5

include

the

California

Resources

Joint DL):Stanford University

The Stanford focus i s on inter operabilit
among third party repositories and services I
This i s a challenging objective since resources
and services such as selective monitoring and
dissemination of information and information
summarisation
are
being
independently
developed. Moreover, users are faced with
many variations in communication methods.
Besides telnet and http, some services require
login id, others are authenticated by IP number
while still others offer open access. In addition
many services charge a fee which may depend
upon the services used. Stanford's goal includes
providing a mediating service that is aware of
such variations. They employ an architecture
termed the 'InfoBus'. Services, collections and
clients plug into ihis and communicate via
built-in inter operability mechanisms that
include a common language to describe
information management tasks and objects.
Implementation is with CORBA (Common
Object Request Broker Architecture) distributed
object technology implemented through Xerox's
Inter-Language Unification System. The Stanford
test bed provides access to Internet search
services such as Lycos and Alta Vista as well as
commercial services such as Dialog. Services
offered include text summarisation and online
payment options. Sample industrial partners are
Xerox PARC, Bell Communications Research,
Hewlett-Packard and Knight-Ridder Information
Services.

X

2.6

joint DLI: University of
California at Santa Barbara

The goal here is to research problems related
to a 'distributed digital library for geographicallyreferenced information', where the phrase
geographically-referenced implies indexing of
information by geographic locations in addition
to indexing by other attributes14. Their Web
based prototype called the Alexandria Digital
Library supports both text based and visual
query languages to identify and work with
relevant data sets. Users may visualise and
browse data sets and transfer subsets to other

locations. The test bed focuses on populating
the test bed, maintaining compatibility with
various standards (example: spatial and library
standards); scalability aspects and user
evaluation goals. Their test bed collection
includes digitised maps images and other
graphical information- related to Santa Barbara,
Ventura and Los Angeles counties. Example
partners are the National Centre for
Geographic Information and Analysis, Digital
Equipment Corporation and Xerox. Further
details on these NSF/ARPA/NASA DL initiatives
may
be found at the Web site
http://www.clse.nsf.gov/iris/DLHorne.htrnl.
These projects are not onjy interesting for their
research contributions but also for their test
beds which should be available for further
research.

3.

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS

The Library of Congress (LC) has been a key
leader in the use of automation to promote
inter-library collaboration and in developing
standards such as MARC and 239.50, The LC i s
conducting a fjve-year DL program to assemble
a core digital col{ection of American historical
and cultural primary source rnaterial'12. These
collections, collectively referred to as 'American
Memory', derive from heterogeneous resources
and are intended to serve a range of users
including scholarly researchers and school
children. Most of the books and papers have
been encoded in SGML with embedded links to
the images of original pages. However these are
also converted to HTML to support a wider user
group. The LC has recognised a number of
special challenges. For example digitising
historical collections poses special requirements
since it is necessary to minimise the handling of
fragile or deteriorating originals. Similarly
significant staff time and technical expertise are
required to create work flow plans and process
materials through to successful digitalisation.
Other conclusions made include recognition of
the need for a naming scheme and the
impracticality of expecting uniformity in
description. The American memory collections
are also linked to the INQUERY search system5
to offer both browsing and full text searches.
The digital archive expected to be 50 TB by the

year
2000
requires
management and
preservation. Other related LC projects are
THOMAS to provide public access to legislative
information7 and CORDS to accept materials in
digital form for copyright registration and
deposit. LC is also a participant in the National
Digital Libraries Federation (NDLF) established
in 199515 a consortium of the country's fifteen
largest research libraries and archives. In
addition LC participates in the G-7 program on
the Global Information Society. This program
emphasises international cooperation in projects
such as the Electronic Libraries Project which
aims to build a prototype global library.

4.

XEROX

Vendors such as Xerox, have had a strong
role in the development of digital libraries.
Xerox in collaboration with Indiana University
Purdue University at Indianapolis explored the
viability of a WWW based 'electronic reserve
section'. In collaboration with Cornell University
they investigated digital image scanning as an
alternative to rnicrofih and photocopy archival
of brittle library materials. These projects
indicate
that
the
interaction
between
technology and the social and political context
of the development effort is a major factor
determining success6. This paper includes some
thought provoking discussions examining a
number of assumptions typically made. These
include, assumptions regarding technology,
users, copyright and document revision
management. For example, the task of scanning
brittie materials, initially regarded as a low-skilt
job proved to be relatively highly skilled.

5.

ONLINE COMPUTER LIBRARY
CENTER

OCLC has taken a strong leadership position
with its research and development efforts on
Persistent 'URLS ( P U R L S } ~ ' and more generally
on Resource Metadata. Functionally a PURL i s a
IIRL. However, it points to a resolution service
that returns the actual URL of the selected
resource. The OCLC PURL Service has been
functioning since january 1996. In addition, the
Dublin Core Metadata Element Set resulted
from a 1995 Metadata workshop jointly hosted
by OCLC and NCSA". A follow up workshop in
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1 997,17(6)

1996 yielded
the
'Warwick
Container
Architecture' that allows individual metadata
sets (including Dublin Core) to co-exist1'. This
architecture allows designers of individual
metadata sets to focus on their specific
requirements. Moreover, the same object may
be accessed via separate metadata sets
representing different user communities. This
flexibility accommodates future metadata sets
without requiring changes to existing ones.
These and other related efforts also emphasise
the importance of metadata standards for
effective resource discovery.

6.

TULIP

TULIP (The University Licensing Program,
1991-1995) a collaboration between Elsevier
Science and nine US universities is definitely a
significant part of US DL history. The
collaboration tested systems for the networked
delivery to, and use of electronic journals at the
user's desktopz3. The scanned pages, the
bibliographic data and unedited, OCR
generated, ASCII full text of 43 Elsevier and
Pergamon journals were made available to the
collaborating universities which in turn
developed systems for desktop delivery to users.
This project yielded a number of important
conclusions. An example technical conclusion is
that scalability of TULIP-like projects will be
hindered by bandwidth and the limits of massive
storage technology. An end-user related
conclusion is the importance of coverage in
attracting users. An organisational conclusion
made is the need for a reliable infrastructure:
systems, networking printing facilities, etc.
Project participants also see the role of libraries
increasing and not decreasing with a major role
in providing coherence to the vast array of
delivery, cost and interface models that users
face. Finally, for the publisher, electronic
publishing offers challenges very different from
paper publishing, challenges that typically slow
such expansions.

7.

INTER-UNIVERSITY
COLLABORATION

NCSTRL (Networked CS Technical Report
Library) is an excellent example of a
collaborative DL project involving a number of
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1997,17(6)

universities. It i s a distributed digital library
offering access to Computer Science Technical
Reports. It has the advantage that the underlying
social context of computer scientists exchanging
technical reports is an established one. The
development of NCSTRL from its predecessors
UCSTRI*~,then WATERS'^ and DIENST'~ is a
good example of system evolution8. Both
UCSTRI and WATERS adopt a centralised search
model while Dienst involves a distributed set of
servers for both indexing and searching.
NCSTRL uses the Dienst protocol for distributed
storage and retrieval developed by Davis and
Lagoze at Cornell University. Future
vers
ions will be based on the distributed digital
object architect~~reof Kahn (CNRI) and
Wilensky (tic Berkeley). A NCSTRL user views
the technical report collection as a single entity
although the collection and search .engines are
distributed over the net. The search interface is
web form based. Participating institutions may
collaborate in standard or in lite mode. The
former implies the installation of the NCSTRL
server software. This allows the ability to
provide customised user interfaces; store data
locally and maintain own search engines and
the ability to store documents in multiple
formats. The lite version requires only the
availability of an anonymous ftp site. As far as
the user is concerned, there is no distinction
between NCSTRL server documents and
documents on an NCSTRL-lite ftp site.
Inter-operability of NCSTRL sites is through an
open protocol and three component services:
repository, index and interface services. One
hopes to see similar applications built for other
disciplines.
A similar distributed effort to build a national
electronic collection of theses and dissertations
(ETD) has been initiated at Virginia Tech in
collaboration with organisations such as Cornell,
UMI, IBM, Virginia Tech, Adobe. The idea i s to
build a unified national collection to support
higher education with
each university
responsible for its local collections. Two
document formats are involved. First Adobe's
PDF and second SGML. In the later a special
DTD (Document Type Definition) tailored to
electronic theses and dissertations has been
developed. The SGML approach simplifies the

creation of derivative objects such as HTML
versions, MARC records and Dissertation
Abstracts entries. Moreover, author submission
and verification may be done through the
WWW. This application, since i t encompasses
the global TD domain, requires work flow
redesign at the local end which in return
requires strong local consensus and training.

8.

RESEARCH LIBRARIES G R O U P

Research
Library
Group
(RLG),
a
not-for-profit cooperation of
universities,
archives, libraries, etc., produces and maintains
RLlN
a
union
catalog
of
over
one-hundred-million bibliographic records .in
more than 365 languageslO. RLG promotes
collaborative efforts such as resource-sharing
agreements and thus the RLG environment is
naturally supportive of collaborative digital
conversion of materials. 'Studies in Scarlet' is
the first in a series of RLG Digital Collecrions
projects. The goal is to digitise legal research
materials on marriage and sexuality in the US
and UK between 1815 and 1914. Participating
institutions develop and contribute resources.
Scanning, text conversion and SGML encoding
are part of the overall process. This and other
collaboratively established collections will form
the basis oC user studies, metadata archival and
finding aids research. RLG efforts wi:l be
interesting to watch as they slowly become
more global with increasing international
partnerships.

9.

creativity and novelty are encouraged. The
newcomer to the DL R&D world has at one
extreme the option of emulating an existing
project and at the other extreme the option of
carving out an independent path. Either way, it
i s necessary to pay close attention to the more
frequently made observations such as the
importance
of
strong
organisational
commitment, a critical mass of information and
a well defined collaborative approach. DL
projects continue to be exciting ventures with
many open challenges and opportunities.

10. BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Arms, CR. Historical collections for the
national digital !ibrary: Lessons and
challenges at the Library of Congress. Part-1.
D.?ib Magazine, .April 1996.
http:,ljlci~eb2.loc.gov/amrnern/ammernhe.
htnil

2.

Arms, CR. Historical collections for the
national digital Library: Lessons and
challenges at the Library of Congress. Part-2.
D-Lib Magazine, May 1996.

3.

Atkins, D. The Llniversity of Michigan digital
library project: The test bed. 0-Lib
~llagazine,July/August 1996.

4.

Birmingham, WP. An agent-based
architecture for digital libraries. D-Lib
~llagazine,July 1995.

5.

Callan, JB, Croft, iVB, and Harding, SM. The
inquery retrieval system. /n Proceedings of
the Third International Conference on
Database and Expert Systems .Applications,
Valeccia, Spain, 1992. Spring-Verlag, pp.
78-83.

6.

Crocca, LV and Anderson, W. Delivering
technology for digital libraries: Experiences
as vendors. Digital Libraries, 1995.

7.

Croft, W, Cook, R, and Wilder, D. Providing
government information on the internet:
Experiences with THOhIAS. Digital Libraries,
1995.

8.

Davis, 1. Creating a networked computer
scier.ce technical report library. D-Lib
Magazine, September 1995.

CONCLUSIONS

We make a few conclusions that are
potentially relevant to groups or organisations
considering research and development in Digital
Libraries. First, there appears to be no single
model or method to follow. For example,
despite the collective experience gathered thus
far the choice' between Adobe's PDF format
and SGML format for digital documents is not a
simple one. Needles to say more complex
decisions such as the choice of architectural
model and the design of collaborative
connections remain highly challenging. Each
project surveyed appears to have taken an
almost unique approach determined by its
goals, resources and the extent to which

DESIDOC Sulleth of Inf Technol, 1997, l7(6]

9. Digital Libraries Initiative. University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, October 3 1,
1996.

19. Paepcke, A. Summary of Stanford's digital
library testbed design and status. D-Lib
Magazine, July/August 1996.

10. Erway, R. Digital initiatives of the research
libraries group. D-Lib Magazine, December
1996.

20. Phelps, T and Wilensky, R. Toward active,
extensible,
n e t w o r k e d documents:
multivalent architecture and applications.
Proceedings of ACM Digital Libraries,
March 20-23, 1996.

11. Fin in, T, Labrou, Y and Mayfield, 1. KQML
as an agent communication language.
http://www.cs.umbc.edu/agents/introduction.

21. Schatz, B and Chen H. IEEE Computer
magazine, May 1996.

12. Fox, E, et a/. National digital library of theses
and dissertation: A scalable and sustainable
approach to unlock university resources.
D-Lib Magazine, September 1996.
http://etd.vt.edu/etd/

22. Shafer, K., et al. Introduction to persistent
uniform resource locators. OCLC Online
Computer Library Center, Inc.
http://purl.oclc.org .

13. French, JC, et al. Wide Area Technical
Report Service: Technical Reports Online.
CACM, 1995, 38(4), 45.

23. Smith, T. The Meta-information environment
o f digital libraries. D-Lib Magazine,
July/August 1996.

14. Frew, j. The Alexandria digital library test

24. TULIP: Final report. Elsevier Science, NY.
1996.

bed. D-Lib Magazine, luly/August 1996.
15. http: //lcweb

. Isc. gov/lsc/ndcf .

16. Lagoze, C. The Warwick framework: A
container architecture for diverse sets of
metada. D-Lib Magazine, July/August 1996.
17. Lagoze, C, and Davis, JR. Dienst: An
Architecture for Distributed Document
Libraries. CACM, April 1995, 28(4), 47.
18. Ogle, V. and Wilensky, R. Test bed
development for the Berkeley digital library
project. D-Lib Magazine, July/August 1996.

DESIDOC Bulletin of In1 Techno!, 1997,17(6)

25. Van Heyningen, M. The unified computer
science technical report index. In
Proceedings of the Second International
W W W '94: Mosaic and the Web,
W W W '94, 1994. 535-43.

26. Wactlar, H. lnformedia digital video library:
Technology outreach. D-Lib Magazine,
July/August 1996.
27. Weibel, S. Metadata: The foundations of
resource description. D-Lib Magazine, July
1995.

21

