DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 17, No. 6, November 1997, pp. 45-56
0 1997, DESIDOC

NDLTD: Encouraging International Collaboration in the
Academy
Edward A Fox, Robert Hall, Neil1 A Kipp, John L Eaton,
Gail McMillan, and Paul Mather *
Abstract
The Networked Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations (NDLTD) i s an
international effort aimed at ensuring that future scholars are more
effectively prepared for the lnformation Age. The NDLTD also supports
present day scholars by providing a forum for more tirnely, detailed, and
effective exchange of information. The NDLTD streamlines the entire thesis
process, not only simplifying searching and retrieval, but also making
submission and approval easier.
Individual universities play a key role in the development of the NDLTD.
Each university establishes a team responsible for local development.
Information professionals from the university train students on ETD
(Electronic Thesis and Dissertation) submission, and the university network
and computer systems provide essential NDLTD infrastructure. University
professors play a vital role in ETD quality control, and advise students on
publication practices and appropriate digital library access controls.
When a university decides to work towards full participation in the NDLTD,
it is most appropriate to engage in pilot efforts. There are several different
methods that exist for developing a pilot program. Level of study, discipline,
geographic, and administrative groupings are all valid criteria for selecting
participants in the pilot initiative. In addition, student volunteers may be
invited, thus bringing in innovators and early adopters.

As a result of collaborative activities the NDLTD has been growing rapidly.
ETDs in the NDLTD are increasing in number, and are accessed ten to a
hundred times more than paper theses. Universities have been joining
steadily - twenty during the first year. As more universities join the NDLTD
we expect that the materials produced by Virginia Tech will be adapted to
varying local situations, allowing the NDLTD to continue to expand rapidly
and to facilitate further collaboration.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Education is an important force in the
advancement of civilisation. Its success depends
* Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA 2406 1-0106 USA
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/, 1997,17(6)

upon sharing of information, which is uncovered
through worldwide activity. Digital libraries can
provide a vehicle for extending collaboration,
which is at the heart of the Academy, with the
aim of more effective education. This paper
focuses on the Networked Digital Library of
43

Theses and Dissertations (NDLTD) and its
potential to improve education and enhance
international collaboration.

1.1

NDLTD

The NDLTD (see http://www.ndltd.org) i s an
international effort aimed at ensuring that future
scholars are more effectively prepared for the
Information Age by understanding publishing
and digital libraries. It is an open initiative, with
all educational institutions invited to join and
other organisations encouraged to assist as
appropriate. While some might prefer to use the
term ETD (Electronic Thesis and Dissertation)
Initiative, which refers to a broad range o f
efforts aimed at moving graduate theses into
digital formats, due to the openness of NDLTD
we will treat the terms interchangeably in this
discussion. Similarly, unless precision demands
more specific terminology, we use the word
thesis to refer to a range of documents including
doctoral dissertations, masters theses, bachelors
theses, and even the broad range of reports
produced in partial fulfilment of degree, course,
or research requirements.
The worldwide preparation of theses is one
of the largest publishing efforts of items that are
book sized or larger. In Canada, about ten
thousand doctoral or masters works are written
annually. In the United States, about fifty
thousand dissertations are prepared each year.
While Council of Graduate School records
indicate over 350,000 U.S. students per year
receive a masters degree, the number of
documents they write per year i s not known
(though it is certainly over 50,000 and is likely
to be 150,000 - 200,000, especially if one
includes project reports). Based on a loh sample
of data provided by OCLC from their World Cat
database, it appears that there are at least 3.5
million theses that have been cataloged in
OCLC-affiliated organisations, and that about
100,000 more are added each year. UMI
reports that 1.5 million doctoral dissertations
h ~ v ebeen entered into their database. Clearly,
more than 1,00,000 theses of one kind or
another are prepared annually worldwide.
Accordingly, NDLTD seeks to involve every
interested educational institution in the world in:

t~

helping graduate students learn more about
publishing and digital libraries;

e ensuring that as many theses as possible are
captured and archived electronically;
et increasing access to theses through digital

library technology.

1.2 Support of Educational
Requirements
Scholars depend on irrformation for their
work. Many of their requirements for
information can be met in part through ETDs.
Some of these requirements include:

Timeliness. For many purposes scholarly information must be timely. Considerable investment i s
made in obtaining news, state-of-the-art reports,
preprints, conference papers, or direct cornmunications from leading researchers. While parts of
a thesis may refer to discoveries made several
years earlier and reported in a conference, the
release of a thesis is usually the first packaging of
the full research results of a graduate student. If
students, faculty, and university groups allow, an
ETD can be made widely available within days of
submission.
Detail. Advancing knowledge often depends on
having sufficient data and analysis to reach important conclusions. A detailed account may be
crucial in the sciences to enable replication, and
in the humanities to facilitate corroborating analysis. The hundreds of pages typically present in a
thesis may be needed to fully articulate an argument in the social sciences or to give adequate
literary rendering in the humanities. Reading a
long work is often the best way for a graduate
student to n-rastera new subfield, or to understand
the depth of investigation needed to prepare his
or her own thesis.
Understanding the literature. Many theses have
comprehensive bibliographies and careful literature reviews. These help others ensure that
they have not missed importan! background
works relevant to their own research, help them
clevelop skills of critical analysis, and provide helpid insights into specialty areas on the borders of
their own investigation.

Effective and complete communication. ETDs
may include data files, databases, metadata,
DESIDOC Bulletin of In{ Technol, 1997,17(6)

spreadsheets, images, audio, video, links, simulations, software, virtual reality representations, interactive applications, and other digital artifacts.
These forms may enable readers to more easily
comprehend the research reported, may give
them a more complete understanding, and may
facilitate subsequent follow-on studies.

1.3

Outline

Given the above discussion of NDLTD,
theses, and the educational value of ETDs, it i s
important to consider how the NDLTD can
expand and be of even greater benefit. Below
we explore how digital libraries in general, and
NDLTD in particular, can be developed so as to
increase international collaboration. Next we
focus on universities, and indicate how the
Academy can evince more collaboration. Then
\ye explore types and levels of collaboration
that are possible, and report on current
collaborations. We conclude by summarising
the discussion and point to future work.

2.

DIGITAL LIBRARIES AS
ENABLERS F O R
INTERNATIONAL
COLLABORATION

Digital libraries can bring together a
community
throughout
an
integrated
information life cycle1 of creation, authoring,
refinement, access, reuse, and new discovery.
Digital library methods are crucial to allow
NDLTD to help advance graduate education
and promote worldwide knowledge sharing.

2.1

Formats and Expressive Power

NDLTD focuses not only on retrieval,
browsing, access, downloading, and reading of
publications but also on their creation,
submission, and all related work flow activities.
For digital libraries to be cost effective and scale
able, it is crucial that appropriate automation be
applied, and that use of the digital library fits in
with standard community activities.
Communication between researchers in the
Information Age can be facilitated, complicated,
or limited because of technical considerations.
We hope
that
NDLTD will
facilitate
communication, increase its volume and spread,
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1997, 17(6)

and still provide archiving and preservation
services that afford protection into the future.
Accordingly, we balance competing pressures,
e.g., allowing:
E+

readers to access works as easily as possible

s archivists to preserve works at the lowest cost
feasible

a students to express themselves as precisely
and completely as possible, and

o faculty to guide their students and carefully
check and critique their works
In a 1994 workshop at Virginia Tech
involving ten universities, it was decided that
NDLTD should establish format standards to
achieve a balance of the competing pressures.
Where multimedia content was appropriate,
conformance to prevalent standards (especially
international ones) was encouraged. In addition,
the goal was established of having two versions
of the body of each document: a fully rendered
form supporting electronic books and related
images-PDF (Adobe's Portable Document
Format), and a tagged representation capturing
the structure of the work as well as enabling
full-text search-SGML (Standard Generalised
Markup Language, I S 0 8879). A simple
Document Type Definition, ETD-ML (Electronic
Thesis and Dissertation Markup Language, see
http://etd.vt.edu/etd-ml/),
was devised that
woulcl capture the crucial metadata (e.g.,
bibliographic information and front matter),
references, and high level organisation of the
work. To aid authors, tools have been
developed to allow conversion to SGML from
standard word processors and formatters. To aid
readers, a translator from SGML to HTML was
constructed that automatically builds a table of
contents, adds forward and backward links
between chapters, and links the table of
niultimeclia objects to all the separate files
9
involved in representing them.
Since commercially available tools for SGML
are relatively expensive, and locally developed
tools are in beta testing, most institutions
involved in NDLTD have focused on use of PDF.
Helping students learn enough to create their
ETDs in PDF seems to be a sufficient challenge
for most universities, so that has been our focus,

Video

Sound

Clips

Clips

Hypertext

Ccrlor

Links

Images

Scannw
Images

Figure 1 (a) Planned Multimedia Use
ML submission is still viewed as
expressive potential afforded by
in the long term. Ultimately, if
can easily access the multimedia i
n create their ETDs in both PDF and
by others.
will have learned a great deal about
2.2 Support Software
locurnent preparation, and archivists
jsured that preservation will be
Supporting scholarship in the P
(eyed students about their plans f o ~
timedia in their ETDs. Nearly
?rs planned
to
use
images
in the body of their thesis. Only one
danned to use digital video in their
(Figure la). Indeed, nearly half used
s in their ETDs (Figure 1 b). As more
we expect a general increase in the
~ltimediaobjects.

111 number of cases, special formats
r Ware, Director) are used that will
solete in a few years, but those are
lied in situations where the study
,equires use of those representations
the authors are aware that parts of
;sion will be difficult to preserve in
form. In general, students seem
~ i t h the
range
of
formats
the
led, are exciting about

digital libraries requires a base
software systems. While many are
distributed information technologic
WAIS, and SQL, only in recent 1
packaging of even more comprehe
for scholars into digital libraries be
goal and realistic possibility.

A number of corporate do1
supported development of ND
provided copies of Acrobat softw;
supplied preparation of SGMt fror
OCLC donated Site Search to sup[
package for access to MARC rec
ETDs. OCLC also provided PURL
allow association of persistent nar
with current URLs, and the Corporation for
National Research Initiatives i s assistin with
'handle' software for the same purpose. 6 j 3
The NOLTD support team at Virginia Tech
has developed a variety of tools to help authors
DESlDOC Rulletin of InF Technol, 1997,17(6)

Saurrd

GIips

Virtual
Reality
f if-

Macromind
Dlrectar

Video

Clips

Color
Images

Figure 1(b) Actual Multimedia Use
create works, enhance them with hypertext and
multimedia capabilities, submit them to campus
servers, and then automate subsequent
processing by Graduate School and Library staff
In addition, they have constructed a database
record
keeping
system,
provided
an
up-to-the-hour mirroring of submitted works on
a separate computer, added log analysis and
reporting tools, and prepared analysis tools for a
variety of survey instruments. Another database
keeps track of NDLTD member universities. All
general interest materials are managed through
WWW tools on a single physical server with
multiple URLs: http://w~w.~dl-td.org!
(about the
project), http://etd-vt.edu/ (local instructions to
aid with authoring and submission), and

searching. The Site Search system from OCLC
will support 239.50 access. IBM's Digital Library.
system also will support searching, initially on
text or rnetadata values, where needed for
multilingual texts, later on image content, and
eventually in federated fashion. These search
systems, building upon the standardisation of
repraentation discussed in Section 2.1 above,
will enable a variety of approaches to
constructing and accessing a large, distributed,
international collection of ETDs.

htt~://www.theses-org/
c~llection).~~

NDLTD support team at Virginia Tech has
prepared extensive online information, including
a number of multimedia training programs,
available through the above-mentioned WWW
sites. In addition, several writing projects are
underway to reach others interested through a
llov/-to booklet for students; a source book for
students,
faculty,
publishers, and other
interested parties; and a compendium to be
drawn from talks by those slated to speak in a
symposium series on ETDs.

(leading

to

the

The collection at Virginia Tech is indexed
and made accessible for searching using Open
Text software. Another mode of access i s
supported with the Dienst protocol that
underlies the Networked Computer science
Technical Report
Library
(NCSTRL,
at
http://www.ncstrl.org); an improved version of
that software developed at the University of
Virginia has been prepared to support federated
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1997, 17(6)

2.3

Role of Information Professionals

For significant numbers of graduate students
to learn about publishing and digital libraries, a
serioals educational initiative is required. The

49

Ultimately, however, there
must be
substantive
involvement
of
information
professionals in supporting the education of
students regarding NDLTD. We believe that if
graduate students are to be prepared adequately
for the information age, they should have
competence in preparing electronic documents
(which can be demonstrated by preparing their
ETD), knowledge about the world of publishing
(copyright, intellectual property rights, derivative
works, agreements with publishers, inter library
loan, and related economic issues), and ability to
use digital libraries (e.g., from accessing the
NDLTD collection).
Besides reading materials about NDLTD,
students should attend local training sessions
carried
out
by
campus
information
professionals. For complex ETDs, they should be
supported as needed by experts in the various
electronic publishing and multimedia capture
tools required. At Virginia Tech, the New Media
Center has a number of professionals helping
with scanning and other special tasks, while the
local ETD team handles email, phone, and
in-person requests for assistan~e.~'

'

3.

ROLE OF UNIVERSITIES

Supporting
NDLTD
thus
calls
for
involvement of local information professionals at
each university, in the context of an overall
educational initiative organised by personnel in
the
Graduate
School,
Library,
Computing/lnformation Technology, etc. Efforts
by a team at each university are crucial for
scalability of the ETD Initiative.

3.1

Infrastructure

NDLTD builds upon distributed information
system technology in the context of the Internet
and WWW. Typically, universities have a LAN,
WWW servers, an online public access catalog,
systems to store several gigabytes of information
(since a gigabyte is roughly the space required for
500 new theses), search software, scanners,
multimedia capture labs, database management
systems, and other basic facilities needed for
distributed digital libraries. Students may have their
own computers and the university is likely to have
computers in labs, the Graduate School, Library
Automation, Cataloging, and for general access.

Of key importance for NDLTD are the
Acrobat tools available from Adobe. Students or
campus personnel can buy the inexpensive
package needed for authoring; anyone can
obtain the free Reader directly from Adobe that
suffices to read works in NDLTD. Most client
systems have built-in or freely available plug-ins
that can handle multimedia works.
A few specialised services round out the local
infrastructure. First, Virginia Tech or.other centers
involved in NDLTD can run PURL and 'handle'
servers, so that each new ETD is assigned a
unique identifier (Uniform Resource Name-URN)
that can junction instead of a less persistent URL.
These URNS can go into the 856 field of a MARC
record, to be managed by the local catalog, so
individuals searching the library catalog can view
the record and click on the URN (or paste it into a
WWW browser to gain access to the ETD).
Second, universities should have an electronic
archiving operation to secure and preserve their
ETDs, or else have an arrangement with a large
organisation capable of providing such permanent
services (e.g., OCLC or UMI).

3.2

Unlocking Resources

With the help of information professionals
(see Section 2.3) and building upon a
satisfactory infrastructure (see Section 3.1),
universities are in position to participate actively
in NDLTD. While gopher and WWW have
encouraged universities to make general
information available, there is little coordination
among universities to share their intellectual
output on a systematic basis. Some provide
access to online course ware (e.g., the
Computer
Science
materials
at
http://ei.cs.vt.edu which have had over 6 million
accesses), but many others either have little that
is online or else restrict access to what they
have prepared. In selected domains, like
Computer Science, there is free sharing of
technicat reports by services like NCSTRL.
However, many disciplines are not oriented
toward reports. ETDs, on the other hand, are
available for all fields, and seem to be
something that many universities have thought
of as a genre for sharing with other institutions.
Contributing to NDLTD allows students'
works to be more widely known, which may
DESIDOC Bulletb~of Inf Jechnol, 1997, 17(6)

add to the prestige of a university as well as
bring credit to its graduates. As collections of
ETDs accumulate at each university, researchers
at other institutions can learn about the
activities of research groups, facilitating
collaboration between such groups.
Since an average size university can produce
something in the range of 100-1000 ETDs per
year, there is a substantial base of works per
year upon which to discover and develop
collaboration, of much larger scale than the
number of reports in a particular discipline.
While collaboration based on ETDs begins with
the student author, it can extend to others in the
research group, including faculty involved, as
well as to any future places of employment of
the student. If students elect to publicise their
,'~
ETDs or parts thereof before c ~ m ~ l e t i o n the
collaboration can begin early in a research
investigation, allowing refinement or reshaping
of ideas based on feedback from others
interested in similar topics.
As universities unlock these important results
of graduate study and research, collaboration can
extend even beyond the Academy. Companies
involved in technology transfer, scholars in
government or corporate research facilities, and a
wide variety of others interested in new
discoveries all can gain access to materials
previously difficult or expensive to obtain.

3.3

Quality Control and Access

Control
Universities play a key role not only in
knowledge generation but also in quality
control regarding research. Faculty serve as
editors and reviewers of all types of
publications, and often develop considerable
skill in training students to present their works
effectively. It is likely that, as ETDs become
more common and more widely read, faculty
will ensure that the quality of ETDs goes up.
That can take place without a great deal of
additional effort, especially if spell checkers and
3
other automated tools are employed to help.
Fundamentally, however, it is not necessary
that ETDs differ radically from the theses and
dissertations that have been prepared for
decades. Their main roles remain: (I) marking
DESlDOC Bulletin of lnf Techno/, 1997, 17(6)

completion of, and (2) recording the content of
a student's graduate work. On the quality side,
they are usually fairly good, having passed
scrutiny of a faculty committee. O n the length
side, they tend to be long and sometimes
verbose, typically representing the first
book-length writing activity of the student. On
the detail side, they tend to be comprehensive,
giving specifics often recorded nowhere else. In
this genre there is often a large bibliography, a
careful literature review, a clear problem
statement, a long discussion of approach, and a
short statement of future plans.
It seems likely that ETDs will co-exist with
paper theses for a number of years, and that this
well-established genre will co-exist harmoniously
with other types of publications. There continue
to be a large number of genre that serve to
complement each other. ETDs fall into the class
of gray literature, though on the high-end of
quality, since faculty committees certify the
works; in contrast, conventional publications
have peer review. ETDs are a type of electronic
publication, and so will grow to be more flexible
in using multimedia, but for a while are likely to
remain mostly text, appearing as electronic
versions of paper books. It seems extremely
unlikely that ETDs will dislocate or reduce
demand for conference or journal papers,
research monographs, textbooks, or other types
of publications commonly used by the scholarly
community.
Consequently, we argue that ETDs should be
made freely available, and encourage publishers
not to force authors to place restrictions on
access. Though dissertations have been
available on demand from UMI for decades,
and UMI is well known as the publisher of
record for most US dissertations, publishers of
related books or papers have not considered
such distribution to count as prior publication.
We hope this view can extend to ETDs. At the
very least, we hope that after a fixed number of
years since completion, e.g., no more than 3-5
years, all ETDs will be fully accessible worldwide
to provide an important scholarly record of our
civilisation for the future.
While publishers learn about NDLTD, and
consider these matters, digital library technology
allows enforcement of a variety of access

options regarding ETDs. Table I summarises
those options, gives reasons for choosing each,
and provides numbers to show a typical
sequence of broadening access. Thus, in the last
row, a work that relates to a patent application
may be locked up completely while the patent
application is prepared (step 1). Next (step 2),
part of the work, that relates to the patent
disclosure, may remain locked up during patent
review, while the rest (e.g., literature review,
bibliography) may be released worldwide.
Finally (step 3), after the patent i s granted, the
entire work may be released worldwide since
the patent is in the public record.

Reason for
Restriction

No
Access

Campus Unlimited
Access Access

None

Step 1

Wish to
publish
separately

Step 1

Step 2

Wish to delay
dissemination

Step 1

Step 2

Proprietary
agreements

Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

Patent
application

Step 1

Step 2

Step 3

Table 1: Access Options

Though we hope widespread access will
become the norm, it may take time for that view
to evolve. since diverse cultures are involved in
this matter.

3.4

Bridging Cultures

The word 'university' indicates that a variety
of viewpoints are represented. Since ETDs will
be produced by each part of each university,
tremendous diversity of opinion is sure to
surround issues relating to them. Inside a
university, there are differing views depending
on level (bachelor, masters, doctoral), area
(topic, research group, department), and college
(engineering, arts, sciences, business,...).
In some cases the student is the sole author,
while in other cases part of the work was done
by a research team (whose members' names
should be appropriately credited in an ETD).
Depending on the discipline, the valuation of an
ETD relative to a conference or journal paper, or
to a monograph on the same topic, may vary.
Having seen that ETDs serve the needs of the
entire Academy, and so can act as a bridge for
all sectors to move forward into electronic
publishing and digital libraries, we turn our
attention to focus on sources of variation that
have appeared for ETD pilot efforts.

Figure 2 Pilot Taxonomies
52

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno!, 1997,17(6)

4.

TYPES OF PILOT INITIATIVES

At the time a university decides to work
toward full participation in NDLTD, it is most
appropriate to engage in pilot efforts so the
campus can understand issues likely to emerge
when the whole campus is involved. Following
the lead of those tracking technology transfer,
one may divide groups based on their reaction
to technology and acceptance thereof.
Alternately, one may distinguish populations
according to a variety of other schemes. See
Figure 2 and the subsections below for details
on such divisions.

4.1

By Level or Discipline

One type of variation deals with discipline.
In some disciplines, such as the sciences, the
type of related publication most commonly
considered is that of journal articles. In the
humanities, on the other hand, a manuscript is
more common.
Disciplines vary in terms of their use of
mathematics, figures, tables, and multimedia.
That leads to variations in preferred tools, like
word processor or a separate equation
processor. Many disciplines have different styles
for format, especially rqarding footnotes or end
notes, citations, and entries in the bibliography.
Some expect a thesis to tell a story of discovery
not yet reported, while others expect that
students will have obtained outside certification
and publicity regarding their discoveries through
published papers.
Since disciplines often relate to one or more
commercial publishers and one or more
associations, there also are aspects of them
relating to the lead associations. For example,
publishers in some fields are known for
conservatism regarding electronic publishing,
whiie others are in the vanguard of technology
application. Similarly some publishers focus on
serving a particular nation or region only.

4.2

By Region

Universities exist in a variety of contexts.
Virginia Tech is in the Southeast of the U.S., and
so is part of the Southeastern Universities
Research Association (SURA). The University of
Illinois, on the other hand, i s in the Big 10, with
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol 1997,17(6)

administrative coordination through the CIC.
Regional university associations also are
paralleled by other types of regional groups.
Thus, among libraries there i s the
Southeastern Library Network (SOLINET).
Similarly, among graduate schools there is the
Conference of Southern Graduate Schools
(CSGS). Serving mostly North America is the
Council of Graduate Schools (CGS).
Efforts in regard to NDLTD have had strong
support from CGS, CSGS, SOLINET, and SURA.
There is also interest in the CIC. Additional
groupings relating to NDLTD rest on other types
of association.

4.3

Political, Social, Linguistic, and
Economic Concerns

Croups involved in NDLTD may base their
definition on a variety of issues. For example,
representation on the NDLTD Steering
Committee deals covers national groups (e.g.,
Canada, UK), continental programs (e.g., African
Virtual University), social groups (e.g., those
with disabilities), or economic forces (e.g.,
companies involved in information technology,
like IBM).
Various groupings can be used when
establishing a pilot program (Figure 2). At the
University of Virginia, the pilot began with
bachelor theses in the College of Engineering. In
many universities, the effort begins with a
voluntary program, bringing in innovators and
early adopters. In yet others, certain
departments are particularly capable regarding
technology, or see economic benefits that can
come from electronic publishing (e.g., when
large numbers of expensive photographs would
be required).
NDLTD seeks to avoid economic limitations
and difficulties. If ETDs are prepared as a natural
part of the education of students, they can be
produced without special financial (university
line item budget) support. If automation of
processing i s implemented, the clerical costs of
handling ETDs is actually less than in the
previous paper-based system. Since we argue
that ETDs complement other types of
publications, we hope that outside publishers
will not feel economic pressure from NDLTD,

and so will make it easy for universities to
collaborate through the NDLTD.

5.

COLLABORATION

As a result of collaborative activities, the
NDLTD has been growing rapidly. Subsections
below consider that growth and collaboration.

5.1

Accesses

Since September 1996, when the US
Department of Education funded Virginia Tech
to expand work on NDLTD, there has been
considerable interest and rapid growth in
accesses. Figure 3a shows that interest as
reftected in accesses to our WWW sites. Shown
separately are the counts for the project, for
instructions on preparation and submission, and
totals. Figure 3b records accesses to the
collection of ETDs. Of thesis accesses, 32.3%
are downloads of the full-text ETD {PDF file).
The remainder of the accesses involve only the
cover page and abstract (stored together as an
HTML page). Note that these statistics represent
about 2 orders of magnitude increase relative to
the number of circulations in the campus library
of a paper thesis.

5.2

joining

With all this interest in NDLTD, universities
have been joining steadily. After a year, twenty
were official members, with letters giving
contact information for coordinators in the
Graduate School, Library, and Computing.
These several contacts have been signed up
separately in focused listservs, as well as in the
general listserv, etd-l@listserv.vt.edu.
Members come from Africa, Australia,
Europe, and North America. In the U.S.,
because of a SURA sponsored pilot that began
in 1995, most members are in the Southeast,
but there are members throughout the nation,
including Hawaii. Since NDLTD encourages
regional and national collaboration, we
encourage not only universities but also national
libraries, international consortia, and others
interested.

5.3

Adaptation and Innovation

As NDLTD expands, we expect that the
extensive set of materials produced by Virginia
Tech will be adapted to local situations,
translated into other languages, and extended to
reflect local practices. We hope that tools and
standards will be liberally applied to reduce

Figure 3(a) WWW Site Accesses

54

DESIDOC Bulletin of lnf Technol, 1997, 17(6)

38.888

PS.88D

i

1 Is."'
<

18,888

5.880

8
d ~ R . 8 6 JUl.91

AU(.I6

Sap.96

OCI 9 1

Nov.96

n a c 9 6 Jan 9 1 F b b . 9 1 Y H I 9 1 A p r . 0 1

Y a v 0 1 .dun I 7

Jul.ll

Au9 9 1

M O l l l

Figure 3(b) ETD Library Accesses

costs and ensure inter operability. At the same
time, we hope that the full potential of
electronic publishing will be realised, and that
students will learn about publishing policies and
practices (regarding copyright, intellectual
property rights, and economic pressures) in the
appropriate legal and cultural context.
Virginia Tech support for NDLTD is aimed to
be enabling, not prescriptive. NDLTD is aimed
to be open and comprehensive; we hope that
people or institutions will not start separate
groups but rather work together in a unified
international collaboration among universities.
Starting in 1998, we hope that a worldwide user
group
will
emerge,
communicating
electronically to expand NDLTD, and meeting in
groups for regional discussions. Ongoing
innovations by
students,
faculty,
staff,
universities and others are needed to
accommodate diverse needs, and to ensure a
fitting balance between the needs of all parties
involved.
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno!, 1997,17(6)

6.

CONCLUSIONS

Since ETDs were first publicly discussed in
1987 at a UMI-led workshop in Ann Arbor,
Michigan, work has proceeded at Virginia Tech
to expand this initiative to improve graduate
education worldwide. Support by SURA and the
U.S. Departmerit of Education has extended
membership around the United States and into
a number of nations around the world. NDLTD
can support international collaboration in the
Academy,
and
requires
international
collaboration to expand. We hope that
information
professionals,
universities,
government agencies and others will aid with
further
growth
and
facilitate
further
collaboration.

7.

REFERENCES

1. Borgman, Christine L, et a/. Social Aspects

of digital libraries. Final Report to the
National Science Foundation; Computer,
Information Science, and Engineering
55

Directorate; Division of Information,
Robotics, and Intelligent Systems;
Information Technology and Organisations
Program. Award number 95-28808.1 996
~http://www.gslis.ucla.edu/DL/>
2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

56

Borgman, Christine L. Multi-media,
multi-cultural, and multi-lingual digital
libraries: Or how do we exchange data in
400 languages?.D-Lib Magazine, June 1997.
~http://www.dlib.orgldlib/june97/06borg
man. htmb
Fox, Edward A, Eaton, John L, and
McMaillan, Gail, Improving graduate
education with a national digital library of
theses and dissertations. Proposal submitted
to the United States Department of
Education. 1996.
<http://www.ndltd.org/support/fipse
1 O.pdf>
Fox, Edward A, et a/. National digital library
of theses and dissertations: A scalable and
sustainable approach to unlock university
resources. D-Lib Magazine, September
1996.
<http://www.dlib.org/dlib/september96/th
eses/09fox.htm~>
Fox, Edward A, et a/. Networked digital
library of theses and dissertations: An
international effort unlocking university
resources. 0-Lib Magazine, September
1997.
<http://www.dlib.org/dlib/september97/th
eses/09fox.html>

7.

Kipp, Neill A. SGML usability and DTD
design. SGML '96 Conference Proceedings.
Graphics Communications Association,
Alexandria, VA. 1996. 41 9-29.

8. Kipp, Neill A. Document type definition for
electronic theses and dissertations. March
1997.

<http://etd.vt.edu/etd-rnl/dtdetds.html>
9.

Kipp, Neill A. Button bars, sticky notes, hep
cats, and ripple: Using hytime hyperlinking
to make lasting intranet relationships. SCML
Newsletter, May 1997.

10. Kipp, Neill A. The hytime engine peer-peer
protocol (hep): Hep cats jam java in the
digital library. International HyTime
Conference 1997, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada. 1997.
<http://etd.vt.edu/hep/h97talk.hep>
11. Kipp, Neill A. A scenario from the
networked digital library of theses and
dissertations: the life of an ETD from
creation to dissemination. 1997.
<http://www.ndltd.org/howto/etdlife.html>
12. Kirschenbaum, Matthew G. Electronic
theses and dissertations in the humanities: A
directory of on-line referemes and
resources. 1997.
<http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/ETD/ETD.html>

13. Weibel, Stuart, Jul, Erik and Shafer, Keith.
PURLS: Persistent Uniform Resource
Locators.
~http://purl.oclc.org/OCLC/PURL/SUMM
ARY>

Handle system overview v3.0.
<http://www.handle.net/overview.html>

DESIDOC Bulletin of lnl Jechnol, 1997,17(6)

