DEsIDOCBulletin of lnformation Technology, Vol. 16, No. 2;March 1996, pp. 11-22

0 1996, DESIDOC

Information and Library Network (INFLIBNET) Programme
Pramod Kumar* and OP Arora**
ABSTRACT
This article describes the objectives, services, and infrastructure at
INFLIBNET programme, it also describes how the programme with
financial support from the U G C i s c o n t r i b u t i n g towards
computerisation of university libraries in India by providing grants and
training. The problems faced in getting data from the libraries 2nd
putting it into a central database are also discussed.

1 . INTRODUCTION
The lnformation and Library Network
((NFLIBNET) programme was started by the
Clnlversity Grants Commission (UGC) in
April 1991. It is a cooperative venture for
pooling, sharing, and optimisation of library
resources in the country. It aims to provide
a channel to the academicians and
researchers for exchange of information
from sources within the country and
abroad. It is a major programme towards
modernisation of libraries and information
services in the country, using computer and
communication technologies. INFLIBNET
vv,il/ include participants form colleges,
universities, R&D institutes, institutes of
higher
learning,
information centres,
institutes of national importance, and
document resource centres (DRCs). All the

disciplines such as science, technology,
medicine, agriculture, fine arts, humanities,
1 1 covered under
social sciences, etc., ~ ~ 1 be
this programme

The iNFLlBNET programme has been set
up with the follcswing objectives:
a To

modernise iihvsries/inia!ma~;r)icentres in the countr):

ei

To estabiish a mechanism fot inforr!~ation
transfer and access to support schclanhir:
and academic work.

+B

To facilitate pooling, sharing, a ~ i d
optirnisation of library/information
resources.

ei

To organise library services at macro I i ~ 2r 1,
affordable cost and maximiscl benefits.

'Director, INFLIRNET Programme
+t+ To

joint Director, INFLIBNET Programme
Near Cujarat University Guest House
Post Box No. 4 1 16, Navrangpura
Ahmedabad-380 009

"

DESISIDOC Bulletin of lnf Technol, 1996.16(2)

provide speedy and efficient services
to the end users.

The ultimate aim of the programme i s to
provide the end users a mechanism for

Kumar & Arora

- Information and Library Network (INFLIBNET)Programme

sharing and using resources offered by
modern information technology.

3.3

3. DATABASE ACTIVITIES

Utmost care is taken in the preparation,
management, and protection of a central
database. The database has to be
authenticated with the help of available
sources and typographical errors avoided to
the
extent
possible.
Complete
bibliographical details such as ISSN or ISBN,
title, author, publisher, year, subject
description, bibliographical notes, code,
etc., are to be included as far as possible.

Conversion of records into machine
readable form involves both efforts and
time. A number of steps have been taken to
minimise this effort which will facilitate
information resource sharing.

3.1

Standards for Data Capturing

It is essential to adopt a set of
bibliographical
standards
to
ensure
compatibility at national and international
levels and to promote efficiency and
effectiveness in the transfer of information.
A Standardisation committee has been
appointed and it has finalised standards and
formats for serials, books, theses and
dissertations, for creating databases. A
detailed manual on standards and formats
providing guidelines for data capturing with
illustrative examples has been prepared and
distributed to over 100 university libraries
having computers an3 whose manpower
has been trained at INFLIBNET. This will
help libraries in the computerisation of
their holdings ensuring uniformity.

3.2

Library Management Software

A library management software is being
developed jointly by DESIDOC and
INFLIBNET. The software is designed to
work under DOS as well as UNlX
environment. Its cataloguing and circulation
modules have been completed and installed
in some of the libraries computerised under
the INFLIBNET programme for trial. We
have received useful feedback on these
modules and they have been modified
points/suggestions
incorporating
the
wherever necessary. Acquisition and serials
control'modules of this software are under
development.
12

Database Development
Interfaces

Many software application interfaces for
the creation and database of a central
database have been developed by
INFLIBNET. These are outlined below.
6

Software interface for customised data
entry, search and print in CDS/ISIS at
user's end.

e Software for converting records from the
different available sources into I S 0 format
in CDS/ISIS using CCF tags.

e Software for effective data entry of serials
holdings from hard copy to CDS/ISIS.

e Software interface for data validation and
merging of the incoming records into
central database.

3.4

Union Catalogue

INFLIBNET has set the following prioiity
for the creation of a union catalogue for
different types of documents available i n
the libraries. These resources include:
te

Serials

e Theses and dissertations
gt

Book holdings

a

Database of experts

a

Monographs (essentially books), and

o Non-book materials.
DESIDOC &Iletin of Inf Technol.1996,16(2)

Kumar & Aro:a

- Information and Library Nehvork (INFLIBNET) Programme

Serials get first priority in view of the
(a) urgent need of users, (b) the ever
increasing cost of serials which takes away
a major share of money in the limited
budget available to the libraries, and (c)
limited and inadequate holdings available in
the library. Doctoral theses are required
very often for reference purposes. A
database of experts assumes importance in
view of the expertise needed in various
agencies. In case of books, priority is given
to the books in active circulation.
3.4.1 Serials.

At present the union catalogue of serials
database at INFLlBNET contains around
30,000 records from more than 60
universities. The database i s growing
continuously.

2 user-friendly software for accessing the
database i s designed in CDS/ISIS with
Pascal interface. This software allows the
end user to search through the union
catalogue and display records in an
user-defined format. The records can then
be printed or the complete records can be
copied to a file.
3.4.2 Theses and Disserfations

The development of the database of
theses/dissertations at INFLIBNET is an
on-going process. At present the database
holds about 65,000 records.
3.4.3 Book Holdings

INFLIBNET has received over 6.5 lakh of
book records from different university
libraries. The authentication of these
records i s in progress and will be available
online soon. At present, about 50,000
records have been authenticated.
3.4.4 Dafabase of Experts
A large number of experts in different
fields are available in the universities in the
country. Their eicpertise is frequently
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technd, 1996,16(2)

needed by various R&D organisations,
industries, and other institutions. INFLIBNET
is therefore developing a database of
experts in India in various subject fields to
provide detailed information about their
expertise to enable the user organisations
to contact them to avail the expertise.
8

The printed data input sheets are being
sent to the vice chancellors/directors,
professors and heads of the departments
and to the librarians in the universities/
deemed universities, regional engineering
colleges, and other technical institutions.
Mailing is in progress and will be extended
to all the experts in the,R&D instituilons. At
present, information regarding 1500 experts
has already been received. The database is
steadily growing. Various types of
information provided by the experts have
been interlinked by the speciaify designed
software.

3.4.5 Software Packages
Presently the union catalogue is
available on both DOS and Litu!X platf~rm.
Finally, the database so created will be
mounted on a kISC-based po\,~tz:fttl
ccirnputer iystem for access. Necessary
interfaces are being deveioped.

4. SERVICES
INFLIBNET will offer a vaiieiy of services
to its users. These services can broadly be
placed under four categories.

4.1

Catalogue-based Services

A union catalogue of holdings of
libraries of academic and research inititutes
will be generated. This catalogue will
initially contain bibliographic details of
serials, books, theses/dissertations, and
non-book materials. By accessing this
database a user will come to know the
location of a serial, a book or a dissertation
in the various libraries in India. Gradually,
contents, abstracts, and full-text services will

Kumar & Arora - information and Library Network (INFLIBNET) Programme

also be introduced. INFLIBNET also
proposes to create specialised databases of
academic
interest.
Catalogue
card
generation and downloading of information
for creation of local databases are other
services being offered by INFLIBNET.

4.2

Database Services

Supply of the required document to a
user in the shortest possible time is a crucial
component
of
this
programme.
Cooperation between the participating
libraries is of utmost importance for the
success of this programme. It is proposed
to identify a set of resourceful libraries both
in the university and R&D sectors as DRC.
These centres will possess information on a
broad spectrum of disciplines. INFLIBNET
proposes to augment their photocopying
facilities. A user will send request for a copy
of document required to the nearest DRC.
It wit! be the duty of DRCs to supply the
document to the user either by post, e-mail,
or any other suitable means.
It is proposed to resort to coopeiative
procurement of serials and the costly
abstracting and indexing journals for
avoiding duplication in subscriptions.
Libraries will be willing to stop subscribing
to common serials, if the document sharing
is efficient. The resources so saved can be
utilised for acquiring additional serial titles.

4.3

Communication-based Services

INFLIBNET proposes to link all the
participating libraries and various databases
both national and international. Since a
number of Government supported data
networks such as ERNET, NICNET, I-NET
and GlAS are already operational in the
country, it is proposed to use them for
providing
network services to
the
participating libraries. INFLlBNET's own
captive network will be planned in future if
these networks fail to provide requisite
services to the users. INFLIBNET will
14

provide access to information-both offline
and online-to its users. E-mail will be used
for offline search of databases and also for
information exchange and communication
among the users. It is proposed to start
bulletin
board
services
also.
Teleconferencing is another important
facility which will be provided to the users
in future.

4.4

COPSAT Service

INFLIBNET programme in collaboration
with
National
Centre
for
Science
Information
(NCSI),
Bangalore
has
introduced Contents with Abstracts of
Periodicals in Science and Technology
(COPSAT) service with effect from 1 April
1993. Under this scheme, a subscriber i s
provided every month with the contents
pages along with abstracts (wherever
available) from 25 journals on paper fpririt),
or from 40 journals (opted from a list of
3000 !eading journals in the area of science
and technology) on a floppy diskette. This is
a low cost, high value service for providing
the latest information. I S 0 2709 format i s
used in the service to enable subscribers to
create their own COPSAT database. This
service has been found very useful by the
research and academic community. Two
hundred and twenty four subscriptions have
been received till date. Provision aiso exists
for getting photocopies of desired articles
through document delivery service.

4.5

Application Software Packages
for Library Services

Several software packages have been
developed to support various library
applications and functions.
4.5.1 Utility Soft ware Package
A utility software for the book database
on CDS/ISIS has been developed for
getting the desired result by pressing a
single key, thus saving effort and time in
DESIDOC &Illefln of Inf Techno!,1 W6.16(2)

Kumar & Arora - Information and Library Network (INFLIBNET) Programme

going through various steps. Following
features are available in the software.
(i) Title index list.
(ii) Author
index
repeated entry.

list-irrespective

of

(iii) Search with author sort without going
through the steps of giving search
expression, processing, saving the file
and printing with sorting effect.
[ivj Search with title sort similar to (iii).
(v) Accession register print-out in prescribed

farmat for the search expression as per
the desired set of accession numbers. The
format provides ail the information in
respect of entry date, language, class
number, title, publisher name, place of
publication, year of publication, vendor,
bill number, date and price on a 132
coiumn printet.
4.5.1 Catalogue Card Generation

Applicatior: interface programme has
been developed for generating catalogue
cards on CDS/ISIS. The programme
generates the cataiogue cards as per
AACR-2 format from data avai!able in
ISO-2709 format having standard tags from
CCF. iiarious types of catalogue cards can
be generated viz., main as wel! as added
entries as per the requirements of various
university libraries.
4.5.3 COPSAT Database Software
A user-friendly, menu-driven PASCAL
interface programme has been developed
in CDS/iSIS fcr COPSAT users subscribing
for data in ISO-2709 format. This
programme can be used by the user
without having the knowledge of all the
operations of CDS/ISIS. It has the facility to
search through the database by author, title,
joilrnal name, publication details or by
Boolean search. The search statement may
be the fuil statement or a part of statement
DfSlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1996,16(2)

with right truncation. Facilities are available
to display previous records or subsequent
records, to save the searched results in a
file, and to take print-out of the displayed
records.

4.6

Access to INFLIBNET Databases

Many libraries have acquired e-mail and
I-NET facilities. The union catalogue at
INFLIBNET can be accessed using I-NET
facility. The X.2 5 connectivity with leqsed
line is also ir! the process of being
established. INFLIBNET has already started
the service of providing access to its union
catalogue of about 30,000 periodicals and
65,000 theses holdings using e-mail facility.
This includes h ~ l d i n gdetails of more than
60 universities and other institutions of
higher learning. The e-mail faciiity has been
started as an economical and easily
implementable means for exchange of data
for resource sharing. The procedure
involves sending qtleries by e-malt to
INFLIBNET
mailbox
on
query
@infahd.ermtin
or
i n fibhqashakti.
ncsternetin address. The query is then
processed and results put hack ir:
respective mail boxes. One can then collect
back the results through e-nail i-ibraries
slibscribing to any one of the e-mzii
facilities such as SIRNET, ERNFT, UUNET,
ICNET, NICNET, etc., can avail of this
facility.

5. PROMOTION OF LlBRARY
AUTOMATION
Computerisation i s a basic requirement
for automating library operations. 'ill a
few years back, majority of the universitv
libraries in our country did not have even
a single PC. The INFLIBNET programme
organised six one-day seminars at various
places in India, to generate interest and
awareness among the library community
in computerisation. It also stressed on the

Kumar & Arora

- Information and Library Network (INFLIBNET) Programme

need to introduce automation of libraries to
promote the required culture and prepare
proper base which was badly needed for
effective implementation of INFLIBNET. The
UGC provided grant for one PC/AT-386
system for each of the 25 university libraries
to initiate computerisation activity in the
library through its Computer Development
Committee while allocating funds for the
purchase of computer for the universities.
INFLIBNET programme provided technical
assistance in the system configuration.
The INFLIBNET programme during last
couple of years has been providing funds
through the UGC to the university
libraries for procuring computer systems
and for networking. Tiil now about 54
university libraries have been provided
grants for this purpose. Annexure-1
contains the names of the 54 beneficiary
institutions. The grant given to a library
includes funds for computer hardware,
software, site preparation, telephone
connection, network subscriptions and
recurring
grants
for
maintenance,
retrospective data conversion and salary
of a computer operator. In addition to the
grants, iNFLlBNET provides full technical
guidance and help to the libraries in
working out their computer configuration
and software, help in subscribing to data
networks, generation of local databases
and training manpower. Various other
universities/institutions not funded for the
activity are also participating in the
programme very actively and contributing
their databases of holdings for the union
catalogue.

6. HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT
This is another important activity of the
INFLIBNET programme. Trained library staff
and computer awareness among the users
successfuI
are
important
for
its
16

implementation and therefore these have
been given the highest priority. To meet
these
needs,
INFLIBNET programme
conducts a number of training courses for
the benefit of libraries. Two persons from
each university are invited to undergo this
training (One is a library staff having no
computer background and the other person
is supposed to have some basic computer
background). The first person undergoes a
four-week training programme. In the first
week, the trainee is imparted basic
knowledge of computer. In next three
weeks both the persons are trained
together in computerisation of library
operation including use of various library
management software packages. They are
exposed
to
the
latest
information
technologies in a well equipped computer
library, followed by a visit to a computerised
library. They carry out a project work to
gain confidence
in the operational
environment. Importance i s given to
'hands-on' experience. At the end of this
training course, a person develops sufficient
expertise and confidence to initiate
computerisation in his/her library. In
addition, a short-term training course of
about 10 days duration is conducted for
senior staff members like librarians and
deputy librarians. So far, INFLIBNET has
conducted 11 four-week training courses
for working-ievel professionals and three
courses
for
the
library
executives.
Annexure-ll gives a list of institutions whose
library staff have undergone these traini:,g
programmes.
'

To provide exposure and to generate
awareness in library automation, INFLIBNET
organises a national convention every year
focusing on a particular theme in different
regions of the country. These conventions
provide a common platform to the
librarians and some organisations to interact
with each other, assess the progress made
in computerisation activities and plan for
DESlDOC Bullet/nof Inf Technol,1996.16(2)

Kumar & Arora

- Information and Library Network (INFLIBNET) Programme

the future. This convention is becoming
increasingly popular among the library
community
of
our
country. Three
conventions with specific focus on different
themes, viz., (a) computerisation and
automation of libraries, (b) networking, and
(c) library database management, have so
far been organised in 7994, 1995, and
1996 respectively.
After installation of a computer system
and associated equipment in a university
library, the INFLIBNET team visits the
university and provides on-the-site training
in the installation of UNIX-based library
management software (LMS), application of
LMS, database creation, GIST card
applications and remote access through
e-inail, online, etc.

7. FUNDING
INFLIBNET is a programme of the UGC.
Recently, the Ministry of Human Resource
Development, Government of India, has
given approval for
converting this
programme into an inter-university centre
under 12 CCC Act of the UGC. This centre
will soon be registered as an autonomous
society. Total funding for this programme
and for the proposed centre will be
provided by UGC.

8. HARDWARE/SOITWARE AT
INFLIBNET
INFLIBNFT has to play multiple roles at
its headquarters. The technical activities
include development of suitable library
management software, development of
various software interfaces, creation of
databases and development of search
mechanism, providing network facilities and
conducting training programmes. To meet
these requirements, the INFLIBNET has a
variety of computer hardware and software.
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technd, 1996,16(2)

A mini-computer with super sparc CPU
has been procured and installed for housing
the centralised union catalogue and the
databases for providing online access. A
number of PCs are available in the
laboratories. Some of these PCs have
CDdrives, a CD-Net facility and LAN have
been established for various in-house
activities. For certain operations, CCD
barcode scanner/decoder systems have
been installed. A heterogeneous computer
network has been established at the centre.
This network makes use of both UNlX and
Novell Netware software. There are three
file servers. One houses the union
catalogue (UNIX server) and the second the
CD-NET server (Novell Netware file server).
Third i s a communication server to cater to
remote connectivity to the network. They
are all connected over the etkernet bus.
For networking purposes, INFLIBNET has
subscribed to ERNET, NICNET, I-NET and
GIAS. The mini-computer has X.25 protocol
card for connecting to the X.25 leased line
of I-NET. A number of modems having
different data speeds are available for
providing connectit ity.

9. PROBLEMS ENCOUNTERED/
SURMOUKTED
One of the initial problems faced by
INFLIBNET was that differevt libraries were
using different standards and formats for
data entry work. There was no uniformity. A
national committee was set up which has
recommended a set of standard formats for
data entry work relating to serials, theses
and books.
Getting data from libraries and putting
them into a centralised database was
another problem area. Some libraries sent
data in print form and some in machine
readable form. The software and database
structure used were different in the libraries.
INFLIBNET therefore had tc develop a

Kumar & Arora

- information and Library Network (INFLiBNET) Programme

number of software interfaces for merging
the received data into the centralised
database and the data also needed proper
authentication before merging into the
database, to ensure accuracy and
completeness of essential details as far as
possible.
Direct phone connection is not available
in most of the university libraries. Getting a
new telephone connection takes a very
long time and till that time networking is
delayed. INFLIBNET has been interacting
with the Department of Electronics and the
Department of Telecommunication for
providing ERNET and I-NET connections to
the university libraries on priority.

10. FUTURE PLANS
The INFLIBNET programme will soon be
getting the status of an inter-university
centre of UGC and its activities will expand
as establishment of regional centres and
identification of Document Resource
Centres and sectoral information centres
(SICS) will be taken up. It is planned to
establish five regional centres in the
country. Each regional centre will develop a
union catalogue pertaining to the libraries

18

in its region; interact with libraries; provide
them technical help, guidance and training;
and coordinate cooperative procurement of
costly journals in its region. About 35
resource libraries will be identified in' the
Ninth Five Year Plan to act as DRCs.
Suitable grants will be provided to them, for
augmenting their photocopying facilities for
the users.
A few Sectoral lnformation Centres will
also be identified. They will be specialised
libraries belonging to univeriities or R&D
institutes in different disciplines. They will
be responsible for supplying information to
the users in their specialised fields. About
ten such SICSare planned to be established
in the Ninth Plan period.
It is hoped that by the end of the Eighth
Plan about 70-75 libraries will be covered.
However, all the libraries will have the
facility of information access and resource
sharing. At the end of Ninth Plan, it is
expected that all university libraries in the
country will be computerised and
networked and INFLIBNET will becorne
fully operational and provide the fruits of
information technology to the academic
and research community of our country.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol,1996,i 6(2)

Kumar & Arora

- InformaGon and Library Nehvork (INFLIBMfl) Programme

List of Universities Identified by UGC for Participation in INFLIBNET during
1993-94 and 1994-95
1. Dr B R Ambedkar University, Agra

28. University of Kerala

2.

University of Allahabad

29. Kurukshetra University

3. Aligarh Muslim University

30. University of Lucknow

4

Andhra University

3 1. University of Madras

5

Anna University

32. University of Manipur

6.

Annarnalai University

33. University of Mysore

7.

Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar Bihar Univ.

34. Marathwada University Library

8.

Banaras Hindu University

35. The MS University of Baroda

9.

University of Bombay

36. Nagpur University

10. The University of Burdwan

3 7. North-Eastern Hill University

11. bniversity of Calcutta

38. Osmania University

12 University of Delhi

39. Patna University

13. Doctor Harsingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya

40. University of Poona

14. Cuwahati University

41. Pondicherry University

15. University of Gorakhpur

42. Pt. Ravishankar Shukla Univ.

16. Gujarai University

43. Punjab University

7 7. Culbarga University

44. Ranchi University

18. Himachal Pradesh University

45. University of Rajasthan

19. University of Hyderabad

46. University of Roorkee

20. jadavpur University

47. Rani Durgavati Vishwavidyalaya

2 1. Jai Narayan Vyas University

48. Sardar Pate1 University

22. jamia Millia lslamia

49. SNDT Women's University

23. University of Jamrnu

50. Sri Venkateswara University

24. jawaharlal Nehru University

51. T M Bhagalpur University

25. University of Kalyani

52. Utkal University

26. University of Kashmir

53. Vikrarn University

27. Karnatak University

54. Visva Bharati, Shantiniketan

DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1996.16(2)

19

Kumar & Arora - Information and Library Network (INFLIBNET) Programme

List of Universities/institutions with Manpower Trained at JNFLJBNET
Programme
A. Working Level Professionals

29. Tamil University, Thanjavur

1.

Kakatiya University, Warangal

30. Pt. Ravishankar University, Raipur

2.

Gulbarga University, Gulbarga

31. Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad

3.

University of Roorkee, Roorkee

32. Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh

4.

University of Kalyani, Kalyani

33. Cochin University of Science & Technology

5.

Mother Teresa Women's University, Madras

34. Gurunanak Dev University, Amritsar

6.

SNDT Women's University, Bombay

35. lndian lnstitute of Science, Bangalore

7.

Coa University, Goa

8.

Marathwada University, Aurangabad

9.

North Eastern Hill University, Shillong

10. Sri Venkateswara University, Tirupati
1 1. Gujarat University, Ahmedabad
12. L.D. College of Engineering, Ahmedabad
13. Shivaji University, Kolhapur
14. Pondicherry University, Pondicherry
15. Patna University, Patna
16. Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra

36. Manipur University, lmphal
37. Nagarjuna University, Cuntur
38. North Bengal University, West Bengal
39. Dharmsing Desai lnstitute of Tech., Nadiad
40. Annamalai University, Annamalai Nagar
41. Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh
42. Madurai Kamaraj University, Madurai
43. Jadavpur University, Calcutta
44. Jamia Millia lslamia University, Delhi
45. lndian lnstitute of Technology, Kharagpur
46. Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirapalii

17. Jawaharlal Nehru Tech. Univ. Hyderabad
47. Sri Jagannath Sanskrit Vishwavidyalaya, Puri
18. Punjabi University, Patiala
48. Birla lnstitute of Technology, Mesra
19. University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad
49. Anna University, Madras
20. GB Pant Univ. of Agrl. &Tech., Pantnagar
21. Space Applications Centre, Ahmedabad
22. Andhra University, Visakhapatnam
23. Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi
24. University of Bombay, Bombay
25. University of Madras, Madras
26. Karnatak University, Dharwad
27. Osmania University, Hyderabad
28. University of Poona, Pune

20

50. Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi

51. Amravati University, Amravati
52. Allahabad University, Allahabad
53. Mysore University, Mysore

54. University of Lucknow, Lucknow
55. Alagappa University, Karaikudi
56. Bharathiar University, Coirnbatore
57. Avinashilingam lnstitute for Home Science
& Higher Education for Women, Coimbatore
DESlOOC Bulletln of lnf Technol,1W6.16(2)

Kumar & Arora - Information and Library Network (INFLIBNET) Programme
58. Sri Krishnadevaraya University, Anantpur

59. Banasthali Vidyapeeth, Rajastban
60. Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad
61. Calcutta University, Calcutta

62. Guwahati University, Guwahati
63. University of Jammu, jammu
64. Jai Narayan Vyas University, jodhpur

65. Maharshi Dayanand Saraswati University,
Ajmer
66. University of Rajasthan, Jaipur
67. Sardar Patel University, Vallabh Vidyanagar

87. Karnataka Regional Engineering,
Srinivasnagar
88. Regional Engineering College, Warangal
89. International Instt. for Population Sci.,
Bombay
90 Tezpur University, Tezpur

91. Nagpur University, Nagpur
92. Mangalore University, Mangalagangothri
93. The University of Kashrnir, J & K
94. University of Kalyani, Kalyani

95. Himachal Pradesh University, Shimla

68. Visva Bharati, Shantiniketan

96. Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya,
Sagar

69. Consumer Education and Research,
Ahmedabad

97. Central Instt. of Engg. & Foreign Languages,
Hyderabad

70. Bhavnagar University, Bhavnagar

98. Mepco Schlenk Engg. College, Sivakasi

71. Kannada University, Hampi

99. The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda

72. University of Kerala, Thiruvananthapuram

100.University Grants Commission, Delhi

73. Tata lnstitute of Social Sciences, Bombay

101.Gujarat University, Ahmedabad

74. Saurashtra University, Rajkot

B. Library Executives (LibmPians/Dy. Librarians)

75. Regional Engineering College, Srinagar, j&K

1 . Anna University, Madras

76. S. V. Regional College of Engg. & Tech., Surat

2. Annamalai University, Annamalainagar

77. Govt. of Higher Education, Govt. of U.P.

3.

Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi

78. Regional Engineering College, Tiruchirapalli

4.

Goa University, Goa

79. lnstitute of Plasma Research (IPR),
Gandhinagar

5. Gujarat University, Ahmedabad

80. Survey Training Institute, Gandhinagar,
Ahmedabad
81. Gurukul Kangri Vishwavidyalaya, Hardwar
82. Kuvempu University, Karnataka

83. Rani Durgavati Vishwavidyalaya, Jabalpur
84. Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra

85. Governor Secretariat, Lucknow
86. Sardar Vallabhbhai Regional College of Engg.
& Technology, Surat
D E S I&lkffn
~
of lnf Technd. 1996,16(2)

6. Gujarat Vidyapith, Ahmedabad
7. Gulbarga University, Gulbarga
8.

University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad

9. Indian lnstitute of Technology, Kharagpur

10. Jadavpur University, Calcutta
11. University of Jamrnu, jarnmu

12. Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
13. Karnatak University, Dharwad

14. Manipur University, Irnphal
21

.

Kumar & Arora

- information and Library Network (INFLIBNET) Programme

15. North Bengal University, Darjeeling

36 Guwahati University, Guwahati

16. Osmania University, Hyderabad

37. Himachal Pradesh University, Shimla

17. Pondicherry University, Pondicherry

38. Jai Narayan Vyas University, Jodhpur

18. Rani Durgavati Viswavidyalaya, Jabalpur

39. Karnatak University, Dharwad

19. Vikram University, Ujjain
20. Sardar Patel University, Vallabh Vidyanagar

40. University of Kerala, Thiruvananthapuram
41. Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra

21. University of Roorkee, Roorkee
42. Madurai Kamaraj University, Madurai

22. Ranchi University, Ranchi
23. North-eastern Hill University, Shillong
24. Kashmir University, Kashmir

43. Nagarjuna University, Guntur
44. Punjab University, Chandigarh

25. Calcutta University, Calcutta

45. Pt. Ravishankar Shukla University, Raipur

26. The University of Burdwan, Burdwan

46. University of Poona, Poona

27. A n d h a University, Visakhapatnam

47. Saurashtra University, Rajkot

28. Mohanlal Eukhadia University, Udaipur

48. Sri Venkateswara University Library, Tirupati

29. Kakatiya University, Warangal

49 Tamil University, Thanjavur

30. Mangalore University, Mangalagangothri

50. Gujarat University, Ahmedabad

3 1. Lucknow University, Lucknow

5 1. Mysore University, Mysore

32 Kuvempu University, Shimoga District,
Karnataka.

52. Rajasthan University, Jaipur

33. University of Calicut, Kerala

53. Punjabi University Library, Patiala

34. Bhavnagar University, Bhavnagar

54. Gulbarga University Library, Gulbarga

35. Devi Ahilya Vishwa Vidyalaya, lndore

55. Jawaharlal Nehru Technological, Hyderabad

22

DESlDOC &Ilet/n of Inf Technol,IW6.16(2)

