 
  
   
 
  
   
  
   
   
   
   
 
   
  
  
  
 
    
    
   
  

described.

ODUCTION

'internet connects thousands of
and computer networks worldwide.
a relatively easy way to communicate
j' . ge information. However, as the
 continually increasing both in size
plexity, it is becoming more difﬁcult to
'Internet’s resources. As a result, a
fsoftware tools have been developed
users to navigate the Internet and its vast
formation. Librarians and information
‘als use the Internet for various
. _ a reference tool, the Internet offers
'of resources, up-to-date, accurate, and
e in any bound volume.

- Internet gives direct access to specialists
I of disciplines, who are quite willing
'th both the most mundane and the
i cult problems faced by librarians and
us. As a communications device, the
allows librarians to send messages and
“Is to each other without being
 by mail, telegraph, or fax. Different
- been developed over the years for

 

Scientiﬁc Officer

_ Centre for Science Information
limm of Science

- 560 012
raiaOncsr‘stcemetinJ

' of information Tedtnology, Vol. 16, No. 3, May 1996, pp. 11-20

Internet Services : An Introduction
TB Raiashekar"

ABSTRACT
This article provides information on the various segments of Internet, and

also on how to go about various protocols needed for acquiring information
from this vast ’networks of networks’. A sample browsing session is also

accessing the variety of resources on the

Internet. These.include basic tools like e-mail,
telnet and ftp and also the advanced
navigational tools like archie, gopher, Wide Area
Information Servers (WAIS), and the World

Wide Web (W). The following provides a

brief description of each tool. Other Internet
resources such as discussion lists, online library
catalogues, and electronic journals are also
described.

2. INTERNET ACCESS TOOLS

2.1 Electronic Mail (e-mail)

Email is the oldest method of
communication on Internet. Using e—mail, one
can send messages (or even ﬁles) to anyone on
the Internet. In order to send e-mail to a person,
you need his/her email address. Internet e-mail
addresses are of the form: userﬂhostdomain.
The ’hosLdomain’ unambiguously identiﬁes a
host.

Example : raia®ncsi.iisc.emetin. where ’raja’
is the user name, ’ncsi’ is the host name and
’iiscernetin’ is the domain.

Other example: garﬁeldﬂauroracismpenn
edu, amohindruﬂcascrg. Here, ’in’, ’edu' and
’org’ are top level domain names indicating
’India’, ’educational institution' in USA and

 

1 Salem oflnfTechnoi. 1996. 16(3)

  

Raiashekhar — Internet Services : An introduction

‘organisation' in USA, respectively. Following are

some more top level domain names :
com - Commercial sites in USA

gov - US Government sites

net - Network administrative organisations

mil - US military sit’es
fr - France

au - Australia

uk - United Kingdom

Different e-mail interface programs exist for
sending and reading mails. These include ’mail’,
‘mailx', 'pine’, ’elm’ for Unix computers, and

'eudora’, ’pcpine‘, 'ccmail’ for Windows.

In addition to personal-messages, e-mail has
been used for operation of discussion forums
(listservs or mail servers), electronic newsletters,
electronic journals and e-mail based information

servers. PACS-L (Public Access Computer Stan_upthe Telnet program

Systems List) operated at University of Houston, ‘ 7
USA (to subscribe send e-mail message G'Ve the “ith Pr°3f3m 3" ad
’subscribe pacs~l your name' to fonned to: Mal“? a "0‘9 Of
Iistserv©uhupvm1.uh.edu) and LlS-FORUM escape Charade" '5

(e-mail forum for L & | services in Asia) operated
at NCSI, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
(to subscribe send e-mail message ’subscribe
listservﬂncsiiisc.
ernetjn) are two examples of discussion forums

lis-forum your name’ to

'II

  
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 

that you have accessed. You can tel -'
huge databases to do research, or even
into libraries around the world to check’ '
have a certain book that you are looki
Telnet also offers easy entry into the w,
gophers and the World Wide Web (d'
below) for those people who may not 0
have access to these tools. Telnet a
look something like this:

a) domain name: melvyl.ucop.edu
IP address : 192.35.222.222 (Un' “‘59
California library catalogue)

b) domain name : locis.loc.gov
IP address 140.147.2543 (Li if-
Congress)

It may be seen that Telnet addresses mi: .
in domain name format or in IP addres
There are seven steps to a successful
session :

Log into the remote computer
'terminal emulation’

Play around on the remote computer 1

Quit

in library and information science. PACS-Forum
and PACS-Review are similar examples in this
area fur electronic newsletters and journals,
managed by the same group in University of
Houston that operates PACS-L list. Examples of
e—mail based info/ database servers include
cancernet©icicb.ncsi. nih.gov (operated by the
National Cancer Institute, USA) which provide
email users with search and retrieve facility. An
e-mail 'help’ message to these addresses will
provide more details for accessing these servers.
E-mail gateways also exist for providing Ftp,

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 

A sample session showing access 
Melvyl library catalogue is shown in Ann 

2.3 File Transfer through File
Transfer Protocol (Ftp)

As the name suggests, ftp is a tool to
files from a remote computer on lnte
your computer and vice versa. What t
ﬁles are available through ftp? These ‘
computer software, games, documents '
etc. One can also ﬁnd files containing

Gopher and WW access through e-mail.
2.2 Telnet

Telnet is a utility which will allow you to log
on to another system and use various services
the t0
commands that you type on our keyboard are
sent from your terminal to the remote computer

available on that host. With telnet,

about the Internet itself.

The basic steps in a ftp Session are: r

 

Start-up y0ur ftp client programme

Give your ftp client an address to "‘ET'

Identify yourself to the remote site

 

12

 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
     
  
   
    
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
 
   

' ‘ remote site your password
v und the directory for files
directories

transfer mode

ﬁle(s) you want

 ftp session is shown in Annexure 2.
bus ftp

made it possible to set up publicly
archives on Internet with all kinds of
and software, true to the spirit of
through what are known as
it's ftp sites. Most of the academic
‘ ake available material, which they
'I be of interest to others, on their
The material is held online on the
and can be accessed by anybody
ernet connection. Ftp access is
to everyone under the user name

Anonymous ftp has thus become
with accessing, browsing and
material from these sites.

its ftp servers on the Internet. Archie
ntain an index of directory listings of
‘nymous ftp servers and the index
rched using archie client programs.

list of Internet addresses of ftp sites
the sub-directories where the ﬁle is
These ﬁles can then be downloaded
. Archie servers access all the known
' from time to time and get the listing
d directories to maintain the indexes.

far is a c0mputerised agent working
lntemet to bring all sorts of useful faCts
pser’s desktop. It was started at the
of Minnesota as a way to deliver
on online. The inventors of gopher
everyday users to be able to find text
y and display them on their deskt0p
, without having to know the entire

osaooc Buieﬂn of mi Technol. 1   . ‘

 

Raiashekhar - internet Services : An Introduction

process of connecting and disconnecting to
other computers. The gopher universe includes
over 1100 servers around the world, each with
a collection of menus and documents.

Gopher divides the digital world into clients
and sewers. A ’client' may be any sort of
computer-a PC, a Macintosh, a workstation, or
a UNIX box. Gopher’s client software runs on
your desktop computer. Local Area Networks
(LANs) and the Internet connect the desktop
computers with gopher ’servers’. The client
software determines how a ﬁle will look on the
screen. Electronic bookmarks can be created to
help users keep their place in menus or
doouments; documents can be saved and
printed as required.

Gopher works in a world of ﬁles and menus.
When a user connects to a gopher server, a set
of messages tells the server what the user wants
to view. For example, the user may see a menu
with several sub menus. The server reads the
message from the user’s computer, sends the
information about the menu and sub menus,
and disconnects. The user can open up a menu
and see that document of interest. To scan the
document, the user re—opens the connection to
read or print the document. At present, these
documents are usually simple text ﬁles with0ut
special components, so they are easy to
maintain and retrieve. The next version, the
gopher + software, will handle other formats
also. Gopher is a tool for browsers, and it can
work in the background while your computer
does other work. Gopher servers around the
world handle millions of questions a week due
to simple design.

There is a wide variety of gopher
documents, and there are descriptions for each
kind of document. These descriptions point to
information that might be stored on the hard
disk of a machine right around the corner, or a
machine halfway around the world. Gopher
might be used to access a database of
telephone numbers or to download ﬁles
archived in a variety of formats. Gopher handles
all of the network details, so a user can go from
the Library of Congress catalogue to an online
thesaurus to a weather report with a few clicks
of a button. Sample gopher menus from the

 

mun of in! Tochnoi. 1996. “(3)

  
  
  
   
  
   
   
  
 
   
   
   
 
   
  
 
    
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
  
   
 
  

 e remote site your password
 ,und the directory for ﬁles
"- directories

transfer mode

-- ﬁle(s) you want

1.‘ ftp session is shown in Annexure 2.
nus ftp

made it possible to set up publicly
' archives on Internet with all kinds of
and software, true to the spirit of
through what are known as
ftp sites. Most of the academic
inake available material, which they
the of interest to others, on their
e material is held online on the
and can be accessed by anybody
nternet comection. Ftp access is
to everyone under the user name
using the e-mail address as the
Anonymous ftp has thus become
with accessing, browsing and
, material from these sites.

. hie

system enables locating ﬁles on the
wt ftp servers on the Internet. Archie
ntain an index of directory listings of
onymous ftp servers and the index
hed using archie client programs.
search for a particular ﬁle or program
w of Internet addresses of ftp sites
.I the sub-directories where the ﬁle is

These ﬁles can then be downloaded
Archie sewers access all the known
from time to time and get the listing
- directories to maintain the indexes.

n.

#418

stiller

er is a computerised agent working
internet to bring all sorts of useful facts
r’s desktop. It was started at the
of Minnesota as a way to deliver
.n online. The inventors of gopher
ereryday users to be able to ﬁnd text
and display them on their desktop
, without having to know the entire

13

Raiashekhar — Internet Services :An Introducdon

process of connecting and disconnecting to
other computers. The gopher universe includes
over 1100 servers around the world, each with
a collection of menus and documents.

Gopher divides the digital world into clients
and servers. A ‘client’ may be any sort of
computer—a PC, a Macintosh, a workstation, or
a UNIX box. Gopher's client software runs on
your desktop computer. Local Area Networks
(LANs) and the Internet connect the desktop
computers with gopher ‘servers’. The client
software determines how a ﬁle will look on the
screen. Electronic bookmarks can be created to
help users keep their place in menus or
documents; documents can be saved and
printed as required.

Gopher works in a world of ﬁles and menus.
When a user connects to a gopher server, a set
of messages tells the server what the user wants
to view. For example, the user may see a menu
with several sub menus. The server reads the
message from the user’s computer, sends the
information about the menu and sub menus,
and disconnects. The user can open up a menu
and see that document of interest. To scan the
document, the user re—opens the connection to
read or print the document. At present, these
documents are usually simple text ﬁles without
special components, so they are easy to
maintain and retrieve. The next version, the
gopher + software, will handle other formats
also. Gopher is a tool for browsers, and it can
work in the background while your computer
does other work. Gopher servers around the
world handle millions of questions a week due
to simple design.

There is a wide variety of gopher
documents, and there are descriptions for each
kind of document. These descriptions point to
information that might be stored on the hard
disk of a machine right around the corner, or a
machine halfway around the world. Gopher
might be used to access a database of
telephone numbers or to download ﬁles
archived in a variety of formats. Gopher handles
all of the network details, so a user can go from
the Library of Congress catalogue to an online
thesaurus to a weather report with a few clicks
of a button. Sample gopher menus from the

 

Bu'Bﬂn ofinf Technol. 1 996. “(3)

 
 

Raiashekhar _ internet Services : An introduction

University of Michigan gopher server are given

in Annexure 3.

Finding sources like these in gopher can be
very difﬁcult because of its menu and sub menu
Nevada created
’veronica’ to address this problem. Veronica
stands for 'Very Easy Rodent Online Network
Information by Computer Access’. Veronica is a
keyword index to all the menu titles, sub menu
titles, and document titles in gopher, and it is
updated monthly. It can be searched via gopher

structure. Researchers in

menu selection.

Besides reference works, gopher also offers
access to electronic texts, thus providing digital
access, say to the complete works of ’Lewis
Carol’. For example, in the 'Electronic Books'
sub menu of the University of Minnesota
lnternet gopher, there are books by Thomas

Hardy, Herman Melville, and Willa Cather.
2.6 WAIS

WAIS, or Wide Area Information Servers,
allows users to search indexed text on a number
of servers. WAIS servers are identified by using
a directory. There are some 340 WAIS servers
providing access to some 200 databases. One
or two databases are added to WAIS each day
from around the world; there are servers in at
least eight countries, and users in over 25

different countries.

With WAIS, one uses a computer to search on the
in natural language among all the servers and
indexed documents. The computer returns a list
that sets out the relevancy of each hit in against
the user’s search terms. The relevancy is based
on the difference between the keywords given
by the user and the frequency of their
The
search query can be repeated to different
servers. News, science, and literature are the
strengths of WAIS. Indexed files may fill only
ten megabytes on a personal computer or
include hundreds of megabytes and reside on a
parallel super computer. WAIS is less effective
with very specific questions, or with questions
on topics not yet covered by any server. WAIS
is different from gopher in that it connects the
user directly with indexed documents, and in
that its directory of servers gives you some idea

appearance in an indexed document.

I3

  
   
  
   
    
      
 

of the kind of resources available to,
advance.

2.7 The World Wide Web

The World Wide Web, referred to as)":-
or simply the Web, is a client-servers.
distributed hypertext multimedia in a-‘ji‘e'
system on the Internet. It was nil};
developed at the European Particle *9:
Laboratory (CERN), Geneva. It has now ri=~
the most popular navigation tool 5:"
Internet. The National
Supercomputing

CERN work by developing a graphical I
the Web named Mosaic for Unix X-W
platform, which was later made 
MS-Windows also. Now a number or
clients are available for different 

HTTP (hypertext transfer protocol
transferring documents from Web se 
Web clients. ‘

The Web servers maintain informativ -
Web pages, which are simple ASCII -_.'_
the text marked-up with HTML ( 3;;-
Mark-up Language) tags. HTML has 
providing references to other Web 
can be on the same server or any othen‘.’
Internet. Web pages can 7
references to images (in GIF and JPEG l'
audio files (AU format) and video ﬁles (in:
format) which gives multimedia dimen’
the information provided on the W,
clients access the Web pages on the 
render and format them according to the:
tags for display on the client’s system. if:
user selects a hypertext link (indicated {9'
underscore or an icon) on the Web pal 
can follow the link and fetch the “‘7‘”

USing a standard format for locating im'__
on the Internet. The format ,1»,

 

Id

  
   
    
  
   
 
 
   

"n of the resource preceded by the

" ..sura.net
[lgOphenmicrosochom
.byte.c0m

e web browsers provide facilities like
ng the history of the hyper links across
bookmarking the URLs of information
or later reference, saving the web page,
a a string within the displayed web
nfiguring the Web browser for playing
ia document objects, etc.

images of a session with the NCSTRL

science technical report server
.ncstrl.org) using the Netscape
:5 shown in ﬁgures 1 to B at the end of

 
   
  
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
   
  
   
  
 
    
   
  
  
   

yTERNET RESOURCES

inline Library Catalogues

" her menu offers access to libraries
. catalogues in different countries.
prevides prompts that permit a user to
library catalogue.

rt'ternet gives access to the bibliographic
of millions of books, and details on the
of academic and research libraries
the world. With these resources, a
can verify bibliographic information,
obscure title or paper for a user,
“ct bibliographies, and compare subjects
n of libraries in different countries.
also check on new titles, and even
em from a number of university presses.
North America makes available a
: e of books in print, and the inventories
bookstores are also available online.

' 1, iscussion Lists

are hundreds of electronic discussion
conference proceedings available over
met. They give users direct access to
in disciplines as different as folklore,
n, medieval history, climatology, and
I Ics. More than 100 discussion lists are

ossrooc Bulletin onnr Technol. 1 r '

 

Raiashekhar — lnternet Services : An introduction

available specifically for librarians. The Special
Library Association, the American Library
Association, and other organisations support
electronic conferences devoted to topics as
diverse as rare books, maps, difﬁcult reference
questions, and conservation. It would be
impossible to subscribe to all discussion lists. A
recent survey indicated that special librarians on
an average subscribe to a little more than three
discussion lists per person.

Discussion lists give users an opportunity to
ask or offer help. Librarians can post
complicated referenca questions to listservs and
have access to the expertise of librarians located
in institutions across the United States, Europe,
Central and South America, and Australia. A
reply may appear in minutes. In the discussion
related to e-mail in section 2.1 above, we
referred to two discussion lists PACS—L and
LlS-FORUM.

3.3 Electronic Journals and
Newsletters

There are hundreds of electronic journals
and newsletters on the Internet. They cover
such diverse topics as beans, ancient Greece,
astronomy, tourism, medicine, and philosophy.
These journals are like their printed counterparts
in that they appear on a regular schedule, have
a team of editors and reviewers, and focus on a
speciﬁc topic. Many also publish original
research. Some electronic journals appear in
both paper and electronic editions, including
the biweekly newspaper The Scientist and the
journal Postmodern Culture. Only six electronic
journals charge a subscription, although printed
editions of many journals carry a fee while their
electronic counterparts do not. Traditional
newspapers are becoming available in certain
networks but they are not yet accessible on the
larger Internet. For instance, the National
Capital Freenet in Ottawa, Canada, makes The
Ottawa Citizen available electronically, and the
Cleveland Freenet provides USA Today. The
Mercury-News from San Jose, California and
other newspapers can also be found on
America Online.

For librarians, electronic journals such as
Public-Access Computer Systems Review (which
grew out of a discussion list) and Current Cites

 

  

Elem oflnr Technol. 1996. 16(3)

Raiashekhar ._ Internet Services :An introduction

give the latest information on the use of

technology in libraries.

4. CONCLUSION

The Internet offers possibilities for interactiOn

15

 
 
 
 

surprising that the Internet is being em
librarians around the world.

5. REFERENCES

This paper has been prepared lar
material available Over the Intern

not available through any other technology. A
librarian can take advantage of materials that
may be physically located thousands of
kilometres away. It can decrease demands of
distance and time, and bring together
intellectual and physical resources. It is not

 

_t.... -

 

‘ Elle Edlt View s ﬁookmarks thions

t

   
 

 

from the distribiuad collection.

 

Fig. 1 N03 THL — Portion of Opening Screen (http://www .ncstrl.org)

g Netscape—rNetworkéibiiiiiiiiléflinens[animal‘iiéimisiiiséarvj' ‘  ' to:
nlrectory

 

  
 

 Technical Reports Library

wcsrg {pronounced ’bncestral ‘9 is an international collection of
computer science technical reportsme Csdepartmertts and industrial and government 1
research laboratories. The NCSI‘RL collection is distributed wrung a set of interoperaiing -' ‘
server: operated by ,wrrtrcipptigg institutions. You may search for and access documents

Search the NCSTRL collection

0 The. Fit-tried Search Form allovirs you to perform a search on several ﬁelds of the
bibliognmlnc data, and/or to limit the search to speciﬁc institutions,

    
 
 

course material on ’lnternet for In ,
Professionals (lFlPl’, prepared by N.

workshop on the same topic conduct
July and September, 1995.

 

     
   
  
    
   
 

   
 

 

l6

 

Rajashekhar -— lnternet Scrvices : An introduction

 ' ‘ r.  i7 Netscape  
 It: Edit Miew .60 Bookmark thlons Directory
‘7 a» "  ’  ~ '  ' ’

     

   

 
 
    

 

   
 

i Fielded Search or the Collection

Bibliographic keywords: ((9 AND keyword ﬁelds 0 OR. keyword fields)

Author:

lsairan l
' Title

[text retrieval 1

Abstract

I j
Select one or more organizations ﬁ‘om this list:

‘ Auburn University

. Boston University

Caltech Computer Science

Carnegle Mellon

ct-ilcago Journal of Theoretical Computer Science
Comeil

5 or E search all organizations

 

 

 

 

g; .,,-.,. .—

   
 
   

Searcti fields:
organization = all
Bibliogaphic keywords ("and"ed together):

I 0 author = sailor!
0 title = text removal

Search Summary:

0 ('7lgi'vmcff

 

 

0 figurine!
0 (USU'Ni’oi Bu (do
Heal 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Organizatith you selected are listed below by mnber oftitics found.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 3 — NCSTHI. - Search Result Screens

 

 

 

Bulletin of Inf Technol. I996. 16(3)

Rajashekhar — Internet Services : An introduction

    
   
   
  
   
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
  

530 Bookmarks ,thions

Gerard Salton, James Allen and Chris Buckley
"111924286
June 1992

‘ collection browsing and information retrieval.

 

Automatic Structuring and Retrieval of Large Text Files ~—

3 In many operational environments. large text files must be processed severing n wide variety
I ofdlﬂ'erent topic areas. Aids must then be provided to the user that permit collection
browsing and make it possible to locate particular items on demand. The conventional text

f analysis methods based on preconstructcd imowledgvbues and other vocabulary-control

. tools are difficult to apply when the subject coverage is unrestricted. An aitcmativc

j: approach. applicable to text collections in any subject area, is introduced which uses the

2 docutltenl collections dicmstlvcs as a basis for the text analysis. together with sophisticated

: text matching operations carried out at several levels ofdetail. Methods nrc described for

2 relating semantically similar pieces oftcxt. and for using the resulting hypertext structures for

l7

 

 

 

 

in

 

 

 

 

 

T5im—wfﬁﬁuﬁﬁliﬁiiﬁiéiié"si‘ni'é'iiiliﬁiland Retrieval gr I. .ag'iaiiiiggrf‘test"  I

   

 

 

Help

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

121 Overview of thumbnail pages
El Structural overview

 

I Print or download all or selected Egg. es.

   
   
 
     
    

0 Display an overview oftbc document in one of the following formats.

0 DiSplay a selected page in one of the following formats (documctll has 58 pages).

 

0 Display the whale doctunent in one ofthe following funnels.

D OCR text (produced by OCR, may have errors) 87323 bytes.

 

 

 

i».

 

 
   

Fig. 5 —NCSTFIL - Document View 0pm

 

 

 

18

   
     
   
 
  
   
   
   
  
   
  
  
  
   
   
  
   
  
   
   
 
 

_7 RN for the MELWL System:-

f'e' to the University of California's MELWL‘
SYSTEM

f books for UC and California State Library
1 of periodicals titles for UC and academic
of California

‘ article information, abstracts, and text in
‘Iiject areas

access to databases and systems across the

egistered trademark of The Regents of the
of California.

U Databases and Systems

ELVYL Ten-Year Catalog—books, music,
iovisuals, etc.)

LWL Full Catalog—books, music, maps,
als, etc.)

General—book catalogues and article

(Biomedical databases)

urnanities)

Vusiness), SCI: (Science/Engineering), GOV:
ment/Legal), SOC (Social Sciences),
:(Alphabetical list of all databases and
l, and DBTYPE: (Databases and systems
.ine}

the name of the database or system you
, the name. Otherwise, select an option 1
L-llst. Type HELP for assistance.

being issued: START TEN
to the MELVYL TEN-YEAR Catalog

niversity of Califomia libraries, and the
t -- State Library

DESIDOC Bulletin ollnfl'echnob 

 

Raiashekhar - lnternet Services : An introduction

Annexure -i

Searching the Melvyl Library Catalogue Database

OPTIONS: Type an option and press RETURN, or
type any command.
HELP - For help in getting started.
E GUIDE ~ For a brief guide to using the Ten-Year
database.
START - To start over or change databases.
END - To end your session.
TEN=>heIp
You can use the TEN-YEAR database with two basic
commands:
FIND [index] [search words]: to begin a search
DISPLAY: to display the results of a search.
For example: FIND SUBJECT JOB STRESS
For more information, type EXPLAIN FIND or
EXPLAIN DISPLAY.
For a list of indexes in the TEN-YEAR database, type
EXPLAIN INDEXES.
For a list of commands in the TEN-YEAR database,
type EXPLAIN COMMANDS.

OPTIONS: Type an option and press RETURN.
EXP TEN - For an explanation of database

a database for searching: press RETURN contents.
getting started: type _HELP and press EXP GUIDE - For a guide to searching the
database.

START - To start over or change databases.

END - To end your session.
Or type any command.
TEN=ﬁnd subject neuroscience
Search request: FIND SUBJECT NEUROSCIENCE
Search result: 81 records in the TEN-YEAR Catalog
.l database '
Type D to display results, or type HELP.

TEN=sd

Search request: FIND SUBlECT NEUROSCIENCE
Search result: 81 records in the TEN-YEAR Catalog
database

Type HELP for other display options.

. DISSERTATION
Aboitiz, Francisco Dominguez.
Quantitative morphology and histology of the
human corpus callosum and its relation to brain
lateralisation/by Francisco Dominguez Aboitiz.

- 1991.
As of 2/20/95, approximately 1,63 7,652 UCLA Biomed W4C A154q I991
.. nting 3,497,100 holdings for materials Ten=send

 

 'amorin orinrrechnoi. 1996. 16(3)

Raiashekhar — internet Services : An introduction

A Sample Ftp Session

Here is a sample anonymous ftp session in which a
file called library guide is retrieved from
samba.oit.unc.edu Commands typed by the user are
shown in bold italics.

S ftp samba.oir.unc.edu

Connected to samba.oit.unc.edu.

220 samba.oit.unc.edu Ftp server (Ultrix Version
4.36 Thu Dec 29 22:53:11 EST 1992) ready.

Name (samba.oit.unc.edu:pjones): anonymous

331 Guest login ok, send your email address as
password.

Password:type your e-mail address here—it will be
hidden

230 Guest login ok, access restrictions apply.

ftp is

200 PORT command successful.

150 Opening data connection for /bin/ls
(1 23109.1 5170,4260) (0 bytes).

bin

pub

uploads

226 Transfer complete.

36 bytes received in 0.23 seconds (0.15 Kbytes/s)
ftp cd pub

250 CWD command successful.

ftp Is

200 PORT command successful.

University of Michigan Gopher

URL : //g0pher.umich.edu
Gopher Menu
About GopherBLUE
Information Technology Policies and Guidelines
Job Postings
Phone Book (X500)
News and Weather
Library Resources (ULibrary)
Computing on Campus
U of Michigan and Ann Arbor
Software Archives
Internet Resources
Other Gopher Servers
Gopher Menu
About Using the ULibrary Gopher
Contents of the ULibrary Gopher
About University Michigan Libraries and
Information Resources
News Services and Government Information

19

An  .

   

150 Opening data connection for . 
(128.109.157.70,4261) (0 bytes). '
docs

msdos

unix

vms

226 Transfer complete.

103 bytes received in 0.21 seconds (0.48 
ftp co‘ docs 
250 CWD command successful. '
ftp is r
200 PORT command successful. 7
150 Opening data connection for,"J
(128.109.157.70,4262) (0 bytes). I
hitchhiker

libraryguide

other.anonymice

tcpipintro

226 Transfer complete. A
188 bytes received in 0.1 1 seconds (1.64 
ftp gel librarjaguide V ‘
200 PORT command successful. .
150 Opening data connection for lib. "
(128.109.157.70.4263) (4517.2 bytes).
226 Transfer complete.

local: librarygur'de remote: libraryguide
46571 bytes received in 0.66 seconds:
Kbytes/sj ' 
ftp quit

Dissertations and Other Indexes

General Reference Resources

Humanities Resources

Science Resources

Social Sciences Resources "

Library Catalogues ‘

University Michigan Campus info; 

(GopherBLUE)

Other Gophers and Veronica

What’s New and Featured Resources
Gopher Menu

Search Phone Book

About Phone Book ' ,

Add Your Electronic Mail Address

View and Change Your X500 Entry

Finger Services at the University'of Mic

X.500 Gateway (search other places)

Phone Books at Other Institutions

More Information on X500

In.

 

20

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf TechnOli‘T:

 

