DESiDOC Bulletin of information Technology, Vol. 16, No. 4, luiy 1996, pp. 3-8
0 1996, DESIDOC

Expert Systems and their Application in Library and
lnformation Science
Yogendra P Dubey*
Abstract
The article explains the concept of expert systems and how they function.
The components of an expert system: the knowledge base, the inference
engine, user interface and the knowledge acquistion module are explained.
The various activities in the LIS field where such systems can be put to use
are also discussed.

Expert Systems have evolved from a long
tradition of Artificial Intelligence (Al) research.
Almost all types of organisations have
recognised the enormous potential of expert
systems which have forced the frontier of
knowledge forward at a rapid pace. Expert
systems are no longer confined to the research
laboratory. Although, still in an evolutionary
stage, these have added a new dimension to
information processing. Having achieved
remarkable success in both industry and
commerce, expert systems are now denuding
the frontiers of library and information systems.
There is a significant surge in activities on
assessing and debating the likely impact of
expert systems on library and information
profession.
Artificial lntelligence technology introduces
a new paradigm for dealing with knowledge

and reasoning process in human experts. This
new paradigm emerged from the research
* Professor Yogendra P Dubey
Professor (Computer Application)
Department of Library and lnformation Science
Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi-221005
-

efforts of Newell and Simon I , who together
had designed 'Logic Theorist', a programme
that could prove the validity of theorems in
Russell and Whitehead's Principia Mathematica.~
There was however, no intelligence in Logic
Theorist; it worked on brute force trying every
possible connection of symbols until something
worked, but in one case the system discovered
a more elegant proof than the one set forth by
Ruseell and Whitehead. Logic Theorist laid the
foundation for Newell and Simon's next project,
the General Problem Solver (GPS), which they
began in 1957..
The idea behind the GPS project was to
build a machine incorporating problem solving
techniques that could be applied to a broad
range of problems. In the process of developing
the GPS model, Newell and Simon investigated
the information processing behaviour of human
subjects. They discovered that people use
domain specific knowledge as a basis for
solving significant problem; and that the
knowledge incorporates a large amount of
fragmentary,
judgmental,
and
heuristic
knowledge. People reason with this knowledge
forward and backwards at the same time,
keeping track of the current status of the
problem
while
simultaneously
thinking

--

DESDOC Bulletin of Inf Technd, 1996.16(4)

3

Dubey r Expert Systems and their Application in Library and Information Science

backwards from the goal they are trying to
reach. This technique used by Newell and
Simon for learning the way people reason is
used today by knowledge engineers to create
expert systems to solve complex problems.
By 1965, work in Artificial Intelligence had
progressed to the point at which Edward A
Feigenboum and Joshua Ledenberg, both from
Stanford University, could join forces to develop
a system for determining the structure of an
organic molecule based on the input obtained
from mass-spectrograph. The problem was the
one that taxed the abilities of an expert organic
chemist: there were too many possibie solutions
to allow the use of pure logic, and chemistry
experts solved the problem using a
combination of intuition, rules of thumb, and
just plain good yess-techniques that were
known as heuristics .
By interviewing organic chemists on the
methods they used to develop a picture of a
molecule's
structure,
Feigenbaum
and
Lederberg developed a combination of rules
and heuristics for interpreting spectrographic
data. The result was a programme called
'Dendral'; its descendants are used today in
laboratories all over the world. Dendral marked
the beginning of a new branch of inquiry for
researchers in Artificial Intelligence--that is
expert systems. Bendral's immediate successor
was 'Mycin" an expert system which has been
even more influential. Mycin diagnoses bacterial
infections of the blood, and prescribes suitable
drug therapy.

2.

FEATURES

Although, expert systems are the subject of
much discussion these days, their definition is
somewhat vague. If basic definitions from some
introductory texts on expert systems are
examined
(such as those of Barr and
~ e i ~ e n b a u m~~o; r s ~ t hHarmon
~;
and IGng5;
art^; and lackson') then it is found that
only two elements are consistently cited:
1.

An expert system embodies some
representation of knowledge about a given
task domain.

2.

The expert system emulates the capabilities
of a human within the given task domain at

4

a level of .performance equivalent to an
'expert'.
Whitaker and Ostbergs have observed that
these requirements presuppose that the task
domain is of such a nature that consistent facts
about it can be derived, i.e., there is knowledge
about the domain and that there is differentia!
distribution of said knowledge among some
population (there are individuals possessed of
greater relative expertise). Such presumptions
address the character of the task domain into
which an expert system is inserted.
In contrast, much of the literature emphasise
on the expert system's structure. Most
commonly the discussion on an expert system's
structure concentrates on two discrete
components-a
knowledge base, and an
inference engine carrying out logical operations
over that base. Occasionally a discussion
extends to the four essential components of a
full-fledged expert system.

3.

C O M P O N E N T S O F EXPERT
SYSTEM

A detailed discussion of the components of
an expert system is presented here to clarify this
further.

3.1

The Knowledge Base

The knowledge base in an expert system
contains codified knowledge that is structured
very differently from book knowledge. Typically,
the knowledge base of an expert system
contains 'facts' and the relation between them.
There are two kinds of facts : public facts and
heuristics. Public facts are defined as published
rules
(generally available) and
agreed
knowledge, e.g. cataloguing rules. Heuristics are
the personal (and often unwritten) knowledge
of the human expert (e.g., skill in cataloguing).
In addition to facts, heuristics imply several
features of human decision making based on
experience, perhaps acquired on a trial-and
-error basis, 'rules of thumb', and inability to
take all possible factors into account due to
cognitive limitations.
The major difference between 'conventional'
database and expert system database
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/,1996.16(4)

Dubey :Expert Systems and their Application in Library and Information Science
methodology is that a knowledge base of an
expert system is more creative. Facts in a
database are normally passive; they are either
present or not present. A knowledge base on
the other hand, actively tries to fill in the
missing information. Production rules are a
favourite means of encapsulating 'rule-of-thumb'
(heuristics) knowledge. These have a familiar
(CONSEQUENCE)
IF (CONDITION)-THEN
format, for example:
IF frequency of word < = upper threshold
AND frequency of word > = lower threshold
THEN use word as index term.
There are other methods also to encode the
facts
and
relationships
that
constitute
knowledge. They include: semantic net;
object-attribute-vaiue
triplet;
frames
and
predicate calculus. It might be inferred from
some texts that the methods are alternatives;
one or the other is used exclusively. In fact, they
can be used in association with each other.
Different methods have different advantages
and disadvantagesg.

3.2 The inference Engine
lnference engine stands between the user
and the knowledge base. It performs two major
tasks: first, i t examines existing facts and rules,
and adds new facts when possible; second, it
decides the order in which inferences are made.
In doing so, the inference engine conducts the
concl~ssionwith the user.
The inference strategies used in expert
svstems are:
C] Modusponens

Reasoning about uncertainty
Resolution
Engine part of the system means i t is used to
drive around amongst the various inferences it
might make. This means it allows to pursue
reasoning strategies or control strategies as they
are sometimes called, to decide what operators
to apply at each stage of the search. The most
common control strategies used in expert
systems are forward chaining, backward
chaining and bidirectional. Broadly speaking,
forward chaining involves reasoning from data
to hypotheses, while backward chaining
DESIDOC Bulletin of lnl Techno!, 1996, 16(4)

attempts to find data to prove, or disapprove, a
hypothesis. Pure forward chaining leads to
unfocused questioning in a dialogue mode
system, whereas pure backward chaining tends
to be rather relentless in its goal-directed
questioning. Most successful expert systems use
by-directional reasoning method".
Whether inferencing procedure works
primarily backwards or forwards, it will have to
deal with uncertain data. There are too many
ways of dealing with uncertainty. There is Fuzzy
logic, Bayesian logic, rnulti-valued logic and
Certainty Factor, to name only four.

3.3 User linterface
User interface is the component which
enables the user to communicate with the
expert system. Most expert systems are
interactive; they need'users to input information
about a particular situation before they can
offer advice. Most of the existing user interfaces
of expert systems are rnenudriven, accepting
single words or short phrases from the human
user. A few have natural language capabilities. A
good user interface i s an expert system that will
allow the user' :
a to ask question, such as why an advice has
been given, how a conclusion has been
reached or why certain information i s needed

e to volunteer information before being asked

e to change a previous answer
+E

to ask for context-sensitive help on demand

e
e

to examine the state of reasoning at any time
to save a session in disk for later perusal, and

at to resume a session previously abandoned
mid-way.
The expert system aims to assist or advise
the non-expert users, but it will be consulted
only if it helps the users to perform that task
more easily. Thus, expert systems must meet all
the requirements of good rnterface design.

3.4

The Knowledge Acquisition
Module

acquisition is the
mos;
Knowledge
challenging and important element in e w e r i
E
"

Dubey : Expert Systems and their Applicration in Library and Information Science

system development. It i s the process of
eliciting
knowledge
from
experts
and
converting it into facts and rules that are
compatible with the knowledge representation
form of the chosen development tool.
~ e i ~ e n b a u m 'calls
~
those who build
knowledge-based expert systems as 'Knowledge
Engineers', and refers to their technology as
'Knowledge Engineering'. Knowledge engineers
are concerned with identifying the specific
knowledge that an expert uses in solving a
problem. Initially, the knowledge engineer
studies a human expert and determines what
facts and rules-of-thumb the expert employs.
Then the knowledge engineer determines the
inference strategy that the expert uses in an
actual problem solving situation. Finally, the
knowledge engineer develops a system that
uses similar knowledge and inference strategies
to simulate the expert's behaviour.

4.

SCOPE OF EXPERT SYSTEMS
IN LIBRARY AND
INFORMATION SYSTEMS

Expert systems are knowledge intensive
computer programmes. They contain lot of
knowledge about their speciality. They use
rules-of-thumb or heuristics, to focus on the key
aspects of particular problem domain and to
manipulate symbolic descriptions in order to
reason about the knowledge they are fed with.
They often consider a number of competing
hypotheses simultaneously, and they frequently
make tentative recommendations or assign
weights to alternatives. The best expert systems
can solve difficult problems within a very
narrow domain, as well as or better than human
experts can.
All this suggests that expert systems are
confined to welCcircumscribed tasks. They are
not able to reason broadly over a field of
expertise. They cannot reason from axioms or
general theories. They do not learn and thus,
are limited to using the specific facts and
heuristics that are 'thought' by a human expert.
They lack common sense, they cannot reason
by analogy, and that their performance
deteriorates rapidly when problems extend
beyond the narrow task domain they are

designed to perform. A suitable domain should
have clearly circumscribed borders and contain
a limited number of entities and relations.
Now the question is whether the library and
information science (LIS) field is suitable for
application of knowledge engineering to build
expert systems? ~ r o o k s 'and
~ Sparck )ones14
claim that subdomains of LIS field are suitable
for application of knowledge engineering as
they possess clear-cut boundary with lots of
public and heuristics knowledge which can be
identified, elicited, codified and formalised in
the knowledge base. Their claim i s vindicated
by a study reported in Poulter and others1'
which has identified i.59 expert system projects
in the LIS domain.
However, systems are usually grouped in
literature by the sub domain je.g., online
intermediary, reference work, cataloguing,
indexing, classification, etc.) that they address.
Some particular LIS sub domains have received
relatively little attention (e:g., abstracting) while
others (e.g., acquisition of new stock) are hardly
represented at all. A breakup of the avilability of
expert systems in LIS field is given below:
reference work

32 percent

online retrieval

28 percent

indexing, cataloguing,
or classification

1 2 percent

library management
application, and

7 percent

abstracting

1 percent

Within each sub domain, systems tend to be
restricted to even more limited domain to avoid
problems associated with ill-defined borders
and large number of entities and relationships.
For example, 'Plexus' by Vickery and ~ r o o k s ' ~
of expert system devoted to a very narrow
domain of gardening while 'Pointer' by smith1'
is limited to US Government publications and
'Maper' by ~ r c e ~ o v a c "which advises novice
map cataloguers.

5.

CONCLUSION

We are witnessing gradual Increase in the
development and research activities in the LIS
expert systems. However, as already stated,

DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Jechnol, 1996, 16(4)

Dubey :Expert Systems and their Application in Library and Information Science

some areas such as reference and online
intermediaries are more appealing to
researchers than others. In Western countries,
knowledge engineers are gearing up for the
production of commercial expert systems in LIS
domain, but most work is still in experimental
stage. It is however, expected that expert
systems may find increasing application in
special libraries (such. as DESIDOC) which may
collect and codify knowledge within their areas
of specialisation.

REFERENCES
4.

2.

Newell, A. and ~ i m o n H.
, Human problem
solving. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, Nj.
1972.
Williamson, M. Artificial intelligence for
microcomputers: The guide for business
decision maker. Brady Communications
Company, New York. 1986.

3.

Barr, A. and Feigenbaum, E.A. (Ed.). The
handbook of artificial intelligence. AddisonWesley, Reading, MA. 1987.

4.

Forsyth, R. (Ed.) Expert Systems: Principles
and case Studies. Chapman and Hall, New
York. 1984.

5.

Hermon, P. and King, D. Expert systems:
Artificial intelligence in business. John
Wiley, New York. 1965.

6.

Hart, A. Knowledge acquisition for expert
systems. McGraw-Hill, New York. 1986.

7.

jackson, P. introduction to expert systems.
Addison-Wesley, Warkingham, England.
1986.

8.

Whitaker, R and Ostberg, 0. Channelling
knowledge:
Expert
systems
as
communications media. A I & Society. 1988,
(2), 197-208.

DESIDOC W e t i n of lnf Technol, 1W6,16(4)

Dubey, V.P. Knowledge representation and
reasoning. In
Encyclopaedia
of
Microcomputers, edited by Allen Kent and
lames G Williams. Marcel Dekker, New
York, Vol.15.
Kemp, D.A. Computer-based knowledge
retrieval. ASLIB, London. 1988. pp.103-10.
Ref. 4
Ref. 5
Brooks, H.M. Expert systems and intelligent
information retrieval. lnformation Processing
Management1987, 23(4), 36 7-92.
Sparck jones, K. lnformation retrteval. In
Encyclopaedia of artificial intelligence.
Edited by Shapiro, SC. John Wiley & Sons,
New York. 1987, Vol. 1, 419-21.
Poulter, A. and others. LIS professionals as
knowledge engineers. In Annual review of
lnformation Science and Technology
(ARIST). The American Society for
Infomation Science. Medford, NJ, Learned
Information, Inc. 1994, Vo1.28.
Vickery, A. and Brooks, HM. PLEXUS: The
expert system for referral. lnformation
Processing and Management. 198 7, 23(2),
99-117.
Smith, K F. Pointer vs. Using government
publications: Where is the advantage!
Reference Librarian. 1989, 23, 19 1-205.

Z.
Research
on
Ercegovac,
knowledge-based descriptive cataloguing
o f cartographic publications: An
experimental advice-giving system-mapper.
Ph.D. Dissertation. 1990, UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA.

7

