DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 16, No. 4, july 1996, pp. 9-1 2
0 1996, DESIDOC

Expert Systems and their Application in Library and
Information Systems
Dewendra K Singh*, Bhupendra K Singh* and Dr Yogendra P Dubey*
Abstract
This article describes the concept of expert. systems, its origin, features,
advantages and its application in various areas of library and information
system environment.

1.

INTRODUCTION

One of the most rapidly ,growing and
fascinating topic in computer science,
psychology, linguistics and information science
is expert systems. Expert systems are of recent
origin barely mentioned in literatures just a few
years ago. Now there is an extensive Literature
with hundreds of books and artides on the
subject. Several reviews have been published in
the series of Machine Intelligence (published by
Wiley and Elis Horwood) and in various
volumes of ARIST.
Expert systems belong to the broader
discipline of Artificial Intelligence (Al) which has
as
been characterised by Barr and ~ei~enbaum'
'the part of computer science that is concerned
with designing intelligent computer systems;
that is, systems that exhibit the characteristics
we associate with intelligence in. human
behaviour-understanding language, learning,
reasoning, solving problems, and so onn. Al
focuses on symbolic, nonalgorithmic problem
solving methods. Of all the branches of artificial
intelligence, expert systems hold the greatest
potential.
Department of Library and Inbrmation Science
Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi-221005

2.

DEFINITION

The field of expert systenls i s so new and
rapidly evolving that defining the term is not an
easy task. However, broadly speaking, "expert
systems are computer programmes composed
af ,bowledge base that contains the
information supplied by the expert, and an
inference engine that applies the appropriate
information from knowledge base to a specific
problem"2. The key feature of expert systems is
that they involve modelling of the thought
process of human experts who are very familiar
with the given problem domain. For example, if
an expert system is to be built that will serve as
reference assistant, i t must be done by sitting
down with expert reference librarians and
asking them to codify the heuristics or 'rules of
thumb' that guide them in their decision
making. Thus, an expert system incorporates the
knowledge of human experts (which is not
otherwise available other than by consulting
them), a human faculty of reasoning, and the
modes of reasoning of those human experts3.

3.

FEATURES

An alternative way of describing an expert
system, as a series o i distinctive features; rather
than a strict definition, is offered by ~ o r s ~ t h ~ .

Singh et a1 :Expert Systems and their Application in Library and Information Systems

According to him the expert systems have the
following characteristics:

e

2.

Expertise can be pooled when more than
one expert contributes to the system
development. The pooling exercise can
assist in the refinement of the procedures
and help to make them more consistent.

3.

Knowledge can be safeguarded, developed
and distributed. Enormous sums of money
are spent on training individuals, yet all their
knowledge and expertise is lost when they
die or leave the company. Expert systems
offer a way of capturing this expertise and
knowledge and at the same time making it
available to other people.

4.

Expertise can be available. Since expert
systems provide explanations for advice
given they can be used 24 hours a day
without the presence of the expert.

5.

Expert systems can be used for training
purposes. The- problem-solving and
explanation capabilities of expert systems
are particularly useful in training.situations.
Training can also be distributed throughout
a company and done on an individual basis
at times suited to the employee.

Limited to a specific domain of expertise.

a Able to reason with uncertain data.
a Able to explain itself in a sensible way.

*

Deliveringadvice as output.

e Designed to grow incrementally.
te Having a clear separation of knowledge and
inference mechanism.

+

Typically (not necessarily) rule-based.

* Always

restricted to a narrow domain of
expertise.

e The expertise is acquired and codified during
lengthy' interviews with ohe or .more experts
in the.relevant domain.
9 The expertise is codified as a collection of fscts

and rules, which together constitutes the
knowledge base. %

The rules may be held as discrete production
rules, or as a semantic network, or
occasionally in some other way.

It is sometimes assumed that an expert
system should .be capable of 'natural languag&
dialogue'. with the user. This view is however
highly debatable, atid certainly many existing
systems have no such features. Until computers
begin to accept continuous spoken input, it is
likely that the most efficient form of input will
involve selection from menus, perhaps using a
touch-sensitive screen; most systems will also
require a facility for the input of words or
numbers through a keyboard, and the
appropriate 'mix' will depend on the problem
domain.

4.

ADVANTAGES

The motivation to use expert systems must
lie in the benefits obtained. What then are the
possible benefits? These would depend on
individual situations but the general advantages
summaried by orris' are listed below:
1.

10

Experts can be freed from routine tasks and
made available for more exciting, creative
and demanding work.

6.

Expert systems can provide a standardised
approach to problem solving.

7.

The development of an expert system offers
the expert with an opportunity to critically
assess and improve his problem-solving
behaviour.

8.

The performance of non-experts can be
improved over a period of time and they
may eventually even reach expert status.

9.

In many situations, expert systems can
provide solutions to problems far more
quickly than a human expert.

10. Expert systems have the potential for saving
companies a vast amount of money, thus
increasing profits.

5.

APPLICATION IN LIBRARY
A N D INFORMATION
SYSTEMS

Expert systems have been used successfully
in economic and industrial sectors, and
increasingly they are being employed in service
DESDOC Bulletln of Inf Technol, 1996,16(4)

'

Singh et ai : Expert Systems and their Appiicadjon in Library and Information Systems

sectors including medical health care. Against
this background, it is not surprising that the
library and information services (LIS) sector may
also explore the potentials of expert systems.
Today the technology can boast a wide range of
application areas in the field of library and
information systems, some of which are
discussed below:

5.1 Administration
Library administration must deal with
complex problems on a day-to-day basis.
Problems with budgeting, staff, and planning
are just a few of the difficulties they face every
day. During budget cuts, the administrator mGst
determine what items to cut and by how much.
Should staff be reduced? Should serials be
cancelled? Will there be any money to buy
books or equipment? An expert system could
be helpful in assisting the administrator in
making these decisions. One could develop a
system
composed
of
the
heuristics
(rules-of-thumb) that librarians use to make
these decisions.

5.2

Staff Management

In hiring, promoting and placement of the
staff, an expert system might be useful. By using
criteria such as qualifications required for the
job and experience, an expert system could be
used to assist in the hiring process. An expert
system could be developed to determine which
staff members should receive raises, disciplined,
or dismissal.

5.3 Planning
An expert system using information from
patterns and material usage could help plan for
remodelling or new facilities. The system would
help the administrator to determine where the
circulation desk should be located, where the
copy machine should be piaced, and where the
OPAC terminals would get the most use.

5.4 Technical Services
More efforts have been in developing expert
system applications for technical services. The
focus of research efforts are witnessed in the

DESlDOC Bulletin of lnf Technol, 1396,16(4)

areas of cataloguing,
collection development.

classification

and

5.5 Cataloguing
Expert systems have been developed to
create MARC record6 and to apply some of the
rules in AACR-2 for cataloguing. Roy chang7
developed a cataloguing expert system based
on the rules in AACR-2. H e determined that its
usefulness was limited because the system had
no means of interpreting the rules. In this
opinion 'cataloguing problems today are too
widespread For employing an expert system'.

Classification is also a difficult area for an
expert system. While there are guides to
determine classification numbers and subject
headings, there are no strict rules available, and
the relationship between objects and classes
are often ambiguous. Research is progressing in
the development of systems for assigning
subject headings and class numbersa' '.

5.7 Collection Development
There are only two possible responses when
one considers new materials for acquisition or
old materials for discarding; yes or no. With
only two possible responses, it is easier to
develop an $expert system. There has been at
least one successful attempt at building expert
system for collection development at Applied
Physics ~ i b r a r ~ " .

5.8 Reference Service
Expert systems would be useful for assisting
patrons in locating materiafs and information.
Expert systems may prompt the user for the
type of information needed and display
materials that may contain it.

CONCLUSION
The usefulness of expert systems in library
and information systems will depend on
increasing power and efficiency of hardware
and software. To be able to offer expert systern
services to their clients, libraries will have to be
involved in the following areas:

11

Singh eta/ : Expert Systems and their Application in Library and lniormation Systems
9.

Development of prototype'systems.

9.

Cevelopment of knowledge representation
schemes.

o Experimentation w i t h knowledge-based
indexing, abstracting, and classification.

o Experimentation

with
development environments
domains of knowledge.

specialised
for specific

As knowledge based exper: systems
become more acceptable in the library
community, libraries will begin to develop,
purchase
and
maintain
interactive
knowledge-based expert systems for their
clients.

Reirieval. lournal o f Documentation. 1987,
5. Morris, Anne. Overview of Expert Systems
In The application of expert systems in
libraries and information centres, edited by
Morris, A, Bowker-Saur, London, 1992.
p.3-4.
6.

Epstein, t i . An expert system for novice
MARC cataloguers. Wilson Lib Buli 1987,
62(5), 32-36.

7.

Chang, R. Developing a cataloguing expert
system 111. Libr., 1990, 72(8), 592-96.

8.

Gibbs. Taylor Graham, New York, 1986.
p.53-66.

REFERENCE
9.
1. Barr, A. and Feigenbaum, E.A. The
handbook of artificial intelligence. Morgan ,
Kaufwaam, Los Altos, California, 1981.

2.

Holthoff, Timothy N. Library expert systems
in encyclopaedia of library and information
science. Marcel Dekker, New York. 1985.
U. 38; 9. 158-75.

3. Kemp, D. Alasdair. Compu.ter-based
knowledge retrieval. Aslib, London. 1988.
4.

12

Burton, P.F. Expert systems in classification.
In Expert Systems in Libraries edited by F.

Iravis, I. Applications of knowledge-based
system to classification in libraries in expert
systems in libraries edited by R. Aluri and
D.E. Riggs. Ablex, orw wood, N.1, 1990.
p.222-93.

10. Debrower, A.M. and Jones, D.T. Application
of an expert system to collection
development : Donation processing at a
special library. Libr. Software Rev. 1991.
10(6), p.385-89.

Bovey, J.D. and Brown, P j. Interactive
document display and its use in Information

DESlDOC Bulietin of Inf Technol, 1996,16(4)

