  

7 I996, DESIDOC

object recognition.

INTRODUCTION

At the beginning of a new project a
researcher has to conduct a comprehensive

1.

literature survey by looking through
I bibliographies, contacting experts, reading
conference proceedings - and university

technical reports. In the context of the present
day information explosion in virtually all
disciplines, this process is painstakingly slow,
and hopelessly inefficient.

Today, the use of Artificial Intelligence (Al)
based online information retrieval tools has
become indispensable. These tools can help
accelerate the process of locating the desired
topic in the vast sea of knowledge distributed
geographically among thousands of servers
around the globe. The Internet can be used as
the basis for designing tools that enable
browsing, searching and organising information

 

* Dr KK Shuk/a
Reader
Department of Computer Engineering
Institute of Technology
(Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi-221005

:ESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. I6, No. 4, July I996, pp. 13-18

Some AI Techniques for Information Retrieval
KK Shukla*

ABSTRACT

Efficient retrieval of information from the vast sea of distributed databases
over the Internet has assumed great importance with the convergence of
computer and communication technologies. This paper presents some
state-of-the-art techniques for online information retrieval over the
information superhighway. It further advocates the application of Artificial
Intelligence (AI) search techniques to locate and disseminate information in
an effective manner. Content based image retrieval can also benefit from Al
techniques by utilising evolutionary programming for feature extraction and

distributed throughout a large number of
databases. In this paper we discuss
state-of—t‘he—art technologies and provide some
guidelines for the design of new intelligent
search techniques.

2. ‘WIDE AREA INFORMATION
SERVER

The Wide Area Information Server project
(WAIS) is aimed at providing uniform, easy to
use, location transparent mechanism to access
information. As shown in Fig. I, WAIS clients
translate user queries into the WAIS protocol

and query the Directory of Services for relevant
databases. WAIS then transmits the request to

selected set of databases over the
communication network.
The database servers maintain inverted

indexes on document contents and can execute
full text searches on them. On the arrival of a
new query the server returns a list of relevant
object descriptors that correspond to
documents that contain words specified in the
user query. The client then displays query
results and can receive documents from

 

DESIDOC Bulletin of Int Technol, I996. 16(4)

13

Shukla : Some Al Techniques for Information Retrieval

 

DIRECTORY
OF SERVICE “

    

@atabasbij [m2]

  

and other relevant information to the dire

currently offers Filenames

 

Internet file transfer protocol (ftp) sites.

user and helps him reﬁne his future q_
When a new information provider wants to 
WAIS, he must submit his location, descri 

H.

J. .

server. The WAIS Directory of Se
presently contains about 300 regist
databases.

3. THEARCHIE SERVICE

The Archie2 system is aimed at solving I
problem of locating ﬁles by attributes. I
and WH“f
databases. The Filenames database indexes ";
names of ﬁles available from hundreds I

,t.
II

X Emacs Command-line
interface mm mm allows users to retrieve files stored on Inter ',
C L 1 E N TS_ hosts. Anonymous ftp has gained popularity 

Figure 1: WAIS Architecture
appropriate servers irrespective of

their

a medium for distributing software

documents. The WHATIS database containst
names and descriptions of software 

location. Usually the software also displays a
numerical score for each hit that relates to the
frequency of specified words in the retrieved
object’s contents. This acts 'as a feedback to the

documents and other information available 
the Internet

Users can perform caseinsensitive k . :j"
searches to locate the desired informat' t.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

p‘.
I
. I
‘1

 

 

 

 

 

servers Archie
database server
COMMUNICATION

sewers Archie » mm
database sewer

' owero Telnet E-mail

Interfw- Interface Interface

ARCHIE CLIENTS
Figure 2: The Archie Architecture
14 DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol. 1996. “(£11,

Shukla : Some AI Techniques for Information Retrieval

Archie clients can access both databases,
through the user access component (UAC)
while the data gathering component (GAD)
relies on the ftp site administrators to discover
new ftp archives. Presently the archie consists
of about 12 servers around the Internet.
Archie’s simplicity and the use of existing

 

 

 

 

4. "GOPHER’,

. Gopher3 was developed at the University of
Minnesota as a basic tool for browsing
distributed information on the Internet. In this
system the information is olganised inl a
hiera chy such that the intermediate nodes are
directories, or indexes, and the leaf nodes are

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

J

 

 

Figure 3: Gopher Architecture.

 

resources have been the key features
responsible for its popularity. After just two
years in service archie boasts of 1000 registered
ftp archive sites that offer 2,100,000 files and
3,500 software packages. Archie is accessed by

:sers from 47 countries about 50,000 times a
ay.

documents. Thus the gopher information space
is modelled as a directed graph, where cycles in
the search process are allowable. The gopher
architecture is shown in Fig, 3. It consists of
clients and sewers communicating through the
gopher protocol, which is implemented on the
top of TCP-IP (transmission-control protocol -

Internet protocol).

 

 

DESIDOC Bulelln of Inf Technol, 1996. 16(4)

Shukla : Some AI Techniques for Information Retrieval

gopher protocol, which is implemented on the
top of TCP-IP (transmission-control protocol ~
Internet protocol).

Currently, the root of the gopher’s hierarchy
resides on the host (rawBits.-micro.umn.edu) at
the University of Minnesota. This is the default
direCtory received by the gopher clients when
they are first invoked, although clients can also
be configured with other entry points into the
hierarchy. The gopher root server has the
knowledge of all top level services and
advertises their existence to users. For example,
a R&D organisation, or a university running
gopher server may register a central top-level
server with the root server. Then this central
gopher server can link to other departmental
servers, which in turn, can link to lower level
servers.

A user selects an object on the basis of its
user-visible name, and the client retrieves by
constructing a handle from the server’s host
name, its port number, and the object’s path
name. gopher clients can also retrieve objects
from WAIS, archie, and ftp servers.

5. WORLD WIDE WEB

The World Wide Web4 (W) was
developed at CERN in Switzerland, and
combines hypertext with information discovery
technology. In this system the information is
organised into a large distributed hypertext
document. Here the nodes are either full text
objects, directory objects (called cover pages),
or indexes.

The architecture is based on a dient-server
model with the WWW clients offering the users
hypertext like interface. The native protocol for
WWW is hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP). In
addition to this, WWW clients can understand
ftp, and the network news transfer protocol
(NNTP). Ftp can be used to access file archives
on the Internet, where ﬁle directories are
browsed as hypertext objects. Nntp is used to
access news groups and news articles. These
news articles usually contain references to other
articles or news groups, which are represented
as hypertext links.

Currently, besides WAIS and gopher servers,
there are about 24 WW servers accessible to

I5
WWW clients. The WWW servers
info.cern.ch has logged access

onj

from

approximately 6,000 hosts that use their own

WWW clients,
available client.

or connect to a publicly

Besides the information discovery services
described above, two other services—X500 and
Indie are popular. The X.500 resulted from the
standardisation efforts in the field of directory
services by CCITT and the ISO. Here, the
difference is that instead of the usual domain

naming system, (which maps the host name on.

to corresponding Internet addresses, and vice}

versa) X.500 entries

consist of a set of

attribute-value pairs. Hence, X500 can accept

attribute based queries.

Indie is an acronym for Distributed Indexing
developed at University of Southern California.
It consists of a replicated directory of services,

and a collection of broker
brokers automatically cluster

databases. The.
references of

related information by indexing their own data,
as well as data stored in other broker databases,-
and other information search tools. Thus, in a:
fashion similar to archie, this clustering of index
information lets users efficiently search all

participating databases.

6. INTELLIGENT SEARCH

As stated in the previous sections, the
information space on the Internet can be;
modelled as a directed graph. Information
discovery process can then be computationally
viewed as graph search. Conventional graph
search techniques employed by the current'

systems suffer from the symptoms

of;

combinatorial explosion. We believe that there."
is a great scope for improving the efficiency of
the information discovery on the Internet by
using heuristic functions to guide the search.
Ideally, we would like to know, at any given
node which operator would get us closest to
the goal node where we can find the desired‘
information. If we knew this magic information
throughout the search, for every node in the:
information space, we would find the optimal)
path in the optimal way. Here, we can use the
standard AI technique of assigning a numeric

estimate to each state that

represents its ‘

 

I6

DESIDOC Bulletin of In! Techno], I996. 16(4);

 

Shukla : Some AI Techniques for Information Retrieval

 

distance—to-goal. This will enable the search
routine to rank the alternative paths in order of

' their closeness to goal. A heuristic evaluation
function h(x) achieves this by assigning to each
state x an estimate of the minimum cost to
reach a goal state. It must be realised, however,
that the performance of heuristic search varies
directly with the accuracy of the heuristic
evaluation function.

With this model, the information discover!
process can be guided by the A" algorithm
listed below:

 

A * SEARCH ALGORITHM

 

INPUT: Two nodes in the distributed information
space, START and GOAL.

TO COMPUTE: Minimum cost sequence that
transforms START into GOAL.

OUTPUT: Operator sequence, if one exists,
otherwise NO.

1. a. Form queues of action records
OPEN = (START, nil, nil, 0)
b. CLOSED = empty
2. If OPEN is empty return NO, terminate

3. Otherwise, remove the first action record
from OPEN, call it RECORD_X; put
RECORD_X at the front of CLOSED.

a. If state variable of RECORD-X is equal to
GOAL, return the plan used, terminate

b. Otherwise, expand STATE_X, giving a list
of action records called SUCCESSORS; for
each rec0rd in SUCCESSORS, insert it into
OPEN in increasing g(x)+h(x) order

C. CO to step 2.

 

In the above search algorithm, the heuristic
function h(x) uses problem dependent
information to guess the whereabouts of the
goal node. There are three broad categories to
search heuristics:

a. Heuristics that reduce search effort and
guarantee optimal solution;

b. Heuristics that greatly reduce search effort
but do not guarantee finding the optimal
solution;

c. Heuristics that minimise a combination

averaged over the problem instances likely I

to be encountered.

The online information discovery process on
distributed database can benefit from the
intelligent search described above if the
heuristic function h(x) can be obtained by
collecting statistics on Internet access patterns
for a particular class of users.

7. CONTENT BASED IMAGE
RETRIEVAL

With the proliferation of the Internet and
intranets, an ever increasing number of
information access services are now receiving
image retrieval demands from their users.
Images are being generated by a number of
sources, such as, defence and civilian satellites,
military reconnaissance and surveillance ﬂights,
fingerprinting biomedical imaging, etc.

An efﬁcient image retrieval system is
required to effectively disseminate information

‘from such image repositories. The content

based image retrieval (CBIR) technology models
images as a set of attributes extracted from the
database. The user can then specify his
frequency based on these attributes. Current
research efforts are directed at an integrated
feature extraction/object recognition subsystem
to overcome the limitations of the attribute
based retrieval. This is another point at which

artificial intelligence techniques become
relevant. In addition to using generic query
classes like colour, texture, shape, spatial
constraints etc., Al techniques involving

evolutionary programming can be used to
extract objects using a vertically integrated
vision model.

The evolutionary program is a biologically
motivated AI search technique that works with
a pool of candidate solutions, and uses
selection, crossover, and mutation operations to
find the optimum solution satisfying user query.
The evolutionary programming approach
requires the formulation of the information

 

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1996, 16(4)

'17

Shukla :Some AI Techniques for Information Retrieval

discovery as an optimisation problem. In image
retrieval, the principal parameters of interest are
the position co—orelinates n (Le. x and y),
orientation 9, magnification y, and the object
classification label m. A vector Ci of the
following form represents a candidate solution
to the image retrieval problem:

Ci.=[ri 91 7! mi]

The overall merit of a candidate solution is
represented by the objective function

MC; | s)

and depends upon two quality criteria—the
coverage merit and the merit of fit. The
evolutionary program is a biologically motivated
AI research technique that works with a pool of
candidate solutions, and uses selection,
crossover, and mutation operations to find the
optimum solution satisfying a user query.

8. CONCLUSION

Information discovery services have become
indispensable to scientific and engineering
progress. Currently, many useful retrieval tools
are available for locating information in

databases distributed geographically throughout I

the globe. AI oriented techniques can fully
utilise Internet connectivity to effectively locate
and disseminate information. Content based
image retrieval can benefit from evolutionary
programming techniques to quickly sift through
large databases of images, and respond to user

queries in acceptable time. There is a lot of
scope in application of similar Al techniques to
design the information discovery systems. It is
imperative that future systems will use these '

methods to offer efficient and effective retrieval

services.

REFERENCES

l. Kahle, B. and Medlar, A. An information
system for corporate users: WAIS,

1991, 5(11), 2-9.

Connections—The Interoperability Report,

2. Emtage A. et al. Archie: An electronic
a directory service for Internet, Proc. 1992

Usenix Conf, 93-110.
3. McCahill, M. The

Internet Gopher

» 1 Protocol, Connexions—The, Interoperability

Report, 1992, 6(7), 10-14.

4. Berners-Lee T. et al., World Wide Web—the

information universe.

Policy 1992, 1(2), 52-8.

Electronic
Networking: Research Applications, and

5. Nilsson J Nils. Principles of Artificial

 Intelligence. Narosa, 1994.

 Verlag, 1992.

6. Michalewicz, Z. Genetic Algorithms + Data
Structures = Evolution Programs, Springer-

 

18

DESIDOC Bulletln of Int Technol, I996. 16(4). '

 

