DESlDOC Bulletin of information Technology, Vol. 16, No. 4, July 1996, pp. 19-32

0 1996, DESlDOC

Application of Expert Agents/Assistants in Library and
Information Systems
jarnes

G Williams and Ken Sochats*
Abstract

This article presents a brief overview of expert agents and assistants, and
then discusses activities in several areas of library and information centres
where expert systems have been developed and where intelligent
agentsjassistants could be of practical use in such activities. A discussion of
what an intelligent agent or assistant might perform in these areas is
outlined.

Although expert systems can and have been
applied to many areas within library and
information- science, the most popular areas
have been online retrieval, reference and
referral services. Other areas which have
received a relatively significant amount of
attention are cataloguing and classification,
indexing
and
abstracting,
collection
development, acquisitions, and management
information.
McDonald & ~ e c k e r t ' provide a set of
articles from a conference and workshop held
at Charles Sturt University in Riverina, Australia,
which discuss expert systems in many of these
areas. cavanagh2 and ~ u r k i nalso
~ provide
excellent overviews of the application of expert
systems in library and information centers.
Cavanaugh's
article
covers
selection/acquisitions,
cataloguing,
classification, indexing, reference, user models
and interfaces for searching, post-search

processing and intelligent tutoring. He provides
a brief description of prototypical systems that
exist for these areas. Durkin has compiled an
extensive
catalogue of
expert
system
applications in wide ranging areas.
Over the last several years, there has been
considerable effort in developing intelligent
agents and assistants which are experts in a
particular domain such as office automation.
These agents and assistants have been
developed with varying levels of intelligence
using expert system principles and techniques
although they are not necessarily expert
systems in the classical sense.

2.

EXPERT SYSTEMS

Department of Information Science and
Telecommunications,
Un~versityof Pittsburgh, USA.

Generally, expert systems are classified as a
subset of the field of Artificial intelligence (Al).
Expert systems are systems that employ a
codification of human expertise to solve
problems. The goal of the expert system is to
emulate the problem solving process of the
expert(s) whose knowledge was used in the
development of the system. Thus, the expert
system's performance is highly dependent on
the quality of the expert. Typically, expert

DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol. 1996, 16C4)

19

Williams and Sochats :Application of Expert Age17ts/Assistants in Library and Information Systems
systems are narrowly limited in their domain of
operation.
The structure of an expert system i s shown
in Fig. 1. An expert system i s comprised of three

1

1

J

Inference
Engine

r

tJ
Data Base

I

I
Figure I. Expert System Structure

component areas. First is the knowledge base.
The
knowledge
base
contains
the
representation of the expert's knowledge in the
domain. Next is the database that
contains specific facts about the problem
situation under study. Finally, the inference
engine i s a programme that applies the
expertise of the knowledge base to the facts in
the database to solve the problem at hand.
Knowledge base is the 'nerve centre' of the
expert system. The knowledge base represents
both the expertise and the reasoning strategies
of the expert in the problem domain. Many
different representational schemes have been
used by expert systems researchers to structure
the knowledge base. Rese range from network
structures that interrelate the expert's domain
nowl ledge to frame representations that
represent knowledge as schematic data
structures to rule based systems that codify the
expert's knowledge as a set of rules or
heuristics.
Two major issues arise during the
development of the knowledge base. The first i s
the source of the knowledge base content.
Knowledge bases can be derived from the
expertise of single experts in single domains as
in the Caduceus system for medical diagnosis
(Pople, Myers, and ~iiier'). Many common

systems rely on the use of knowledge from
several experts in the same domain that are
merged to form a single knowledge base.
The Prospector system for
mineral
exploration (Duda, Gashnig, and art^) has
several sub knowledge bases derived from
experts with differing areas of expertise. The
Prospector system applies each of these
knowledge bases to a problem and evaluates
the outcomes of these to arrive at a single final
recommendation.
The second issue in knowledge base
development is the extraction of the expert's
knowledge. Many expert system developers rely
on interview techniques to get their expert(s) to
explain the techniques and information that
they bring to bear in solving the docain
problems. Ericsson and simon6 have introduced
the formal methodology of protocol analysis to
capture an expert's reasoning. In protocol
analysis, the actions of an expert are completely
recorded as the expert solves a series of
problems. The expert is also encouraged to
'think out loud' or to talk through the steps he
or she i s taking during the solution of the
problem. These recordings become a protocol
which, when analysed, provide insight into the
expert's problem solving skills.
~ u l e c o n sis~an expert system to aid in the
formulation of knowledge bases. Rulecons
assists the expert system developer or
knowledge engineer during interviews of the
expert(s). It i s a system for creating domain
independent, rule based knowledge bases.
Rulecons helps the designer to maintain
consistency and achieve completeness in the
knowledge base.

3.

INTELLIGENT AGENTS

An agent is a software module that monitors
a specified set of events, messages aod
information flow for a user or group of users
and performs useful functions that assist the
user@)in reducing his/her need to be notified,
involved, interrupted or otherw~sebothered to
deal with all aspects of the activity, task or
related sub-tasks. Agents that have been
developed in various application areas range
from simple extensions to existing software
-

DESIOOC Bulletln of lnf Technol, 1996. 16(4j

Williams and Sochats : Application of Expert Agents/Assistants in Library and lnlorrnation Systems

such as a word processor or spreadsheet to
complex work-flow procedures. Such agents
assist in tasks such as scheduling meetings,
filtering e-mail messages, searching for specific
types of task related information or making
decisions about routing forms for authorisation
or performing anticipated additional work
functions.
Two main features of
software for assistance are:
5

intelligent agent

it must be able to (earn and

c it must be able to negotiate.
Negotiation is required because software
must be able to interact with other agents
(which may include human being) in order to
both learn and complete its tasks. It must be
able to learn since it must adapt to the user for
whom it i s an assistant and the changing
environment in which i t exists. Such agents
have
been
developed
for
calendar
management, optimised use of the UNlX
operazing system and 'surfing' the Internet. The
most popular application of intelligent agents
has been in the office domain for handling
information flow such as mail filters, news filters,
and library browsers.
Intelligent agents must work autonomously
in the background so that they can perform
their work with as little user intervention as
possible. This requires the agents to negotiate
with other agents and reason about available
resources and alternative solutions to task
related problems in order to rninimise user
interaction.
Intelligent agents must be able to learn a
user's (expert's) approaches to performing
tasks. A number of approaches have been taken
to provide learning mechanisms such as
'learning-by-being-told' or 'dialogue learning'
and 'programming-by-demonstration.' ~ a e s ~ "
discusses four methods for acquiring data for
learning that are incorporated in intelligent
agents:

3.

User provided explicit example6 as training
exercises.

4.

Inter-agent exchange of task specific
knowledge.

In all cases, expert agents need some
knowledge acquisition mechanism which may
include the selection of various machine
learning algorithms. Machine learning consists
of tools and algorithms for learping classifiers,
decision trees, rules for control knowledge,
learning protocols, finite state machines and
other operational structures for learning group
support structures. Learning protocols permit an
agent to acquire or improve strategies for
negotiation with other agents and humans. It is
possible to distribute the learning task to many
agents thereby enabling reasoning types of
systems. The most recent - agent/assistance
software is constructed so that they improve
over time by learning dynamically during actual
operations of their designated tasks. This type
of software i s called a learning apprentice or
learning assistant.
Toolkits for intelligent agent development
are beginning to appear. Lotus Motes has under+
development customisable intelligent agents for
filter and search assistance for various
databases. The SHADE system1' implemented
using the Knowledge Query and Manipulation
Language
(KQML)
supports
concurrent
engineering which acts as a mediator for
information consumers and providers. The
Knowledgeable Agent-oriented System (KAoS) is
a distributed artificial intelligence environment
based upon the Common Object Request
Broker (CORBA) standard that epables expert
agent applications to be developed in
distributed Smalltalk.
Agents which have been developed and are
currently quite popular fall into two major
classes, namely, filtering agents and search
agents. The development of agent systems is
being actively pursued. These are briefly
discussed below.

1.

Observrng the actions of the user and
finding patterns of regularity.

3.1

2.

Using user feedback such as when a user
discards an agent action.

Information filtering agents have been the
foccls of attention in the e-mail domain by
pre-sorting or pre-selecting e-mail messages for

DESlDOC Bulletin of lnf Technol, 1996, 16(4)

Filtering Agents

WiNiNiams and Sochats :Appiication of Expert Agen ts/Assistants in Library and lnfor,nation Systems
certain types of actions such as forwarding to
colleagues. Lotus Notes, lnbox Assistant, Mailbox
assistant and Microsoft Exchange Server have
such filters. Mailbox assistant augments its user
supplied rules with learned rules based on
email transmissions. Similar types of agents
have been developed for filtering internet news,
W W W pages, library documents, video
database browsing and other sources of
information.

3.2

Search Agents

Filtering agents assist in interactive browsing
while search agents automatically search for
information. This can be of enormous help with
millions of WWW pages and large library
collections as well as corporate databases. The
computer programs referred to as Web
Crawlers or Spiders index the W W W pages of
interest for their user(ยง). Web Watcher is an
example of a learning apprentice which
acquires knowledge about useful HTML links
that correspond to a user's interest. The
learning mechanism is relevance feedback from
the user. Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)
files at the various Internet sites are the target o f
Hanimond's FAQ-Finder which applies parsing
and classification techniques to find relevant
keywords and the type of question in a request
(how to, verify, when, etc.). The Commerce
Business Agent reasons and plans for requests
that may be asked of the Commerce Business
Daily's online database. Many other such
agents have been developed for use with
business information as well as technical reports
on the Internet.

3.3

Systems sf Agents

While the agents discussed above have been
developed for a specific type of task, agent
systems will be developed for multiple tasks that
are interrelated or at least performed by the
user on a frequent basis. A system of agents
which can share knowledge and assist users for
complex information processes is the desired
goal of expert agents. At present there are no
fully operational, generally applicable agent
systems but rather various categories of
specialist agents each designed to perform a
specific task. But experiments with such systems

are underway in several academic and
commercial environments. Several critical issues
are being investigated related to intelligent
agents. These are:

I.

Natural language support in terms of natural
language understanding relative to cost and
technical requirements.

2.

Consistent user behaviour in terms of how
consistent must user behaviour be for an
agent to learn.

3.

Personal privacy in terms of unwanted
surveillance and control.

4.

Authority transfer in terms of how willing a
user i s to have an agent acting on the user's
behalf.

These and other issues provide a fertile
ground for research and development over the
next several years.

4.

INFORMATION RETRIEVAL
A N D CATALOGUE
SEARCHING

Studies of OPAC use have revealed that
effective use of online retrieval is difficult to
achieve for novices as well as experts. A major
problem area is the match between a user's
search, terms and correct subject terms. The
correspondence between the terms a user's
supplies and the terms actually used for
indexing items, is typically less than 50 percent.
Additional
studies
have
shown
that
understanding how to use an online database
or OPA(Z accounts for its ineffective and
inefficient use.
~ o r ~ r n a n found
"
that simple typing errors
and logical errors accounted for a significant
amount of user dissatisfaction with online
searching. An expert agent or assistant would
need to understand the user's needs, intentions
and goals and develop a plan to meet the goals.
An expert agent to aid in searching would also
'need dealing with the problem of term
'selection'. This might be done in a variety of
ways such as spell checking, thesaurus look up
of antonyms and synonyms, rearranging words
in a multi-word search term, dealing with
prefixes, suffixes as well as infixes, accounting
DESlDOC Bulletin of lnf Technol,1996, 16(4)

Williams and Sochats :Application of Expert Agents/Assistants in Library and InformationSystems
for varying spaces and utilising the results of
previous searches to find additional terms or
eliminating terms. An intelligent agent would
perform the following tasks:

e Learn typing, spacing and spelling errors of
each user and make appropriate corrections
during operations.

e Learn the vocabulary used by each user and
perform the appropriate thesaurus or
authority file look up for legitimate search
terms.

o Perform word and phrase substitution based
on previous retrieval results and user
feedback.

o Monitor the sources of information used by
each user and perform a check for new
additions of interest in those sources and new
sources that cover the areas of interest.

e Maintain an updated profile of information
needs, preferences and use for each user by
ageing interest areas based on date of last use.
IR-NLI is an expert system designed to
enhance information retrieval performance'2. It
acts as an intermediary to assist a non-tschnical
user in selecting the optimal data base for
searching and in formulating an appropriate
query.

EP-X assists users in defining and focusing
their areas of interest during information
retrieval. EP-X uses an iterative technique to
present to the user a topic area refinement
based on user input and a knowledge base of
search strategies and domain knowledge. The
domain of EP-X is limited to the field of
environmental pollution literature.

5.

REFERENCE SERVICES
Reference questions are answered using a

range of
of different
such as
atlases, dictionaries and encyclopaedias. 'When
to use a particular 'ype of source' and the
's~ecifictool' to utilise within the source class is
the domain of the expert reference librarian.

his requires a knowledge of what reference
tools are available, general strategies of when to
use which tools for a specific type of question
and finally, a deeper knowledge of interviewing
DESIDOC Bulletin of lnf Technol, 1996. 16(4)

users and the structure of knowbdge within a
particular domain. This can be viewed as a
decision-making process. An essential step in
answering a reference question of the ready
reference type is to map the question to a
category of tools. For example, IF the question
requires information about basic concepts
THEN an encyclopaedia is a good source. IF the
question requires information about a word,
THEN a dictionary i s a reasonable choice.
Thus, the question must first be categorised
into a type of reference tool category before a
specific tool in the category can be selected.
This can be thought of as a simple forward
chaining technique which, after analysis of the
question which was asked, is the initial expert
system task to be performed. The next step or
task can be considered a backward chaining
task that attempts to map the elements of the
question to the most appropriate reference
source within the category determined in the
first step. This is done by matching
characteristics of the question to characteristics
of the source. IF the question is initially mapped
to the category of dictionaries because it dealt
with the meaning of a word or phrase and it
was a medical term for which the user wanted
an illustration, THEN a specific illustrated
medical dictionary such as Dorland's lllustrated
Medical Dictionary would be an appropriate
selection.
The fact that it i s possible to codify the rules
for answering 'ready reference' questions based
on a .relatively simple model does not mean
that it can replace a reference librarian for all
ready reference questions but it does mean that
there is a level at which an expert agent can
support answering ready reference types of
questions. The difficulty is in getting questions
into a form that can be analysed by an
automated system so as to first categorise the
question by appropriate tool and secondly by
extracting features from the question so as to
be able to choose a specific tool within a class.

-

As Forrester and ~ a r n e r l - 'point out, the
world of answering reference questions is not as
simple as that portrayed above. A n expert
system for reference must perform the roleof a

23

Williams and Sochats : Application 04 Expert Agents/Assistants in Library and Information Systems
human intermediary which they state comprises
the following stages:
1.

Translate initial user needs as stared into
prepositional form

2.

Confirm, and if necessary, redefine the users
needs

3.

Recognise the appropriate level of
information required

4.

Obtain the correct tools to find this
information using an appropriate strategy

5.

Refine the information obtained and select
exception criteria

6.

Respond to the initial propositions in an
appropriate format, and

7.

If required by the user, repeat steps 1
through 6.

The generation of a reference map based
upon declarative semahtics of a user's question
in a prepositional form are categorised by
Forrester & Garner into seven proposition
types:
1.

Goal statements.

2.

Single assertions.

3.

Information-sources relationships.

4.

Technique-result relationships.

5.

Explanation types.

6.

Activity-methods modelling.

7.

How-to (activity-select),

This scheme requires an intelligent agent to
have both lexical and semantic information of
all referenced knowledge sources.
The capability to respond to a user's natural
language request is a goal of some expert
systems in the reference arena. The ability to
respond to a request such as I need a
bibliography on distributed databases or I need
rhe name o f a distributed database system
represents two quite different types of
questions. The first can be answered by
bibliographic data but the second requires the
content of a source such as a textbook or a
reference source such as Datapro. What they
both have in common is that to understand

what the question i s about, some level of
natural language processing must be performed
and mapped to a question database which
contains the answer to the question.
Several relatively successful attempts have
been made to answer the first type of question
(bibliography) but successful attempts at
answering the second question at a general
level remain elusive. The National Agricultural
Library of the United States Departmat of
Agriculture (USDA) developed a system called
Answerman in 1986 for assisting in answering
questions related to a wide variety of reference
books and other reference materials in the area
of agriculture. This was referred to as an 'Expert
Advisory System.'
This was followed by .a system called
AquaRef which acted as an expert advisory
system in the narrQw domain of aqua culture. A
major concept in this system was to permit
chaining by users to build 'chains' of knowledge
bases representing their own collections and
expertise which could be chained to other
knowledge bases thereby extending the overall
knowledge base using a form of distributed
expertise.
Ready Reference Advisor is an expert system
designed to assist novice users in finding
answers to common library reference questions.
The system was developed for the National
Agriculture Library (NAL). The system was
written using an expert system development
tool called 1st class14. A second system
implemented with 1st class i s the Finders
system. Finders was developed for the
Economic Research Service of the Department
of Agriculture. Finders uses a menu based
system to guide users to the information they
are seeking.
RAS (Reference Advisory Systems) is an
expert systern developed at San Diego State
Universit to assist in providing reference
services1'. The RAS system provides a natural
language interface to reference service in the
areas of materials science, computer science,
public health and nursing.
Ihtelligent agents16 to be experts in specific
domains for answering reference questions
would need:
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1996, 16(4)

Williams and Sochars : Application o f Expert Agents/Assistants in Library and (nformation Systems
iii

4

e+

A database of domain sources, a database of
frequently asked questions (FAQ) with
answers
A thesaurus for vocabulary control, a concept
or topical hierarchy or network of domain
knowledge

A parser plus lexical and semantic analyser for
analysing questions being asked

e Discipline map which contains concepts and
associated relationships found in textbooks,
lecture notes, thesauri and knowledge
classification schemes.
@

Browse function for navigating the discipline
map using hypertext type links.

+B

Item map, which is a stiucture that a domain
expert believes contributes to the organisation
of a subject field and these are used to
construct the discipline map.

ie

The system has a knowtedge editor module for
creating and maintaining concept hierarchies
and a knowledge integrator module for
building structural relationships among
concepts.

+B

Distref attempts to stimulate concept
formation and exploration by users who do
not have a reference librarian or instructor
readily available for asking questions and
receiving answers.

s A powerful pattern matcher
o A classifier for determining question and
answer categories
$

A search engine for retrieving relevant
answers, and

4 A relevance feedback mechanism to learn
how to better perform the reference task.

The intelligent agent would continually
update its databases, its concept hierarchy and
its classification scheme based on relevance
feedback. If the intelligent agent maintained a
profile of users who asked questions and if
relevance feedback information related to
previous questions asked, it could perform its
task in a very personalised manner.

6.

REFERRAL SERVICE

~ c ~ o n a l d describes
"
a referral/reference
prototype called Distref used by students
involved in distance education at Charles Sturt
University in Australia. This prototype system
captures knowledge of academic disciplines as
well as knowledge provided by lecturers and
librarians who deal with inquiries from students.
The system i s composed of the following major
components:
te Student profile which contains the courses

and subjects the student has or is taking which
indicates the level o i complexity for a question
or a concept.

o Local reference sources to which a student can
be referred which is a knowledge base for the
system.
te CD-ROM catalogue

of

bibliographic

references available.

o Search function for searching the catalogue.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1996, 16(4)

An intelligent agent for the student in a
distance education programme might observe
the information (in the form of a course
syllabus, lecture notes, exercises, probiem sets,
etc.) related to the current task (specific course
related activities) a student is working on and
could launch a search for potential relevant
referral items, experts, locations, organisations
and other artefacts. The agent might have
learned a 'pattern of interaction' and when the
student needs to be referred to i s capable of
detecting sources of help and offer suggestions
without being explicitly asked to provide such
help. This i s analogous to a teacher observing
students in a class during a lecture or
question-answer session and determining
whether they need help in understanding the
concepts being presented. it i s also analogous
to a teacher observing a student attempting to
solve a problem or pertorm an experiment and
detecting that they need assistance. In some
cases, the amount of time spent on a particula,
activity indicates a need for assistance whereas
in other cases there is a pattern of interaction
with the material, problem or experiment that
indicates a need for assistance.
The difficult task for such an intelligent agent
is not monitoring what the student is d0ir.g at
25

Williams and Sochars :Application of Expert Agents/Assistants in Library and Information Systems

the workstation since it is relatively simple to
capture all keyboard, mouse, window and data
related activities. The difficult task is
determining how to classify and interpret the
monitor data such that Interaction patterns can
be detected and utilised to provide assistance.
Such an intelligent agent must be able to learn
from past experience with the user or by having
an expert such as a teacher to enter patterns
known to indicate when there is a need for
assistance.

7.

INDEXING AND
ABSTRACTING
Traditional information storage and retrieval

(ISR) systems use an inverted file approach to
indexing. This causes problems with the
postcoordination of uncontrolled vocabulary
resulting in poor recall/precision and the
storage of unused terms. The use of positiona!,
truncation and substitution operators alleviates
some of this problem for searching but syntactic
and contextual information is lost in an inverted
index.
The Structured lnformation Management
Processing and Retrieval (SIMPR) project,
funded by ESPRIT, attempts to process source
documents and make them retrievable using
expert system techniques rather than full
inversion of the documents. SIMPR maintaitts a
model of the information base into which
documents are entered and from which retrieval
is performed. The system uses lexical and
syntactic processing modules for storage and
search rather than simply character matching.
The text processing system validates text words,
performs a structural mark up of a document,
performs a morphological analysis of each word
via a lexicon lookup using 400 disambiguation
rules and then performs a syntactic analysis of
words relative to the role they play within a
sentence and appends an appropriate role tag.
The task of automatic indexing or subject
cataloguing
of
documents
has
been
approached from many angles but all
apprdaches require the selection of terms from
the text of the document or document
surrogate. This involves selecting those terms
most indicative of the content or 'aboutness' of
26

"

the document and mapping it to existing terms
via a thesaurus or creating a new category of
terms when no thesaurus match is found. Expert
systems attempt to select anchor terms Ot.
phrases using a set of rules or heuristics such as:

e If a word or phrase occurs both in the title and
other document structures, it is preferred.
-$

For conferences and workshops, title terms are
preferred.

e If an abstract or summary exists, terms or
phrases in these are preferred.
@

If a classification number exists, select terms
that match the class number's textual
definition.

The SIMPR indexing software works by
extracting analytics (index terms) that represent
the information content of the text and classifies
the index terms for subject searching. Each
sentence in the text is passed through a series
of augmented transition networks (ATN) for
extraction of candidate analytics using a set of
processing rules. The candidate analytics are
then passed through a series of normalisation
and transformational procedures to ensure
standard structure and word forms. The words
are also compared to a set of stop word lists for
possible rejection as an index term. The results
are presented to the user for rejection,
modification or acceptance.
The SIMPR classification system uses an
expert system to learn how a user classifies
documents and suggests likely classification
categories. This learning approach is seen as the
most practical method for determining
classification attributes. This function falls into
the category of an intelligent agent since it must
observe an expert user and learn how the user
performs a task, e.g., classification. The
suggestion of classification categories is an
assistant function. Therefore, the SIMPR
classification expert system fails into the fuzzy
area between a classical expert system and an
intelligent agent/assistant.
lndex Expert is an expert system'8 that
assists librarians in selecting the appropriate
index terms for a document Bailey. It also assists
in abstract development. lndex Expert i s
designed as a generic indexing tool.
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol,1 996. 1 6(4)

Williams and Sochats :Application of Expert AgentslAssistants in Library and information Systems

Martinez, Lucey and ~ i n d e r 'describe
~
an
indexing system developed for the abstracting &
indexing service of the American Petroleum
Institute. This system is domain specific to the
area of petroleum technical literature. The
system applies its rules to the American
Petroleum Institute's Thesaurus to suggest terms
for indexing.
The
Artificially
Intelligent
Document
Analyser (AIDA) project developed a range of
document analysis techniques to indicate the
content of a document. AIDA divides
document into three stages:

e Document structure analysis.
e Content analysis.
e Output generation.
,The document structure analysis breaks the
document into words, sentences, paragraphs,
sections, etc. and identifies structural entities
such as heading;, numbering conventions, and
other document structural and countable facts.
Content analysis is performed using
sentence position, cue identification and
section headings to identify key sentences
which are then selected as representing the
content of the document in much the same
manner as an expert abstracter. The knowledge
acquisition portion of AlDA used a professional
librarian in the Australian Parliamentary Library
In order to develop the knowledge base. The
output i s an abstract ~ndicatingthe content or
'aboutness' of the document using the 'key'
sentences found during the content analysis
processing phase.
The AlDA system can be thought of as
having many characteristics needed for an
intelligent agent or assistant. If an abstracter,
indexer or subject cataloguer had such an agent
available, i t would present its si~ggestionon the
content of the document which could then be
utilised as a draft abstract, a surrogate for
indexing purposes, or a statement useful for
selecting subject terms and classification
numbers. This agent might interact with an
indexing agent, a classification agent and or a
subject cataloguing agent to provide a basis for
their specific tasks.
- -

DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol,1996, 16(4)

-

An expert agent might also observe
professional abstracters and indexers as they
perform their work tasks and learn the patterns
used by them to create abstracts and select or
generate index terms. The agent could then
determine the sources within documents, and
thesaurus or subject classification schedules of
'key' sentences for generating abstracts and the
index terms selected for documents. The agent
could then determine what patterns exist in
these selections for different document types as
well as similarity measures among documents
so as to use this knowJedge to make
suggestions to an abstracter or indexer.
A simple similarity measure between a new
document to be abstracted or indexed and
previously abstracted and indexed documents
could provide prototypical abstracts and index
terms for a new document. This will require
maintaining information about the source of key
sentences and index terms for documents
already abstracted and indexed in such a way
that the intelligent agent could utilise this
information in making suggestions for new
documents to be processed. Structural
information about documents will be necessary
to perform this ta'sk. This would suggest that the
structural markup of documents such as that
provided by the Standard Generalised Markup
Language (SGML), will be required for such an
intelligent task. Thus, it will be possible to easily
and quickly identify structural components of
documents such as title, author, abstract,
summary, conclusion, headings, tables, lists,
formulas, diagrams, etc.
It is hypothesised that expert abstracters and
indexers utilise the structural components as
cues for selecting key sentences, index terms,
classification numbers, subject headings, etc.
The use of thesaurus, subject heading list or
classification schedule as a verification
mechanism for selecting terms, phrases and key
sentences might be more useful if the entries in
these devices had some indication or
explanation of how they were derived, what the
sources of derivation were and under what
circumstances they were most useful. This is
analogous to the roles and links concept
associated with index terms and subject
headings.
- -

27

Williams and Sochats :Application of Expert Agents/Assistants in Library and Informa~onSystems

8,

COhLEGTlON
DEVELOPMENT AND

AcQulsaTror\8
The economic crisis related to the
acquisition of library materials has increased the
importance of selecting and acquiring the best
and most relevant materials within budgetary
constraints. Selection of materials has always
been the domain of experts in collection
development. Expert systems have Seen
develol;ed to select materials in very specific
domains such as the Monograph Selection
Advisor which supports the selection of
materials in classical Latin literature and others
such as that described by uada20 which makes
decisions on journal selection. An expert in any
area including collection development must
have three types of knowledge, namely:

*

Domain

+

Problem solving, and

9

Heuristic rules

theory

where domain theory
heuristic rules.

+

problem solving =

In collection development, the following
kinds of knowledge is required:
ei

General knowledge of libraries, e.g., a library
model.

a Knowledge of selection rules such as selection
criteria, relevance of criteria to a particular
situation, relative importance of rules, etc.

a Knowledge of domain attributes such as
authors, publishers, existing collection,
development objectives, user requirements,
etc.
@

Knowledge of ratings for authors and
publishers in specific fields and why they are
rated at a certain level.

The critical element is the selection criteria
used in the expert system. These can be
acquired via user defined criteria as an
emmerated list with sub issues, range of values
for certainty and how different criteria can be
combined for establishing priorities. Another
approach for establishing selection criteria i s to
use machine learning based on a decision
theoretic model by observing how an expert
collection
developer
classifies
potential
seiections in terms of acceptance and rejection
and the explanation for such decisions. The
statistical
model
resulting
from
such
observations and the features of the items
selected and rejected become the criteria for
future
recommendations
to
users
for
acceptance or rejection.
It may also be possible to train a neural
network to build patterns for determining the
features or criteria for acceptawe or rejection
of specific items. Of course, the selection
criteria will change over time and therefore it
becomes necessary to constantly monitor the
selection patterns and determine when such
changes are occurring. These changes must
then be used to update the knowledge base by
adding new rules, deleting old rules or
modifying old rules.

The Librarian Assistant expert system has
been built using the expertise of a professional
technical librarian Debrower and uones2'. The
d ~ m a i nof this system i s the collection of the
Applied Physics Laboratory at johns Hopkins
University. The subject areas covered include:
engineering, computer science, physics, applied
mathematics, telecommunications and other
technical areas relating t~ the Laboratory.
Johnston and Mfeckertz2 describe an expert
system called Selection Advisor. This system
assists in collection development at academic
libraries. The system has rules for the
application of the following six selection criteria:
Subject.

a+ Knowledge of library goals as related to
collection development and the relative
importance of these goals.
$+

28

Problem solving knowledge in terms of
general strategies, sequence of using criteria
and relative weighting of criteria.

ei Intellectual content.

a Potential use.
ei

Relation to existing collection.

o Bibliographic considerations.
DESlDOC Bullet~nof lnf Technol. 1996. 16(4)

Williams and Sochaes :.9pplication of Expert AgenbsjAssistants in Library and lnformation Systems

e Language.
If we had an intelligent agent that could
observe sources of requests for materials (such
as e-mail requests), changes in the environment
served by the collection (such as new courses,
research projects, services or products), the
content of the existing collection (such as an
OPAC or document database), and sources of
new
materials
(such
as
publisher
announcements and lists), then it would be
possible for the agent to be given a set of initial
rules matching the collection development
pslicy of the library or information centre and
let it observe how an expert bibliographer
makes decisions concerning requests and newly
available materials.
The intelligent agent would then build a
flexible decision model and a set of heuristics
for assisting the collection development
personnel. For example, when an e-mail request
for materials arrives, the agent could parse the
request, determine whether it i s already in the
collection, determine whether it i s in an other
collection from which i t could be borrowed,
verify the bibliographic entry, process it against
the collection development and heuristics
provided
or
learned
and
prepare a
recommendation with explanation as to
whether the item should be acquired and from
whom. Budgetary constraints could also be a
part of the rule base and budgetary data could
be used as part of the decision making process.
The collection development personnel's task
would change from largely data collection and
analysis that currently characterise the job to
evaluating the explanation and data used 5y the
intelligent agent for its recommendations. An
agent that observed multiple collection
development personnel might impose a level of
consistency that i s difficult to achieve using
manual systems.

9.

CLASSIFlCATlON OF
LIBRARY MATERIALS

The classification of library materials using
the Universal Decimal Classification (UDC)
system, Library of Congress Classification (LC)
system, Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC)
system or others is a fundamental function for
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno),1996. 16(4)

libraries which has traditionally been performed
by experts in classification. The N-Cube expert
is ean~ example
~
system reported by ~ o s ~ r o v
of using expert system technology. to assist in
the classification of library materials using the
UDC. This system combines shallow knowledge
usually represented as production rules and
deep knowledge usually represented in a frame
structure (representing classification knowledge
as an integration of object oriented structures
with associated rules and hypotheses). The
N-Cube architecture consists of a parent class,
sub-classes, a rule set, class inheritance and a
set of hypotheses. This i s represented as a tree
structure which is searched based upon
information in the bibliographic elements of a
title to be classified. When a rule lone or more
facts) matches a node in the tree, it i s verified
via a user or a knowledge base of facts and its
classification number is extracted. The node's
sub-tree can then be searched to determine
more specific extensions to the base number as
desired.
Classification schemes may be knowledge
based such as UDC and DDC or they may be
materials based such as LC. Knowledge based
schemes would appear to be easier to apply in
expert system technology than a materials
based scheme. The basic concept of
classification is to keep material about the same
subset of knowledge together. Therefore, a set
of rules could be formulated that depict the
logic
- used by a lassifier to select a classification
category and then build the appropriate
extensions to the number. Extensions to a
classification number are formulated by rules
that dictate how to generate those digits
beyond the general category number to provide
specificity for the location of the material. Rules
for handling form of material (dictionaries,
periodicals, associations, historical, cokctions,
bibliographies, etc.) are provided in the
schedules of the classification schemes.
A particularly sticky problem is the
classification of
non-traditional materials.
~chultz" describes the design of an expert
system for classifying music scores using the
Dewey
Decimal
System.
The
MUSIC
CATaloguing (MUSCAT) system is also designed

29

Williams and Sochaes :Application of Expert Agents/Assistants in Library and Information Systems
to assist in
(~ulton'~).

cataloguing

musicai

pieces

An expert agent could assist a classifier by
utilising bibliographic
elements
in
the
catalogued material to suggest one or more
general categories. For example, the author
i n t r y may be used to lookup other materials
written by the same author and use Its
classification number as a potential starting
point. This is based on the assumption that
authors tend to write on the same generai
knowledge area For extended periods of time.
Therefore, the most recent materials would be
the most usefull.

A match between a previously written
material's slibject headings or index terms
might be used to verify whether the current
material i s in ihe same knowledge area.. The
intelligent agent might then examine other
bibliographic elements such as subject
headings, title words and phrases, etc. to
generate a more specific classification number
within the general category and to determine
whether
the
material
requires
form
subdivisions. If the material requires form
sub-divisions, the classification schedule form
subdivision rules would be used to generate
further extensions to the classification number.
This would require that the form-subdivision
rules be ex~ressedas a set of IF - THEN - ELSE
production rules. The expert agent could then
collect data on the classifier's acceptance,
rejection and modifications to its recommended
classification number. This is to refine its rule
base for future processing of bibliographic
to
determine
recommended
entries
classification numbers. Obviously, such an
agent could have a highly interactive
component to assist a classifier in navigating a
classification schedule and formulating form
sub-divisions of classification numbers, e.g.,
country classes for national bibliographies.

10. ONLINE DATABASE

SELECTlON
The number of online databases has grown
from several hundred to several thousand over
the last ten years which poses a problem to
information specialists or end-user who must
30

select a database for answering a specific query.
Even though database selection aids exist in
printed and electronic form they are not
efficient or effective to use because of their
volume. An expert system developed by
Trautman and litter*^ attempts to provide
database selection assistance. This system
consists of database attributes with rankings, a
user modeller, a question clarifier, a search
module, an evaluator module and a ranker
module to produce a recommended set of
database files to use for a query.,

A browser module also permits a Cree text
search of text Files and indexes of the database
entries. Databases are classified using nine
attributes such as kind, period of coverage,
language, geography, vocabulary, viewpoint,
sources, audience, and updating. Each database
attribute has category descriptions and ranks
used by the expert system to determine which
databases are appropriate for a query. The user
modeller is used to determine where the
end-user fits on a novice-expert scale as well as
the type of results required for its ultimate
utilisation. Ambiguities and uncertainties in the
query are resolved by the question clarifier
module using expert knowledge analogous to a
professional intermediary. This expert system i s
an aid to selecting the correct database from
the thousands that exist.
An intelligent agent might be built that
utilised the same data and module structure as
Trautman and Flitter but with the added
capability to store queries, user modelling
information and feedback on databases that
successfully responded to the query. When a
new query is entered, the expert agent could
match it with similar queries and user modelling
data to determine whether it already had a
database selection list from a previous query.
The agent might still do a search and match the
results with the stored selection list to
determine whether its previous results were still
valid. This is similar to the human expert whc
remembers previous searches that are similar to
a current query and utilises the same databases
that provided success. An extension to this
process might be to have a small but
representative sub-set of each database's
content such that a local search could be
DESIDOC Bulletinof fnf Technol, 1996. 16(4)

Williams and Sochats : Application of &pert Agenls/Assistants in Library and Information Systems

performed to show the user what the results are
likely to be and get user feedback from this
subset search.

I1. LIBRARY EDUCATION
Another
area
of
intelligent
system
application is in the training of professional
librarians and in topics related to library science.
Expert systems can provide a specialised,
concentrated, and low cost method for
obtaining practical library-related experience.
Obensen et ai. describe the Yes Sir expert
system which i s designed to assist in retrieval
tasks. Associated with Yes Sir is an intelligent
tutoring system that teaches the user improved
information retrieval skills. As exDert and
intelligent agent systems become more
abundant in library science, modules for
enhancing the knowledge and skills of the users
will be added.

1.

Planning agents which plan a solution for
complex tasks by acquiring case-based
knowledge and using some 'inductive
learning techniques.

2.

Broker agents which act as mediators or
facilitators by matching user requests
against information or known solutions in
databases or provided by database agents.
These agents rarely use learning methods.
Group support agents which act as special
'broker' agents for performing tasks that
support group activities such as scheduling
meetings. These are based on speech-act
theory and use personal preferences of group
members to negotiate a solution to a problem.

4.

12. SUMMARY
In this article we have tried to provide an
introduction to expert system technology and
intelligent agents/assistants as well as how this
technology has potential uses in work activities
performed in libraries and information centers.
The problem area we concentrated on was the
use of such agents to reduce information
overload and reduction of clerical and repetitive
tasks associated with many activities. In
addition, we have tried to provide some
indication of expert systems developed in these
areas of activities which have proved useful and
whose techniques could be incorporated into
intelligent agents/assistants.
It should be clear that there is no generally
applicable agent or agent system that combines
all the ideas and results of the many different
developments that have been explored. But
there are various types of specialist expert
systems and agents that have been used to
explore specific problem domains with library
and information centers. There are very few
intelligent agents commercially available but this
should change over the next few years. There
does not appear to be any standardised
approach to developing intelligent agents.
Intelligent agents can be classified as belonging
to categories such as:
DESIDOC Bulletin of lnf Technol, 1996. 16(4)

Personal assistant agents2' or apprentices
which contain formalised learning
algorithms and heuristics developed for a
single, specialised application or task.
lnformation filters are an example of this
class of agent applied to browsing types of
tasks.

Future agents will explore information
spaces based on user activities and develop
pathways to information sources which they wiil
cache on the assumption that these sources will
become valuable in the future. Future agents
will be combined into systems o f agents which
will exchange information, execute tasks for
each other and negotiate solutions to
information related problems. Of course, the
acceptance and usefulness of such agents wiil
depend on user acceptance of a software
product acting on his/her behalf and observing
and collecting data on what he/she is doing.

REFERENCES
1.

McDonald, Craig and Weckert, John.
Libraries and Expert Systems. 199 1, Taylor
Graham, London.

2. Cavanagh, Joseph. Library applications of
knowledge-based systems. In Expert
Systems in Reference Services, edited by
Roysdon, Christine and White, Howard.
Haworth Press, New York, 1989, pp.1-19.

3. Durkin, John. Expert systems catalogue of
applications. Intelligent Computer Systems,
Akron, OH, 1993.
31

Williams and Sochats :Application of Expert Agents/Assistants in Library and Informati~nSystems
4.

Pople, H.E. Jr, Myers, j.D, and Miller, R.A.
DIALOG: A model of diagnostic logic for
internal medicine. !]CAI, 1975, 4, 848-855.

5. Duda, R . 0 , Gashnig, 1.G and Hart, P.E.
Model design in the PROSPECTOR
consultant system for mineral exploration. In
Expert systems in the microelectronic age,
edited by Michie, D. Edinburgh University
Press, Edinburgh, 1979, pp. 153-167.

6.

Boy, G.A. Intelligent Assistant Systems.
Academic Press, London, 1991.

7.

Ericsson, K.A. and Simon, HA. Protocol
analysis: Verbal reports as data. 1984, MIT
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

8.

RULECONS. Georgia Tech Research
Institute, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, Georgia, 1992, 30332.

9.

Maes, P. (ed.) Designing autonomous
agents. MIT/Elsevier Press, London, 1994

10. Maes, P. Agents that Reduce Work an$
information Overload. Communications of
the ACM, 1994, 37(7), 30-40.
11. McGuire, I., et al. SHADE: Technology for
knowledge-based collaborative engineering.
Concurrent Engineering: Research and
Applications, 1993, 1(3).
12. B~rgman,Christine. 'Psychological research
in human-computer interaction.' In Annual
Review of lnformation Science and
Technology, edited by Williams, Martha.
White Plains, NY. Knowledge Industry
Publications, 1984, 19, 33-64.
13. Guida, Giovanni and Tasso, C. An expert
intermediary system for interactive
document retrieval. Automatics, 1983,
19(6), 759-66.
14. Forrester,
C.L
and
Garner,
0.).
Knowledge-based support for library users
in Libraries and Expert Systems, edited by
McDonald, Craig and Weckert, john. 1991,
Taylor Graham, London, pp. 17-27.

15. 1STCLASS expert system applications
guide. A1 Corporation,
Waltham,
Massachusetts.
4 6. Carande, Robert 1. Reference advisory
systems board. information Technology and
Libraries, 1990, 9(2), 180-84.

32

17. Riecken, D. Special Issue on intelligent
agents. Communications of the ACM, 1994.

18. Bailey, C. The index expert system: A
knowledge based system to assist users in
index selection. Reference Services Review,
1989, 17(4), 19-28.
19. Martinez, C., Lucey, j., and Linder, E. An
expert system for machine-aided indexing.
lournal o f Chemical Information Computing
Science, 1987, 27(4), 158-62.
20. Rada, R., Bacus, I., Giampa, To,Gidds, C.,
and Goel, S. Computerised guides to
journal selection. Information Technology
and Libraries. 1987, 6, 173-84.
21. DeBrower, A.M. and Uones, D. Application
of an expert system to collection
development: Donation processing in a
special library. Library Software Review,
1991,10(6), 384-89.
22. Johnston, Mark and Weckert, john.
Selection advisor: An expert system for
collection development. Information
Technology and Libraries, 1990, 9(3),
219-25.
23. Cosgrove, S.J. Item classification using the
N-Cube's
hierarchical
knowledge
representation scheme. In Libraries and
expert systems, edited by McDonald, Craig
and Weckert, John. Taylor Graham, London,
1991, pp.88-98.
24. Schultz, Lois. Designing an expert system to
assign Dewey Classification numbers to
scores. National Online Meeting,
Proceedings, New York, May 9-1 1, 1989.
9-11, pp.193-97.
25. Fulton, G. MUSCAT: A music cataloguing
inquiry system from California. Library
Software Review, 1988, 7(3), 192.
26. Trautman, R. and Flitter, S. An Expert system
for microcomputers to aid selection of
online databases in expert systems. In
Reference Service edited by Christine
Roysdon and Howard White, Haworth
Press, New York, NY. 1989.

27. Bocionek, S. Software secretary kernei: An
extendible architecture for learning and
negotiating personal assistants. A/
Communications, 1994, 7(3/4), 147-60.

DESDOC Bulletinof Inf Technol, 1996, 16(4)

