nEI;IDOC iiiilleiin o! lnformatio~?Technology, Vo!. 16, No. 5. September 1996, pp. 3-9
% 1906 DESIDOC

Online Services for Library and Information Centre
Ramanand Malviya and Sundar Rajan*

Abstract
This abstract reviews various avenues available for a modern library to access
remote databases and provide an efficient and comprehensive service to
users. It specifies gateways of oniine services available to lndian libraries and
lists the hardware needed to use such services. Some of the upcoming
lndian networks are also briefly discussed.

1.

lMTRODUCTiON

Academic libraries throughout the world are
New
challenges
and
at
crossroads.
opportunities are emerging due to rapid growth
of publications, shrinking budgets, rising prices
and ever increasing expectations of users. These
are few basic challenges facing library and
information specialists. Rapid economic, social,
political, educational, cultural and technological
changes are making it difficult for the
professionals to respond efficiently and
effectively to environmental changes.
Due to improved communications and
networking facilities, the researchers, academic
institutions, students etc., are beginning to
discover the potential of information retrieval
from online database services. Information,
communication, and networking technologies
are providing the professionals with new
opportunities to improve their resources and
services
Relevant and adequate information is vital
under present social, economic and political
' Indian Social institute
10, Lodi Road
inst~tutionalArea
N e w Delhr- l 70 003.
--

DESlDOC Bulletin of !nf Techno1 1996,16(5)

situations for taking decisions at the right time.
But inspite of all these restrictions, change i s a
must for survival of the library profession.

2.

NETWORKING

2.1

Scope

Networking technologies have enabled the
libraries and information sciences professionals
to reconsider their priorities. As developments
take place at a rapid pace, information gains
importance according to its currentness, hence
there arises a need for new technoloaies which
have the ability to store, retrieve and enhance
dissemination. Networking also implies the
congregation of libraries on an equal footing for
the purpose of' sharing resources and
information.

-

Developing a common classification system
is vital for improving the flow o i iniorrnation
between different libraries. Sow since there is a
trend away from 'just-in-case' to 'just-in-time'
approach,
towards
developing
library
collections; no library can be self-sufficient.
Hence, there is trend towards improving access
to networked information, as compared to the
traditional commitment toit,ards developing self
sufficient collections. Neti\orking technologies
are providing basic iinks to numerous routes of
digital information. Internet, a netii,ork of

networks, i s such a link. It has made virtual
library almost a reality. Time and space are no
more constraints, and saturation of services i s
taking place. Any individual or institution
connected to Internet, is in a position to access
lnternet based resources and services, round
the clock from about 120 countries of the
world. One can access local as well as remote
iesources and services, as and when needed,
from one's desktop computer.

2.2

ERNET/Bornbay Gateway Project

ERNET (Education and Research Network) is
one such endeavour aimed at setting up a
computer network for academic and research
community with initial participation from eight
leading academic and research institutions
including Department of Electronics (DOE). In
India, ERNET is connected to lnternet via
National Centre for Software Technology,
Bombay and apart from providing e-mail, it also
provides Ftp (File Transfer Protocol) and Telnet
modes of access, to various resources and
services available on the lnternet. The main aim
of the project was to build capability in the area
of computer networking in the country and
setup a country-wide computer network for
academic and research community to facilitate
informal and frequent interactions, sharing of
computing resources and extend cooperation in
research activities. ERNET programme i s
currently focussing on expanding i t s reach to
the entire academic and research community of
the country.

2.3

Gateway to Networks

A gateway is a link between two separate
e-mail systems and they allow members of
different systems to swap messages. Most of the
gateways are automatic and they work on the
following principle.
Messages for a remote system are stored in
the home system. The remote system i s
periodically dialled up and all incoming and
outgoing mail is swapped. They also allow the
users on local e-mail systems to swap messages
and share information with users around !he
world. Any individual or institution interested in
accessing the Internet-based resources and
services, must get a connection from ERNET or
4

VSNL which are currentiy available in India. This
can be done by becoming a member of any
one of the two networks named above.
Network-based information i s more valuable for
the developing countries, as it can be retrieved
instantly and i s current unlike :he printed
documents from the deveioped counrries. B u t
for the telecommunication probleds, ERNE is a
very good facility in India to access various
oetwork based information sources across the
world.

2.4

Modes of Access

Electronic mail (e-mail), Ftp, \a/orld Wide
Web (WWW), Gopher, Archie and the Telnet
modes for internet are being made available by
ERNET now. By e-mail, one can transmii small
files of information. E-mail is a very good service
which ensures interaction in a cost-effective
manner, which was otherwise not possible by
'Snail-mail'. It i s a store-and-forward facility and
the term is an acronym for postal mail.
Ftp helps to transmit large files to-and-fro
among various sites. Ftp and Telnet modes are
fully interactive. Whenever we use this mode, i t
i s possible to browse the files available on other
computers, and the results of the interaction are
visible on the monitor of the searcher. Telnet is
just like manipulating a movie on a VCR. People
who do not have access to Ftp and Telnet
services, can retrieve information via Ftp-mail,
gophermail, and mail-archie, by using the e-mail
facility. All the above mentioned features of the
lnternet can be accessed by any standard
modem; a good quality high speed modem is
normally recommended in order to access the
WWW. Computer communication plays an
important role in speedy transfer of information
and libraries around the world use this
technology. Following are a few useful
addresses for this purpose:

<ftpmail@ncc.go.gp>or
<ftpmail@cs.uow.edu.au>
<gophermail@ncc.go.gp>or
<gophermail@calvin.edu>
<mailarchie@archie.ans.net or
147.225 .1.10>
DESIDOC Bullefin of Inf lechnol. l W6,16(5)

Tools for lnternet Use

2.5

There are various tools available for internet
use which facil~tate in accessing, searching,
indexing, retrieving, and organising networked
information on the Internet. Since navigation of
networks is another issue of serious concern, lot
of developments are taking place to facilitate
the locate and search operations of the digital
data and literature. Archie is one such service. It
is possible to find numerous files available on
various anonymous sites, with the help of this
tool. The Archie database also indexes files from
selected directories on major sites.
Veronica is an index which facilitates
Boolean keyword searches and connection to
Gopher's menu resources for information.
Gopher isla tool for decentralised distribution of
digital information. Mosaic, Prospero, Wais, and
jughead are a few other tools which help to
deal with search of networked information.
Mosaic i s a software programme developed by
the National' Centre for Super Computing
Applications in Champaign at Illinois. It i s a
graphical user interface (GUI) that removes the
need to know arcane lnternet addresses and
procedures. The programme is designed to let
users browse through the WWW, a subset of
databases available on the internet. Prospero is
designed to allow an individual user to organise
lnternet sources of personal interest. An
important feature of this system i s that same
information can be organised in multiple ways
depending upon the needs of an individual or a
group, .and user can access multiple
organisational schemes.
Wide Area Information Server (WAIS) is a
tool for index~ng. It maintains a full-text
collection of documents and allows users free
text searching to access the collection. Jughead
is also becoming a standard tool for browsing
gophers like Veronica.

2.6

lnternet Hunt

Training of lnternet users is another service
to enable them to exploit the Internet-based
resources and services fully. Rick Gates of the
University of California,
Santa Barbara,
[~Lbo5gate@ucsbxa.ucsb.edu>] has started
Internet Hunt every month which puts a few

difficult questions pertaining to the items of
information available on the Internet, and then
announces the results of the hunt. This is a very
good way of training lnternet users and
enhancing their awareness of the documentary,
institutional, and other sources of information
available via Internet. This hunt i s posted on
various mailing lists, such as PACS-L, NETTRAIN,
etc (These lists 2re discussed later on in this
paper). The questions, answers, and instructions
related to all the lnternet hunts- are available
from
the
FTP.CNI.ORG
in
the
</pub/netguides/i-hunt/> directory. This is a
very useful method of improving reference
service in libraries.
Online Public Access Catalogues (OPACsj,
Bulletin Board Systems (BBSs), mailing lists,
usenet newsgroups, computer conferences,
directories, guides arid numerous databases are
a few examples of the resources and services
available o n Internet. The best way to know
about these resources and services i s to get
membership from ERNET or VSNL and use
these services for hands-on experience. Another
way is to browse a few directories and guides to
use the network based services effectively.

3.

ONLINE SERVICES

Databases are collections of related numeric
and/or textual information in machine-readable
form that are processed for computerised
publishing and/or electronic dissemination.
Now it would be appropriate to produce them
as new OPACs, BBSs, Usenet, Newsgroups,
electronic journals and newsletters. Many
academic, research and national libraries have
mounted their OPACs on the Internet, and it is
possible to browse them via various routes, such
as, Hytelnet, gophers, bulletin boards, and
various other gateways.

3.1

Hytelnet

Hytelnet (Hypertext browser for Telnetaccessible sites) is a utility that allows access to
telnet sites on the Internet. Telnet sites include
OPACs, BBSs, CWISs, Free-Nets, full-text
databases, electronic books, etc. It can be
received from Peter Scott by sending an e-mail
message at the address: ~scott@sklib.usask.ca~.
Online databases have a number of advantages

-

DESIDOC Bulletin of lnl Techno/, 1996, 1 6 6 )

5

especially if conventional paper searches are
their main means of obtaining information. The
advantages are:

811 R e d u c t i o n i n the number o f costly
subscriptions to periodicals and journals.

5 Reduction in the space required to store paper
based information.
Instant access to information.
Access to up-to-date information.

a

A user can perform a task in minutes that
would take hours to perform manually.

Other benefits of using online services are as
follows:

e By going online one can immediately satisfy
his/her desire for information.
+B

There are scores of important databases
containing more information than is normally
available in a library, and are far more
accessible.

a+ Online systems are normally available 24
hours a day, 7 days a week.
s Online

information IS updated regularly
whereas l~brary reference materral can bc
outdated.

.-L

The requ~redinformatron i s avarlaijle at one's
workplace.

+a The time consuming job of searching manual
systems, which often rely on the depth of
knowledge of an individual is removed. It
eliminates the time spent in clipping and filing
articles which may be of interest.

e Depending c;n the equipment being used to
access the database, extracted information
can be downloaded and incorporated into a
document without the need for rekeying the
data.

3.2. Alternate Access
An alternate way to access these online
catalogues i s to login to local gopher and
browse the concerned catalogue. There are a
few good online gu~des to get the telnet
addresses of these online catalogues. For
example, Art St. George and Ron Larson's
Guide to Library Catalogues and Databases IS

probably the most cornplete and up-todate
guide to these libraries. To access this guide,
send the following e-mail message to:
listserv@umnvma.bitnet. The message should
contain: 'get library package'. This guide can b e
searched on the WAIS also. The place to be
looked
on
the
Internet
is:
'WAIS
online-libraries-st-george.src'. The ftp access is
also available at: 'ftp.ariel.unm.edu'. It is in the
dir-ectory 'library' as the file 'internet.libraryl.
With the help of OPACs, it is possible to
.make collection development, online searching,
technical processing, reference service, and
bibliographical services more effective. Library
of Congress gopher is 1' very good source of
information
for
library
and
information
community. To access this gopher, you may
enter it either through your local gopher or
telnet to: 'niarvel.loc.gov' or '1 40.1 47.2.69'
login as 'marvel'. After this the first screen
appears and for selecting and entering the
screens of your choice. 'Virtual Reference Desk'
at Irvine, California, is a very good place for
reference materials. These sites can be accessed
via IocaI gopher arid any other public gopher.
'Consult;~nt.micro.ur~iri.edu'or 'uxi.cso.uiuc.edu'
are very useful pcrl)lic sites as they provide
further routes of information available on
Internet. While tc:lnetting to these places type
'gopher' at logirl prompt.
The Bulletin Board for Ltbmriiss (B131_)at Bath
in UK i s a very good source of one stop
information hunting. It has a special section o n
electronic journals and newsletters. It is
accessible via various gophers and gateways.
Direct access to it can be ensured by telrietting
to: 'sun.usf.ac.uk' or '128.86.8.6' logging in as
'janet' and at the password prompt by simply
pressing the return key and finally at the host
prompt by typing 'uk.ac.bath.buhll. National
Informarion on Software and Services (NISS)
gateway in the UK provides access to many
commercial services and European and
American networks and databases. D l M D l (a
German online service with severdl bilingual
biomedical databases and unrque expert system
nlerius for end-users), ECHO (the European
Community Host Organisation's onlirlc service),
and
ESA-IRS (European Space
Agency
Information Retrieval Ser\:~ce) arc the i-rlaln
DESlDOC Bulletin of lnf Technol. 1W6.16(5:

services available via the NlSS gateway, besides
various other OPL4Cs, commercial databases,
and regional American networks such as, CARL
and MELVYL. Another important feature of the
NiSS is that it is possible to search BUBh files via
the NISSWAIS. To access the NlSS gateway, use
the following instructions: 'telnetsun.nsf.ac.uk or
128.86.8.7' and type 'janet' at the login prompt,
press the return key at the password prompt
and type 'uk.ac.nissl at the host name prompt.

4.

ELECTRONIC JOURNALS
AND NEWSLETTERS

Another important development i s the
emergence
of
electronic
journals
and
newsletters on the computer networks. Many of
these journals are peer reviewed and distributed
freely via various mailing lists. These are
available on various gopher, bulletin boards, and
anonymous Ftp sites. TACS Review', 'PACS
News', and 'Current Cities' are the three
examples of bulletin boards. PACS Review is a
peer-reviewed journal; Current Cites is an
abstracting journal, but PACS News is simply a
newsletter. There are many more e-journals and
newsletters available for access. Details of these
journals and newsletters can be got from
'strange loves' directory of Bailey's List. The
above three publications can be subscribed by
sending the following e-mail message to:
listserv@uhupvml.bitnet; subscribe PACS-P your
name.
Almost all the free U S electronic journals are
available in the directory 'library without walls'
on the North Carolina State University Library
Gopher. This gopher can be accessed via a local
gopher. Ftp site 'dewey.lib.ncsu.edu' is another
very useful place to look for LIS electronic
journals and newslettersf'To browse archives of
Internet-based
serials,
gopher
to:
'gopher.cic.net 70'; choose 'electronic serials'
and then go through the alphabetical listing 'L'.
You can browse or retrieve all the issues of the
available LIS e-journals and newsletters. Some
are Online journal of Clinical Trials (1992),
published by the American Association of
Advancement of Science; Online journal o f
Knowledge Synthesis for Nursing (1994), by
Sigma Theta Tau International, Honor Society of
DESIDOC Bullefin of Inf Techno/.?996,16(5)

Nursing; Electronic Letters Online by Institution
of Electrical Engineers.

5.

NETWORKS IN lNDBA

information
networks
have
grown
enormously over the past three decades. These
have become an essential tool for users in
business, government and universities. A large
section of society wants access intelligent
machines situated in different locations via
networks. The concept of 'information society'
i s fast emerging where information networks
forms the key for all activities. Different types of
information networks available in India are
discussed in the following paragraphs.

The basic aim of this network is to link
government offices, other state and district
centres spread out in the Country. I t makes use
of satellite communication for long distance
links and terrestrial communication for short
distance intracity network. The network i s
based at Delhi and the host has terminals
spread over ministries and other departments.
Similar networks are being developed at
regional centres and state capitals. NlCNET
offers various online databases on health,
population, geographical facts and other
statistical data pertaining to the Country. High
speed error free communication linkage to
NICNfT can be achieved by installing a standard
PC with a standard communications software
connected to a modem.

5.2

ERNET

Education and Research Network (ERNET)
project was initiated as a result of identification
of computer networking as a thrust area by the
DOE. It i s aimed at setting up a computer
network for the academic and research
community with active support from leading
academic and research institutions including
DOE. ERNET offers a variety of applicatiorls
which include electronic mail, file transfer,
remote login, database access, conferencing,
archie, gopher, WAIS, World Wide Web, etc.
The main objective of this network i s to
enhance national capabilities in the areas of
design, development, research, education and
7

training on state-of-art concepts of computer
networking and related technologies.

5.3

BTIS

The Bio Technology Information System
(BTIS) is a large network of computers
established by NIC as distributed information
systems in lndia linking state capitals to the
centre, and also districts with cities through
satellite communications. The networking of
information and communication system thus
facilitate the use and sharing of available
resources in specialised centres under BTIS. This
network is tinted with the NICNET system, and
every node of BTIS has an identity and they are
linked to the satellite communication through a
dedicated line. Each node of BTIS operates in
conjunction, and each computer runs a separate
network program which accepts mailldata files
to be sent or received tolfrom its destination.

This network is actually a node housed at
Indian National Science Documentation Centre
(INSDOC), Delhi, and is connected to larger
network ERNET which is at DOE. Any subscriber
on this node can access all the Council of
Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR)
laboratories. Institutions on Scientific and
Industrial Research Network (SIRNET) and can
swap e-mail from various other networks of the
world.

5.5

CALIBNET

Calcutta Library Network (CALIBNET) has
been registered as a society and i s based at
Jadhavpur University, Calcutta, with Shri AP
Mitra as its coordinator. This network has up to
32 libraries as its members and is divided into
two clusters (north and south zone) while
INSDOC Regional Centre at Calcutta is its
operating agency. This Network uses standard
ethernet and TCPIIP software using X.25
gate-ways. Prominent members of this network
are the Satyan Bose lnstitute of Nuclear Physics,
Bose lnstitute and Radiophysics Library at
Rajabazar, all of them based in Calcutta. Phase I
of the Project was completed in 1992 and
Phase I1 is in progress. This network however is
not fully operational.

5.6

DELNET

Delhi Library Network (DELNET) was
initiated with the objective of connecting all the
libraries in and around Delhi. This network
provides features like e-mail, inter-library
requests, distribution of questionnaires, file
transfer, etc., with a view to eventually link
national and international databases and
networks. However, in the final phase it is
supposed to provide services like serials control,
books and journals maintenance, circulation,
user service, inter library user services,
circulation and maintenance of bibliographic
database, access to national and international
databases, subject profiles, abstracts, etc.

Any user connected to this network can
have access to a vast number of bibliographic
lists and related documents available at different
libraries and this can be achieved by using a
search term or a subject name.

It is obvious from the above discussion that
LiS resources and services on internet are
expanding rapidly. Lot of developments are
taking place in the field of access tools also.
E-mail, Ftp, and Telnet modes of access have
improved access to digital information. Ftp-mail,
Gopher-mail, and maii-archie are
new
developments for people without access to Ftp
and Telnet facility. With the help of these
services, information from various anonymous
Ftp sites and public gophers can be retrieved via
e-mail facility. Networked information and
online services are more valuable for developing
countries, as printed documents from
developed countries are not easily available in
time. The Government of lndia must ensure
subsjdised access to Internet-based resources
and services via ERNET. In India, Internet based
resources are available through ERNET and
VSNL. Libraries and Information centres are
required to work as gateways to networked
information.
Librarians
should
act
as
intermediaries
for
accessing,
retrieving,
organising and making available networked
DES1DOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/,1996,16(5)

information to end-users. There is also a strong
need for bibliographic information.
Frequent short-term training courses should
be organised by librarians, and other
organisations such as NISSAT, DRTC, INSDOC,
ILA, IASLIC, ITALIS, NASSDOC, DESIDOC, etc.
Libraries are required to adopt a balanced
approach to ensure timely availability of
indigenous as well as quality information. This
can be done by developing comprehensive
indigenous databases at local level and by
providing connections to Internet for quality
information. Our mission should be to provide
access to those materials, which give maximum
satisfaction to our users, by ensuring availability
of these sources iocally but in a timely manner.
The gap between the 'haves' and 'have nots'
must be abridged to enable end-users improve
the quality of their life and work. Only this way,
we cat? make library and information services

relevant to the needs of the end-users in
twenty-first Century.

REFERENCES
1.

Bose, Kausik. Information networks in India:
Problems and prospects. Ess Ess Publication,
New Delhi, 1994.

2.

Dern, D.P. The lnternet guide for new users.
McGraw-Hill, New York 1994.

3.

Education and Research Network (ERNET).
NlSSAT Newsletter. 1994.,13(2).

4.

Kroi. The whole Internet: User's, guide and
O'Reilly
& Associates,
catalogue.
Sebastopol, USA, 1992.

5.

Cal Dwell, I. and Kruiniger, H. Networking
for libraries made easy. Aslib Information,
1989, 17(9), 2 1617.

6. Leggott, M. Local area networks for your
library. Canadian Library journal, 1989,
46(5), 303-05.

DESIDOC Buiietin of inf Technoi, 1996, ?6(5)

9

