DELiDOC Builrtin of Inf~;mmat~on
Technoiogy, 1/01. 16, No.6 , November 1996, pp. 5-10

0 1996, DESlDOC

Chaining the Unchained Books: Copyright as an
infringement on the Philosophy of the Library Science

Abstract
'This paper gives a brief overview of the philosophy and laws o i library
science as propounded by Dr SR Ranganathan. Then it glves a btief
introduction to the laws of copyright in lndia ~ n d e the
r Copyright Act 1957
and the iater ammendments i n view of ongoing information revcl~ntioi:.I!
also explains what constitutes copyright protection aod copyright
infringement.
"What is a book that a man may know it,
and a man that he may know a book?"'

1.

THE CiBRARY SCIENCE-AN
iNDEAN PHILOSOPHY

Indian phiioscphy on library science has
develo~edthrough its deep cuftrsral tradition.
Perhaps the most often remembered name in
this regard is the name of Dr SR Ranganathan,
who has given lndia the framework of this
phrlosophy, which holds as good the basis of
ilbrary science even today. The frame of thought
~ropounded by him, is the philosophical
foundations of librarianship.

2-

THE LAWS OF LIBRARY
SCIENCE

The laws of library science have developed
over a period of time. Dr SR Ranganathan

" R.A., LL.5. (Hons.), National Law School of lndia
University, Bangalore.

DESIDOC Bulletin of lnf Techno],1996, 16(6)

identified five laws of library science,' wi!ich
truly form the basis of any develorsrncnt of this
science in this modern world.
The first law is 'Books zre far use.' ?;his law is
often considered to be the paramount !aiis of
library science as all the remaining izws in some
form or the other, are derivatives and variants of
this law. However this iaw did rake its time to
develop and a look into k-6isto:y w o t ~ f dreveai a
period in the 15th and f6th centuries, when
books were in fact chained and kept to the
shelves. This was because at that point of time,
the purpose to be preservation of the books
and not so much the use at tke same.
The reason identified for the same seerrled
to be that books were rare and difficult to
produce and it took years to copy a book.
However even after they were unchained, a
number of librarians did not accept the primary
principle that the books were meant for the use
and were happier with the books in the shelves,
rather than them being used by someone.
5

Today a turnaround situation is observed with
the information revolution and librarians are
ensuring that the books are meant for their use
and thereby avoidir?g possessive attitudes.
Numerous libraries are round the clock libraries.

statutory protection.
Hence i f one i s to
understand the nature a( the protection sought
to be granted by this right, one would have to
examine the statutory framework under which
the laws of copyrighr are enacted

Other principles which have been an
offspring of this primary, paramount principle
are the principles such as 'Books are for all'.
This law indicates a movement from books
being for a chosen few to books being for all.
The widening of this principle includes
transborder information, travelling libraries, erc.
The third law aims at an open access system
whereby "Every Books its Reader" i s the
paramount purpose of this princ~ple. The
freedom of individuals and the curiosity of
individuals is best rewarded with open access
systems.
The Fourth Law i s the law of
cataloguing, indexing, stacking guiding, etc.,
with the paramount purpose of the same being
'Save the time of the reader' The Fifth Law is a
movement towards world-wide access, with a
growth in members and users, keeping in mind
the principle that The Iibrary i s a growing
organism'.

In India, the law relating to copyright is
embodied under the Copyright Act 1957.

These principles are generally identified as
the philosophical principles around which any
library development would be oriented. All of
them are offspring's of the primary principle of
use of information. Modern day information
accessing through Internet, CD-ROMs, are
nothing but implementation of the above
principles.

3. COPYRIGHT PROTEGTIONBRIEF INTRODUflION
Having given a brief overview of the
philosophy and the Laws of library science, it i s
necessary to give a brief introduction to the
laws of copyright.
The laws of copyright were framed in order
to protect an author against piracy of his work.
This Right i s not a right which arises under
common law, but i s a right which has arisen by

The first question that must be answered is
as to what amounts to a copyright and ir: what
kind of works does i f vest.
Under Section 13 of the Copyright k c :
1957, a copyright subsist in all original literary.
dramatic,
musical
and
artistic
works;
cinematograph films and sound recordings. Thls
reflects that the protection that i s sought to be
given by the Act is wide and includes all kind of
works.
For the present purpose, a look at
literary work is the most essential, as this i s in
relation to library science,
According to Section 14 of the Act, a
copyright would mean the exclusive right to
do the following acts in relation to a literary
work:

rn

to reproduce the work in any material form
including the storing of it in any medium by
electronic means;

m

to issue copies of the work to the public, not
being copies already in circulation;

K

to perform the work in public or
communicate it to the public;

DB

to make any cinematograph film or sound
recording in respect of the fork;

8

to make any translation of the work;

m

to make any adaptation of the work.

to

This implies that if the person is the owner of
copyright in a book (an owner could be the
author or the person to whom the author sells
his rights), than that person has the exclusive
right of reproducing the book, by any means.
That person also has the right to do the other
acts mentioned above.

DESlDCC Bulleflnof lnf Technol, 1996, 16(6)

When one claims such an exclusive right, it
would lead to the obvious conclusion that
others are precluded from doing the same,
otherwise the 'exclusive' nature of the right
would be disturbed.
With
the
ongoing
information
and
communication revolution, certain interesting
questions arise. One such interesting question
is directly affecting Library Science and hence a
discussion on the probable issues that arise is
warranted. The new generation authors today
'key in' their complete work on computers and
more often than not store the data on
CD-ROMs and market the product as CD-ROMs
itself, thereby wishing the traditional hard copies
(paper copies) goodbye. How would the same
be protected? As the material is stored on
compact discs, would the same be treated as
'literary works'?
Interestingly, prior to the Amendment Act of
1994, the definition of literary work had a very
wide definition, including "tables, compilations
and computer programs, that is to say, programs
recorded on any disc, tape, perforated rnedia or
other information storage device, which, i f fed
into or located in a computer or computer
based equipment. i s capabie of reproducing any
information. U:~doubtedlythe definition was
broad enough to include programs included in
CD-ROMs, as it expressly included program
recorded on any disc. Of course the intention
was certainly to safeguard programs on floppy
diskettes.
Unfortunately this clarity has disappeared
with the 1994 Amendment Act (seemingly
dnintentional) wheie the definition of literary
work has been constructed by including "
computer programs, tables and compilations
including computer data bases".
Though
omission of words "that is to say, programs
recorded on any discs....." ought not to make a
difference, as the primary inclusions remain,
unfortunately it does make a difference, as
computer programs has been defined in a very
limited may, as meaning % set of instructions
expressed in words, codes, schemes or in any
other form, including a machine readable
DESDOC Bulletin oflnf Technol, 1996. 16(6)

medium, capable of causing a computer to
perform a particular task or achieve a particular
resultn.
The implication of this definition seem to be
that computer programs would only include
such software as those capable of causing a
computer to do something. Such a constructed
definition would exclude CD-ROMs from within
its meaning, as CD-ROM does not make a
computer perform a task, it merely would
contain certain information, which readers
might find useful and helpful.
Even the definition of 'records' has vanfished
from the amended Act and the definition of
'sound recording' has been brought in. Once
agair, the central theme of this definition
remains the production of sound and hence in
my opinion a CD-ROM in which liter.nry works
are incorporated cannot qualify as a sound
recording.
The question still remains unanswered. In
my opinion, the work would still qualify as a
literary work, even if i t is produced on a
CD-ROM, as the definition i s an inclusive
definition. In law an inclusive definition is
generally considered as descriptive and not
exhaustive. Even otherwise, it is certain that if
an author was to write a book and also produce
it simultaneously in CD-ROM versions he would
be protected, as the written version would
qualify as a literary work and the CD-ROM
would be an automatic right of he owner of the
literary work, as provided in the now
amendment section 14 which i s clause (a)
provides that the author would have an
exclusive right in the cast of a literary work, to
reproduce the work in any material form
including the storing of it in any medium by
electronic means. This right would be \vide
enough to include CD-ROM production under
its fold.
It i s important to note at this point that a
copyright exists in from and not in idea. For
instance, if a person were to write a classical
love story based on an idea, in the settings of
the eariy 18th century, it i s not that nobody can

use the said idea and write another novel, but i t
is merely, that the novel of the first writer should
not be copied.

The period of protection for a copyright is
generally the lifetime of the author-50 years
(after the death of the author). However in
India, the period of protection is the lifetime of
the author + 60 years after the death of the
author. This implies that after the said period
anyone can copy the work. Today the works of
Shakespeare are in fact not protected by any
copyright, which. gives that the freedom to all
individuals to copy the original works of
Shakespeare without the -,;,mission
of the
publishers.

Having understood the copy RIGHTS, it is
now necessary to briefly understand, as to what
would amount to an infringement of a
copyright. A copyright in a literary work shall be
deemed to be infringed when any person does
an act without prior authorisation which the
owner of the copyright has the exclusive right to
do. This implies that if someone were to copy
the book, or even part of the book which is
protected under copyright, then the same
would amount to an infringement of the
copyright. In he modern day, even information
invoives
transmission
across
the
Net
reproduction of the work and if it i s a work in
which copyright subsists, there may be
infringement in such action.
Further it must also be noted that a work i s
given automatic protection and there is no need
for any registration in order to get protection.

4.

C O P Y R I G H T PRBTECTBON IN
RELATlON TO LIBRARY
SERVICES

Copyright protection in relation to library
services would imply a need to examine the
kinds of infringement which may crop up in
library services.
8

The most common kind of infringement that
arises is in the form of direct copying and
photocopying.
Contrary to popular belief,
photocopying a work may be totally illegal, as it
may be violative of some person's copyright in
the work, which includes the exclusive right to
produce further copies.
Another form of infringement may arise
when the photocopying is done not for the
member, but for the library. itself, when i t
requires additional copies of a particular work.
Unfortunately, the implications of the same
have not yet been realised, with laws such a;
the Nationai Libraries Act, 1976, providing
under section 20(2)(h), a function of
photocopying as one of the function of the
Board established under Act. The section reads:
"to undertake duplication (including photo
duplication) on such person and conditions as
may be agreed upon between the Board and
such person or institution".

It is only hoped that the books under the
control of the Board established under the
National Libraries Act, are the books where the
period for protection has expired and are such
ancient books that no person would complain
of infringement.

Before examining the exception to
infringement, it i s necessary to examine certain
modern issues. Would data transfer across the
Met amount to infringement? Would lending a
CD-ROM to somebody to use amount to ar!
infringement of copyright! Would copyright
data from a CD-ROM to a floppy disc amount
to infringement?

The use of Net involves access to certain
databases and certain information. This would
mean that wherever a data base of a particular
nature is being stored across the Net and access
i s sought, i t is necessary first, that the owner of
the copyright in the work, authorise such
storage and dissemination and secondly
DESIDOC Bulletin of lnf Technol, 1996, 86(5)

authorise the making of hard copies of the
work. Unless such authorisation i s taken from
the owner of copyright, the very storage of the
work would amount to an infringement of
copyright.

In relation to lending of CD-ROMs it would
be similar to the lending of books. As seen
earlier, there i s nothing wrong in reading an
already issued copy. It would not amount to
infringement of copyright. Only when copies
are made of the work, would there be
infringement of copyright. However very often
owners of copyrights secure additional
protection by adding "ot for circulation clauses"
in the contract between the purchaser and
sellers. These clauses if breached, would result
in a breach of contract, though not in a
copyright violation similarly such clauses are
generally added on the wrapper of the
CD-ROM, where they purchaser is prohibited
from lending the same. In such a case there is a
contractual prohibition. If such a clause does
not exist, then i s no prohibition on lending,
though copyright the CD-ROM on to a floppy
diskettes or otherwise would be directly
prohibited.

The copyright Act, under section 52 of the
Act however provides certain exceptions to
infringement, whereby some acts would not be
treated as infringement of copyrights.
The
relevant exceptions which need discussion in
the present case are clauses (0) and (p).

Clause (0) of section 52 provides that the
making of not more than three copies of a
book, by or under the direction of a public
librarian, for the use of the library, if the books
are not available in India, would not amount to
an infringement. Interestingly this protection i s
available only to Public librarians.

Clause (p) of section 52 provides that the
reproduction, for the purpose of research or
private study or with a view to publish, any
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1996, 16(6)

unpublished literary, dramatic,.or musical work
kept in a library, museum or other institution to
which the public has access would not amount
to infringement.

A mention is appropriate at this time of the
fair use doctrine.
In short, this doctrine
embodies the principle that a fair dealing
(acknowledgement, etc.) with a literary work for
private use (including research), criticism or
review, would not amount to an infringement of
copyright.
Interestingly, even the above exemptian is
zvailable only to unpublished literature and
unpublished works. It i s also provided that the
said exception would be available only after the
death of the author + 60 years, if the identify of
the author is known to the library or museums
as the case may be.

These are the limited protection that are
available in case of copying of material from
public libraries.

5.

CHAINING THE UNCHAINED
BOOKS

Man and science have travelled a lot since
the books were chained and kept in the library.
However it i s viewed that the introduction of a
concept known as copyright, has once again
brought about a situation wherein the books are
chained to the shelves in a limited sense, where
the law of copyright acts as the invisible chain
to the books. This i s in total contravention of
the primary principle of library science, that a
library i s meant for use and the books of a
library are meant for use. This philosophy
envisages a free transfer of information, where
knowledge would be meant for learning and not
for the purpose of buying and acquiring. It is
unfortunate that the law of copyright has put
this very fundamental principle of library use
acd library science in doubt, with the bringing
in of a commercial edge to knowledge and

literary works.
Even the limited exceptions
provided to infringement of copyright are
insufficient, as they in no way bring back the
concept of free flow of literature and
information. It is sad that the primary pillar of
library science i s losing its significance today
due to this unfortunate creation of a copy
RiGHT.

10

6. REFERENCES
I.

Shera, Jesse H. 0 1 Peacocks, Elephants and
the Philosophy of Librarianship Cited iicm
March of Library Science, edited
by
Venkatappaiah. V. Vikas Publishing,
New Delhi, 1979. pp. 23.

2.

Ranganathan, SR. The Five Laws of Library
Science. Sarada Ranganathan Endowment,
Bangalore, 1988-89.

DESIDOC Bulletin of in: rechnol, 1996, 16(6)

