DESIOOC Bulletin of information Technology, Voi. 16, No. 6, November 1996, pp. 11-16

0 1996, DtSlDOC

Making and Sale of Collections of Readings by Educational
Institutions in Australia

Abstract
This article i s the study of a test case instituted by the copyright Agency
Limited (CAL), and twelve other applicants against the respondent, Victoria
University of Technology (VUT), alleging that the respondent has breached
its licence by compiling photocopies of parts of books into anthologies for
sale to students. The principal objections and court's decision in this case
have been given.

1,

INTRODUCTION

The' Federal Cocrt's recent decision in
Copyright Agency Limited and Others Vs
Victoria University of Technology has assured
universities and other educational institutions in
Australia that the practice of anthologising
(which refers to the common practice of
academics at tertiary institutions of producing
reading material for students by compiling
'study guides' containing extracts from relevant
textbooks and periodicals) or compilation and
sale of course material to students does not
amount to infringement under the statutory
scheme established by the Copyright Act 1968
(Cth).
This case concerned the construction and
operation of certain provisions of Part VB
"Professor o f Law, The University o f Queensland,
Orisbane, Australia; Adjunct Professor, National Law

(SS. 135ZB to 135ZZH) of the Copyright Ac,
1968 (Cth). Part VB is headed 'Copying of
Works etc. by Educational and Other
lnstitutions." The judgement was handed down
by Gummow 1 of the Federal Court of Australla
(as he then was) on 30 September 1994 (see
(1994) 29 I.P.R. 263 [hereinafter referred to as
CAL Vs VUT]). An appeal to the full Federal
Court of Australia was dismissed on 28 February
1995 (see (1995) 30 I.P.R. 140 (Beaurrlons,
Burchett and Hill Jj)).
The case i s also useful in that it recognises
the importance of education and the value of
photocopying as an educational tool that the
compulsory licensing scheme is designed to
accomplish.
This was a test case instituted by the
Copyright Agency Limited (CAL), and twelve
other applicants who are the are the owners or
exclusive licensees of 1 4 literary works in which

I

It should be noted that the immunity from primary infringement under S . 36 is given by 5. 135ZL(l)which s:rpulates
that only a 'reasonable portion' of the relevant work may be copied (see S. 135ZL(2)and 5. 1 O(2) of the Act). Further,
the educational institution should comply with two requirements: (i) marking and record keeping and givirlg o f a
remuneration notice (see SS. 135ZU-135ZZA which deal with equitable remuneration and establish a system of
remuneration notices given to collecting societies); and (ii) copies should be made solely tor the educational WJrpoSe
of the institution ....' A lengthy definition of 'educational institution' is contained in 5. 1Oil)of the Act'.

DESlDOC Bulletin of lnf lechnol, 1996, 16(6)

11

copyright subsisted pursuant to the Act. against
the
respondent,
V~ctoria University of
Technology, alleging that the respondent had
breached its license by compiling photocopies
of parts of books into anthologies for sale to
students. CAL was incorporated in 1974 to act
as a copyright collecting society representing
authors and publishers. CAL i s applicants' agent
for various purposes including claiming
payments of remunerations under Part VB of the
Act. In June 1990, CAL was declared under S.
135ZZB(I) of the Copyright Act 1968 (Cth) as
the collecting society for the purposes of Part
VB of the'Acr for each owner of copyright in a
work, other than a work included in a sound
recording or a cinematographic film. Activities
of collecting societies (of which CAL is one) are
c-ontrolled by the Attorney General pursuant to
SS. 135ZZB-135ZZE.
The two principal objections
applicants took were:

that

the

(i) that the respondent's actions amounted
to a breach of section 135ZL of the Act

because the relevant works had not been
copied solely for .its educational purposes.
(Section 135ZL provides that in certain
circumstar~cescopyright in certain works is not
infringed by making of multiple copies of works
by educational institutions.
It relevantly
provide?:

135ZC (:) .. the copyright in a literary work
... is not infringed by making of one or more
copies of the whole or a part of the work by, or
on behalf of, a body administering an
educational institution if the copy is made solely
for the educational purposes of the institution)
and,
(ii) that the "pied
was
for a
financial profit in contravention of section
135ZZH of the Act? Section 135ZZH is
concerned with the unauthorised use of copies
in circumstances which then result in removal of

the immunity from infringement ~ t h e r w l ~ ~
provided by prescribed provisio~s.
Section 135ZL i s a prescribed provision for
the purposes of S. 13SZZW. i t relevantly
provides:

135ZZH (1) Where a copy ... of a ivorl; ..,
being a copy ... referred to in a prescribc,d
provision of this Part:
(a) is soid or otherw~se supplied for
financial profit;

(b) i s used for a purpose orhcr

titaii

,I

tl:t.

purpose specrfled rn the prescrrhed pro\ir\g<tn
...w ~ t hthe consent of the adm',i~ster~rlg
botiy h\
whom or on whose behaif, it 1s rnadc~, ch,,
prescribed provisron does not apply
to the
making of the copy.
By way of background, it should ho stated
that in 1981, the Australian governrncnt
introduced a statutory scheme ro allow ~ x u i t i p l c
copying in e d u c a t i ~ n ,enabling
~
all edut:atior~ai
institutions in Australia to make multiple copies
of up to 10% of all print works (except
articies)provided the copies are made for
educational purposes. Here the concept o f
'reasonable portion' is used to provide a fixed
maximum volume of copying ihat may be done
under the statutory licence without infringing
copyright. In the case o f articles, one or more
articles in each i s u e of a periodical puhiication
may be copied that relate to the same 5pecific
subject matter (S. 135ZJ). Note that if the work
being copied i s a book, 10% or one chapter,
whichever is greater, may be copied. (For thc
definition of the expression 'reasonable portion',
see S. 10(2) of the Act). The institutions are able
to take advantage of the statutory schernc: by
entering into licensing agreernents with CAL as
the recognised representative o f copyright
owners.
In the past, educational institution5 rieeded
to keep full records of all copying, and a ~ r t h o r ,

i

The provisions dealing with the compulsory licensing scheme have had a chequered history, see CAL Vs VUT,
note 1 at 268-269. Briefly, the Copyr~ghtAmendment Act 1980 (Cth) introduced. Divisions .5A and 5 8 of Part 111 of
the Act (SS. 53A-53D). However, these were replaced by a new set of provisions by the Copyright Amendrnt>nt A C ~
1989 (Cth) which, in turn, were struck down as unconstitutional by the High Court in Australian Tape Mat~clfdctore,-~
r?s,ociation Ltd. Vs The Commonwe,~lth(1993) 176 C.L R. 480. The Government then re-enac-ted thr rt-lrvatlt
provisions minus those dealing with blank tape royalty (Cooyright Amendment (Re-enact~nent)
,4c: 19'13)

12

DESlDOC Bulletin of irlf Technol. 1996. 16 (6)

and publishers were entitled to inspect those
records and receive royalty payments. This
proved to be cumbersome and unworkable and
consequently a 'Licence Agreement'was
entered
into
between
the
Australian
Vice-Chancellors' Committee (AVCC) and CAL.
Under the agreement, while similar limits to
copying apply, a levy reflecting the number of
pages copied is paid per student. The payment
payable each year to CAL is calculated on the
basis of a formula that includes an estimate of
the amount of copying undertaken. This
estimate is based on the sampling review of
photocopying undertaken each year in a
selected number of universities. The Licence
Agreement has legal effect largely outside Part
VB, but this is permitted by S. 135ZZF(l).
However, the provisions of Part VB remain
important to the operation of the voluntary
arrangement because the acts that do not
infringe because they are covered by the
'statutory licence' also fall within the 'Licence
Agreement'. In the present case, the applicants
contended that the activities of the respondent
fell outside the statutory licence and so outside
the Licence ~ ~ r e e m e n t . ' ~
The present dispute involved preparation
and distribution of five booklets containing
course materials produced by two academics
employed by the respondent. The collections
were prepared because there was no single
textbook
available
in
those
subjects.
Accordingly, a series of articles and extracts
from textbooks were collected and bound in
the form of a book for sale to students enrolled
in those courses. These anthologies were said
to contain photocopied chapters of works
copyright in which was held by the members of
CAL. The anthologies were then sold by the
respondent's book shops after marking them up
by 30% of the cost of printed materials in order

to recover the overheads (e.g., salaries for staff,
teiephone and insurance costs).
While it was clear that the respondent could
legitimately make multiple copies of 'resonable
p o r t i o n b f copyright works for educational
purposes under the AVCC-CACs
'licence
~ ~ r e e m e n tthe
' ~ , central issue in the case was
whether the licence extended to putting those
copies together in a 'fresh work' for sale.
Although, the percentages of the works copied
were within the limits, the prices charged, it was
contended by the applicants, appeared to be
significantly higher than that could be justified
on a cost recovery basis. Moreover, the
argument ran, the practice of 'anthologising'
copyright materials from text books and
journals, in a way that replaced legitimate
publishing, was not permitted by the Licence
Agreement. Finally, it was argued that the
respondent's activities amounted to carrying on
a business of quasi-publishingand book selling.

2.

Copies Made Solely for
Educational Purposes

The threshold issue was whether the copies
were made solely for the educational purposes
of the respondent within the meaning of section
135ZL(l)(b). Referring to the question posed by
the expression 'educational purposes',5 viz.,
whether the copies were made for use in
connection with a particular course of
instruction provided by the respondent,
Gummow j stated:
The copies were so made and, in my view,
were made only or exclusively, with the
objective that they be used in connection with
the particular courses of instruction suggested
by the statements on the covers of [course
booklets]. Section 135ZL(l )(b) operated to
confer immunity from infringement. But did S.

For a short account of the 'Licence Agreement' and its effect, see CAL Vs VUT, above, note 1 at 267-268.
The arrangements made between CAL and AVCC were discussed at length in the recent decision of the Federal
Court of Australia in Nationwide News Pty. Ltd. Vs Copyright Agency Limited (1995) 30 I.P.R. 159 at 1 63-165. See
generally, J Lahore, intellectual Property in Australia: Copyright Law (Butterworths'loose-leafservice) at para. 4.1 3.1 50
et seq. and K. Puri, 'Copyright in journalists' creations in Australia' (1995), 4, Australian Studies in Journalism, 200.
'Educational purposes' is defined in S. 10(1A)of the Copyright Act 1968.
-

-

DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol,1996,16(6)

13

135ZZH then
6
immunity?

operate

to

remove

that

His Honour found no evidence to suggest
that the course materials that were supplied to
students were used for a purpose other than in
connection with the relevant courses of
instruction provided to them by the respondent.
'It foilows that S. 135ZZH(I)(b) has no
application to them.' It i s noteworthy that on
appeal, the full Federal Court, whilst endorsing
Cummow j's reasoning, added that the
respondent's conduct in marking up the
materials by 40% was 'not inconsistent with the
respondent's having the sole educational
purpose required by S. 1 3 5 2 ~ ( l ) ( b ) . ~

3.

TRAP PURCHASE

Since the applicants had arranged a "rap
purchase"t0 a person other than a student, it
was argued that the sale was a use for a
purpose not in connection with the relevant
courses of instruction. Therefore, the applicants
submitted, there was ai least in those instances
an operation of section 135ZZH(l)(b) so as to
remove the immunity that would otherwise
apply to the making of the relevant copies.
Gummow J held that the trap order was not
of any significance for present purposes. His
Honour advanced the following reasons in
support of his conclusion that there was 'a
degree of artificiality' in that argument: l o

(i) the trap purchase was an unusual form of
dealing because the purpose of the transaction
was not immediately brought home to the
respondent;

(ii) the use to which the impugned material
was being put was a use by the applicants
themselves, not by the respondent; and
(iii) 'where what is said to be a use within
S. l35ZZH(i)(b) [sic-s.
the meaning of
135ZL(I)(b)] is a sale or other supply, the
structure of the subsection directs one not to
para (b) but to para (a)' of section 135ZZH(I).
His Honour explained this further by observing:

''

The issue in this case is whether the sale was
made by the respondent for a financial profit. If
it was not, then the threat posed by the
subsection [section 135ZZH(1)] to the
immunity otherwise conferred by S. 135ZL is
removed. It is not renewed by going on to ask
whether, whilst the sale was not made for a
financial profit, the sale nevertheless was a use
for a purpose outside that specified in 5.
1352L'12.
It i s respectfully submitted that Gummow J
appears to give a very narrow construction of
the relationship between paras (a) and (b) of
section 135ZZt-l(l). As I understand his
Honour's reasoning, a use for a purpose other
than specified in the prescribed provision, say
use for purpose not connected with a particular
course of instruction provided by the institution
(and hence lying outside the confines of section
135ZL(I)(b) ), will be immune from infringement
if the sale was found to be not for a financial
profit. In my view, par as (a), (b) and (c) of
section 4 35ZZH(I) are independent of each
other and an immunity to infringement
conferred by section 135ZL would be lost even
if the sale was not for a financiai profit. Be that
as i t may, nothing turned upon this because, as
Gummow J's factual findings individual, the
relevant course materials were made only or

CAL Vs VUT, above, note 1 at 276.

' lbid.
Copyright Agency Ltd. and Others Vs Victoria University of Technoiogy ( 1 995) 30 I.P.R. 140 at 145.
Although this argument was not pressed in the oral argument in the appellate court, the full Federal Court expressed
agreement with Gummow J's conclusion (ibid).
lo

CAL Vs VUT, note 1 at 276.

" Ibid.
l2

14

lbid.

DESlDOC Bulletin of inf Techno/.1994.16 ( 6 )

exclusively with the objective that they be used
in connection with the particular courses of
instructions provided by the respondent.13

4.

SOLD OR OTHERWISE
SUPPLIED FOR A FINANCIAL
PROFlT

The applicants argued that the respondent
lost the immunity to infringement because the
anthologies, even if the material contained
therein had been copied under the Licence
Agreement, had been soid 'for a financial profit'
within section ? 35ZZH(I)(b). This was so, the
argument ran, because the respondent was
admittedly recovering more than its direct print
room costs; its aim being to make a gross or
incremental profit, and that was a sale 'for a
iinanciai profit'. Moreover, the respondent's
intention to engage in an activity which made a
contribution to general university overheads was
incompatible with section 135ZZH(l)(b). The
applicants also contended that the court should
take into account the gross profit in preference
to net profit because only the former could be
readily ascertained at the time the act was done.
After
examining
extensive
evidence,
Gummow J stated that the proper construction
of the relevant provisions must be "approached
on a broader footing"?'4
His Honour held that a sale or supply 'for a
financial profit' contemplated a transaction with
the object or purpose of that profit; and that
that criterion should be distinguished from a
provision which contemplated a sale or supply
at a profit.
Under the latter criterion, the inquiry would
be directed at the actual, rather than the

intended, result of the transaction. r ( i s Monoc~r
went on to add:
The phrase in S. 135ZZW(l)(a)in terms does
not ask the question which would be
appropriate on the taking of an account of
profits, namely whether the copy was sold or
otherwise supplied at a financial profit. Rather, it
asks whether the copy was sold or otherwise
supplied for a financial profit. This directs the
attention to the state of affairs at the time of sale
or supply and to the object or purpose with
which the sale or supply was effected.''
Gummow .I found that the respondent's
object or purpose was not to make a profit- the
aim was to provide copies to students at
minimum cost to them. It was not part to the
respondent's objective to attempt to maximise
sales. Rather, the objective was to ensure that
students could obtain copies of the materials at
a price which covered costs, both direct and, in
some cases, indirect.16 Furthermore, the court
rejected the applicants' argument that section
135ZZH referred to gross profits, although the
reasons for the rejection are far from clear. 1 7
Apropos the applicants' argument that the
respondent's activities amounted to carrying $on
a business of quasi-publishing and book selling,
Gurnmow J refused to characterise the activities
of the respondent in that way.I8

5.

CONCLUSION

In sum, Gummow I held that all the relevant
copying was within the terms of the Licence
Agreement and hence the applicants' suit was
dismissed with costs.
Furthermore,
the
court
granted
the
declamatory relief sought by the respondent to

" Ibid.
14

CAL Vs VUT, note 1 at 274.

ls

Ibid. at 275 (emphasis supplied). See Lahore, above, note 12 at para 4.1 3.1 68.

''

ibid. It should be noted that the appellate court, whilst agreeing with Gumrnow J's approach, elucidated this point
further by stating: 'It did not follow from the respondent's decision to implement a 'user pays' policy and to mark up
the product as i t did, that the respondent's object was to make a financial.profit. Its aim remained that mentioned,
namely the provision of materials to its students for use in i t s courses.'(Above, note 16 a t 145)
" See C A I

Vs VUT, note 1 at 274.

'' ibid. at 273
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1996. lQ(6)

15

the effect that the making of the anthologies
was covered by Licence Agreement entered into
between CAL and the AVCC. The decision of
Cummow J, which was subsequently affirmed
by the Full Federal Court, sanctions the making
and sale of collections of readings by institutions
as long as the materials are not sold for a profit
or used for purposes other than educational
purposes of the institution.
While this case was between CAL and
Victoria University of Technology, it had broader
implications for the whole university system in
Australia. Almost every university follows the
practice of collating collections of readings to
provide to students as a single set rather than on
a progressive basis during their tertiary study.
Students are generally asked to pay for these
'course materials' by the universities.
The definition of 'educational purposes' in
section 10(1A) does not at present specifically
include the compilation of collections of
copyright works within its ambit. This prompted

CAL to contend that the practice of making
collections of materials does not fall within the
scope of the statutory licence in Part VB of the
Copyright Act for copying by educational
institution^.'^ Considering that a decision in
CAL's favour would have led either to a higher
rate of payment to CAL or to radical changes in
the way instructions are imparted at educational
institutions in Australia, the judgement is a
significant victory not only for the respondent
but also for AVCC, which had underwritten this
prolonged litigation.*'

6 . ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This article i s a slightly modified version of
the paper that has recently appeared in the U K
in Information & Communications Technology
Law 7996,5, 69. The author would like to thank
Dr IM Carr, Executive Editor, for her kind
permission to reproduce the article in this
publication.

l 9 Interestingly, universities and colleges in the UK have, under a new agreement with the Copyright Licensing Agency
(UK), agreed to pay a special fee for using copyright material in students' 'study packs' on top of ordinary photocopying
licence fees, see Times Higher Education Supplement (7 May 1993).

20 The present author's membership of the AVCC Committee on Copyright and Intellectual Property during the
relevant period heightened his interest in this court battle. Apparently, CAL's motivation was to induce AVCC to pay
a higher rate for 'anthologising' the copied materials.

16

DESlDOC Buliefin of Inf Technoi,1996. 16 ( 6 )

