DESlOOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Voi. 16, No. 6, November 1996, 17-19
0 1996, DESlDOC

Copyright in the Information Age: Librarian's Viewpoint
Ananda TB*
Raveendra Reddy B**

Abstract
The intellectual work musi be produced and it must be accessible. The
copyright act attempted to balance the rights of authors to benefit from their
writing and stimulate creativity and needs of the readers to have ready
access to information. This article explains lnternational Copyright Law and
Indian lami of copyright briefly. It also describes copyrightable items and
reasons for infringement of copyright.

1.

1NTRODUUlON

It i s an era of knowledge explosion. With the
developments in the fields of information
technology and communications, knowledge i s
being shared without any restrictions. It is also
an era of globalization. With the emergence of
new concept of 'Intellectual Capitalism', capital
i s no longer in banks but in minds. The return
on intellectual capital is considerable and not
measurable by any standard. It manifests itself as
tangible asset in the form of inventions,
technologies,
designs,
books, etc. The
intellectual capital requires protection from
piracy and imitation. The Copyright Act
attempted to balance the rights of authors to
benefit from their writing and stimulate
creativity and the needs of the readers to have
ready access to information.
This is a difficult balance to achieve and it i s
important that scale does not tip far in either

" Lib. Asst National Law School of India University,
Nagarabhavi, Bangalore - 560 072.
" Tech Asst National Law School of india
University, Nagarabhavi, Bangalore - 560 072

DESlDOC Bulletin oftnf Technol, 1996. 16(6)

direction. The work must be produced; it must
be accessible; and neither can be sacrificed.

2.

COPYRlGH-f

Copyright is a right given to, or derived from
works ( I )

2.1

lnternational Copyright taw

The international Copyright Law provides
protection to all creative works or productions
of the human mind in the fields of literature, art,
and science regardless of their manner or form
of expression. There i s no copyright of Ideas. It
subsists only in the material form in which the
ideas are translated (2).
Anon (3) has provided a chart fos 64
countries showing whether such copyright
protection is available under the national iaw of
each country, and also each country's
membership of Brene, Universal Copyright, and
Paris Conventions. There is mutual protection if
national law protection i s available in an); pair
of countries and they have mutual convention
memberships.
For example, India is a member of both
Brene and Universal Copyright Conventions and
17

copyright protected rn any country 0 / these ~ L V O
conventions has automatic protecttor in indra.

22

lndian Law of Copyright

The government cf india has passed the
international Copyright Order 1958, according
to which any work first published in any country
which i s a member of Brene or Universal
Copyright Convention (India participated in
both the conventions) will be accorded the
same treatment as if it was published in india.
As regards the work published in a country not
mentioned In the scheduie re t h e order? if the
.iuehor of the swrk was a national of a universai
copyright convention coudtry, the ahthor will he
treated as a citizen of India and he will be
entitled to the benefits ofithe copyright in the
work.

2.3

Copyrightabie Items

3 , REASONS FOR INFWENGE!GENT OF COPYRfGHB
Some of the important reasons for Violatiori
of Copyright-particularly
in Library and
Information centres are:
o

Shrinking (or limited) budgets.

r

Non-availability of books (out of print, ban on
books, etc.).

a

Delay
in
suppiy/procurement
books/journais.

EZ

of

Higher cost of b o o k s l j c u r ~ a !iparric,ila:ia
~
Foreign pub%ications).

r

Urgent need.

a

ignorance of Inteliectuad Property Rights

s

Language - need for translation

Fletcher (4) rn 7990, prov~ded a general
summary of items subjett copyright:

Text : Exclusive sights.
Graphics :Copyright when fixed in a medium.
Software : Source and object wide usually
covered by programs copyright.
Music : Composer, publisher, recording
company and musician have rights over a
recorded programme.

Film : Every frame copyrigi.rt.

2-4 Abuse of Copyright
Pagell ( 5 ) in 4 990 provided a list sf what he
considers to the areas of abuse for a number of
products.

Books : Photocopying, translating, reporting.
journals : Photocopying.
Machinereadable data r Copying of citation
records, abstracts, full text articles, CD-ROM and
software copying.
Computer Programmes : Copying Translating,
Cloning.

The essence of copyright law i s 'protection'
of works/resources from duplication where as
the objective of library i s to 'use' the resources
effectiveli. Here the term kse' not only includes
reading but also photocopying, downloading,
eic. This is a difficult balance to achieve and i t is
important that scale does not tip far in either
direction. The work must be produced; in must
be accessible; neither can be sacrificed (6).

The librarians are taking risk in signing the
licensing agreements inspite of whether they are
protected by their respective managemen: or
not if litigation arises from the information
provides or the product supplier or both.
agreements
of
non-book
Acquisition
materials such as CD-ROM databases have put
burden on the librarian to educate copyright
restrictions to the users and enforce quantity o f
copying and aIso the method of copies to be
made, which is a difficult task for any librarian to
monitor each operation of the search
(particularly in the networking environments
such as LAN, WAN, elc.)

2.
Attempts could be made to cwatc
awareness about intellectuai property rights and
to alter the situations in developing countries
with international conventions and treaties,
trade sanctions, contractual agreements, better
education, etc.

We should also decide whether to include
topics on Intellectual Property Rights and
Copyright Laws in the Library and information
science curriculum. information world i s moving
towards media independent and copyright
controlled distribution technologies.
Also with changing technology and
globalizing communication environment the
concept of copyright i s moving to be a myth
(e.g., INTERNET).

3. Anon. Reform of the law relating to
copyright, designs and performer's
protection. HMSO, London, 1981, Crnnd,
8302.
4.

1. Mittal, DP. Law relating to copyright, Patent
and Trademark, Taxman Allied Services (P)
Ltd., New Delhi, 1994. p.469.

Fletcher, Paul. Advise and compute.
Computer Weekfy, July 19, f 990.

5. Pagell, Ruth A. international Copyright
issues: A persona[ view^ Databare, june
1990.5-9.

6. James, EP Skone. Copinger and Skone
James on Copyright. Ed. 13. Sweet and
Maxwell, London, 1991.

7.

Warner, julian. Writing, literary wori, and
document in United Kirrgiurn copyright.
journal of lniormation Science, 1990, 5(5),

2 79-83.
8.

REFERENCES

Iefrey v B m s e y !I 8543 4 H t C 8'8 5

The Copyright Act. Ed.7.
Company, Lucknow, 19%

Ea5ik.n

Boo':

