DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology#Vol. 16, No. 6 , November 1996, 21-23
0 1996, DESIDOC

Libraries and Library Services under the Indian Copyright Law

This article describes the reconciliation between copyright law and library
services. In India the legal position under dre act is that only very specific
activities are permitted as regards libraries and library services and much
needs to be done for copyright awareness.

'

On the face of it, libraries and copyright
protection
seem
to
be
located
at
cross-purposes. One seeks to freely disseminate
literature, and the other seeks to preserve the
exclusivity of the same.
However, looking
deeper, one can find a basis for reconciliation
of the two in that copyright law is aimed at
preventing the unfair use of and unlawful gain
from another's literature or other creative work,
while libraries aim at distributing knowledge
from this literature and other creative works.
Libraries in their own way, help in preserving
this literature (even beyond the term of
copyright) and make it freely accessible for
bonafide and genuine purposes like simply
reading or research.

2.

P R O V l S l O N S FOR LIBRARIES

2.1

Indian Copyright Act

The

Indian law in this regard clearly

reconciles
the two purposes as mentioned
above and clearlyprovides for libraries and
library services, directly and indirectly in section
"B.A., L. L.B. (Hons.) NLSlU, Bangalore.

52 of the Copyright Act which lists oui ce:tzirr
acts which are not considered to be an
infringement of copyright. It may be mentioned
at this stage that infringement is the ~rirnary
offence under copyright law and all the
remedies are geared towards providing relief
against this offence. !nfringement not only
includes the commission of unauthorised act
but also the permitting for any profit the use of
any place for these actions and other acts like
selling, letting for hire, distributing exhibiting for
2
trade, or importation of infringing copies .
Section 52 o i the Act on the other hand, lists
out several exceptions to this infringement and
it i s in this list that libraries and library services
find a mention.
Section 52 (0) provides for an exccption for
books which are not avidable for sale in India.
It reads as under:
'the making of not more than three copies of
a book (including a pamphlet, sheet of music,
map, chart or plan) by or under the direction of
the person in charge of a public library for the
use of the library if such books is not available
for sale in India-'
Therefore, three copies of such a book can
be made and kept by a public library for the use
of the library. Thus whereas copying a book

1. Hereinafter the Act
2. Section 51 of the Act

DESIDOC Bulletin of inf Techno!,1996,16(6)

21

would otherwise amount to an infringement,
this provision grants a concession for books not
available for sale in India. It i s therefore clear
that libraries themselves can make and keep
copies of such works.
The question therefore arises in whether
there are any provisions for the library to follow
for facilitating access to any material. Are there
any guidelines or provisions to ensure the safety
of the copyright of the works kept in the library?
The Copyright Act answers only the tip of this
proverbial iceberg of a question in section
5 2 (p) which permits the reproduction of
unpublished work kept in a iibrary for the
pupose of research, private study or with a view
to publish. A provision to section 52 (p) of the
Act however obviates this provision and makes
i t applicable only to anonymous works or to
works whose copyright has effectively e ~ p i r e d . ~
It is clear from the above two provisions that
hbrary and library services in particular are onfy
cursorily covered under the Act. It would
therefore be pertinent to view some of the
other general provisions under the Act .blvhich
might have a bearing on this issue.
Section 52 (a) of the Act provides that 'a fair
riealing with a literary, dramatic, musicaj or
artistic work not being a computer programme
for the purpose of

connote reproduction but only a partial use for
a bonafide purpose. While the Act supplies this
bonafide purpose, viz., private use, including
research and for criticism or revision, English
courts have dealt with
this term and the
following guidelines can be culled out from
those decisions:

o The quantum and value of the matter taken ifi
relation to the comments or criticism.

a+ The purpose for which
@

iy

whether of that work or of any other work,
an
infringement'.
shall
not
constitute
Considering that library services can be, and are
usually availed of for private use and research,
this concession finds some meaning in terms of
library services indirectly. There, however,
remains
the
problem
as
regards the
interpretation of the term 'fair dealing'. The Act
does not define it but it i s clear that it does not

W h e t h e r the work i s published or
unpublished, or circulated (if unpublished)
The likelihood of competition between [ire
two works.4

22

US Copyright Act

The US law roo interprets fair dealing in z
similar fashion. Para 107 of the US Copyright
Act, 1976 lists out the following factors to ;he
considered in deciding whether use is fair:

(i) The purpose and character of use.
(ii) The nature o i the copyright work.
(iii) The amount and substantiafity of the
portion used in relation to the copyrighted
work as whole.
(iv) The effect of the use upon the potentiai
marker for, or value of the copyright work.5

1 ) Private use, including research;
2) Criticism of review,

it was taken.

The Ack, through the provision to sectioc

52(1) requires that such fair dealing mandates
the acknowledgement identiiying the work i ~ y
its title and identifying the author.

3.

CONCLUSION

The legal position under the Act portrays the
picture that only very specific activities are
permitted as regards libraries and library
services. From the provision of fair dealing, it i s

Though the normal term of copyright is the life of the author and 60 years, the proviso mentions only life and 50
years. The legislature does not seem to have incorporated the extension of term of copyright from life and 5 0 years
to life 60 years as it has done generally by amendment in 1991.
Sec, Beloff v. Pressdram Ltd. ( 1 9 7 3 ) RPC, 765; Hubbardv. Vosper, (1972) 2 WLR 389, and Biackwood v. Parasuraman.
AIK 1959 Mad, 41 0, and 428, cited in P.Narayanan, Copyright law. 2nd ed., (Calcutta: Eastern Book House, 1995)
187.
Ser, P.Narayanan, Copyright law, 2nd ed. (Calcutta: Eastern Book House, 1995) 189

22

DESIDOC Bulletin of lnf Techno/.1996, 16(6)

evident that the same is applicable as far as
obtaining material from the library is concerned.
However, not only are the enforcement and
monitoring mechanisms weak and toothless, but
the provisions do not address a gamut of issues.
Important among them is that of electronic
photocopying. To what extent should libraries
alfow for such photocopying in their premises.
In the US, not more than 10% of a book can be

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol,1W6,16(6)

photo-copied. In India public photocopying is
neither expensive nor inconvenient and even if
some sort of cap is placed on the portion of the
work that can be photo-copied, the public
photocopying can hardly be morritored.
In conclusion, it may be said that much
needs to be done in this infant area when the
information and technological revolution is on
the rise as is copyright awareness.

23

