DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 17, No. 1, January 1997, pp. 3-6
1997, DESIDOC

Impact of Recent Advances in Information Technology on
Collection Development
IK Ravichandra Rao*
Abstract
The impact of CD-ROM databases, internet and digital libraries on collection
development is quite significant. Challenges in this regard are discussed in
this paper and argued that it is necessary to conduct a survey of available
sources on various networks. Effective techniques are required to search- and
store the downloaded data. The policy for collection development should
take care of recent advances in information technology and its impact.

1. INTRODUCTION
The topic 'Collection Development' covers a
broad range of activities related to the policies
and procedures of selection, assessing user
needs, evaluation of the present collection,
weeding out, and storing parts of the collection
and planning for resource sharing. Collection
development is not any single activity or group
of activities; it is a planning and decision making
process.
In recent years, information technologies
have advanced to such an extent that their
impact on libraries is significant. Particularly,
development regarding digital libraries, Internet,
electronic publications, CD-ROMs, etc., have
forced the librarians to change the way they are
now functioning. In this context and also due to

the budgetary constraints, librarians are giving
importance to 'accessing the other libraries'
collection' rather than 'possessing almost all
documents' on a given subject. For instance, a
number of full text databases are available on
Internet. Why then one has to acquire/purchase
similar documents? Why can't one access such
records and download, if necessary? Once
downloaded, such electronic documents, must
be classified and catalogued, so that one need
not search and download (he same documents
again, if and when required. In some cases,
however, it may be economic to download
again!
An attempt has been made in this paper to
discuss the impact of recent advances in IT on
collection development.

2. IMPACT OF CD-ROM
* Professor and Head
Documentation Research and Training Centre
8th Mite, Mysore Road
Bangalore • 560 059

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1997, 7(1)

CD-ROMs are now increasingly being
accepted as a standard storage medium based
on ISO standards. One CD can store about 650
MB of data. It is estimated that the life-time of a

CO-ROM is almost 100 years-yet to be proved
in a real-life situation! There are cases where
scratched/damaged CD-ROMs cannot be read
by the system and it is practically impossible to
acquire them again. More than anything else, it
is inexpensive. A large number of CD-ROM
databases.are available on almost all subjects.
Multimedia databases are now increasingly
becoming popular. They are the most useful
educational tools, especially for the beginners in
any subject. No librarian can afford to ignore
this development. In the near future, perhaps
there is no need for subscribing secondary
periodicals in printed media. If CD-ROM
databases are subscribed and if they are made
available on CD-NET, many can even access
them on networks from remote distances. In this
environment, librarians can afford to have less
shelving space, since bulky volumes are not
subscribed; CDs require only least space!
Further, complex queries can be searched
effectively by Boolean expressions.
Often cost is considered as a major factor to
decide whether or not one should subscribe to
CD-ROM databases. It is no longer true. Cost is
becoming less and less every year. The problem
perhaps is of compatibility—hardware and
software with its different versions, change so
frequently that one need to worry about its
compatibility with new systems. This however
has to be tackled by adopting certain
international standards. Evaluating CD-ROM
databases is yet another task-lhe simple way is
to know:
• How good is its retrieval engine?
• Its coverage by country-wise, language-wise,
etc. Does it cover Indian Literature?
• How frequently it is updated?
• Whether it can be replaced, if and when it is
damaged or missing?

3. IMPACT OF INTERNET
Yet another development in IT applications is
the emergence of Internet. Its impact on
libraries is considerable. Internet is popularly
known as the network of nerworks. It is being
used world-wide for personal and group

communication, file transfer and for accessing
databases on remote computers.
Information sources on Internet are all stored
as computer files of some kind or the other.
They have a location on at least one Internet
site; may be duplicated at other site (in such a
case, it is called a mirror image of the original
file). These files on the Internet contain varied
materials. Sources like electronic journals, preprints, technical reports, numerical and
graphical data, software, campus-wide
information systems, databases, library
catalogues, educational materials, company
profiles, patents, standards, information on
societies, institutions, associations, etc., are
available on Internet. Much of these are
'reference type' in nature. Other resources on
Internet can be classified as usernet resources,
gopher resources, world wide web resources,
WAIS resources, etc.
In this context, libraries may have to review
their collection development policy—much of
what is available on Internet need not be
procured! This however involves a considerable
amount of time and cost to conduct a survey of
what is available and how long it is available?
How much it cost to access—for searching and
downloading? This is a difficult task.

4. IMPACT OF DIGITAL LIBRARIES
The term digital libraries refers to a new way
of carrying out the
functions of libraries
encompassing new types of electronic
information resources, new approaches to
acquisition (especially, more access to other
libraries' collection and sharing it); new
methods of storage and preservation, new
approaches to classification and cataloguing,
especially of electronic data; intensive use of
electronic system and networks and dramatic
shifts in intellectual, organisational, and
electronic practices. It is also known as a
distributed text-based computerised information
system and service. It may have several
provisions to access documents, those are of
high value, mostly from outside the
organisation.
In
digital
information is

environment,
disseminated;

only
digital
software is

DESIDOC Bulletin of INF Tec/ino/. 199 7, 17( 1)

produced locally, and most of the information is
obtained by remote accesses; much of this
information is less permanent in nature. In these
circumstances, it is very difficult for librarians to
decide :
• What should be acquired (by downloading),
stored and organised?
• Who should do it (most of such information is
accessed directly by users, without bringing
into the knowledge of librarians)?
• What standards to be followed?
• Users locate and access the information;
information is not usually structured; no rules
or codes are followed and no one controls the
information that is made available.
The data or information may be of different
types. To organise the data or information, we
require cataloguing practice and it calls for an
appropriate data model for organising data with
standard font. Specialised technologies are
needed for compressing as well as for
organising information. These are the major
challenges in digital library environment.

5. EVALUATION OF COLLECTION
Evaluation of the library collection is one of
the functions of collection development
programme. Development of quantitative
measures 'to evaluate a collection is usually
complicated by the increasing use of CD-ROMs,
online services, impact of internet, etc. In
traditional methods, the following measures are
usually considered for evaluating collection:
•

Size of the collection absolute size, size of the
rare collection, size of subject, date, language,
etc.;

•

Number of volumes per user, number of
volumes per document circulated, current
growth rate, etc.;

•

Amount of collection used; and

•

Expenditure on collection, etc.

All these measures are inadequate to
evaluate a library in the context of recent
advances in IT. In addition to the above, the

DESIDOC Bulletin of inf Techno/, 1997,17(1)

following measures are equally important in the
modern context:
• Availability of CD-ROM databases—number of
CD-ROM databases subject-wise, frequency
of updation, availability of CD-ROM drives,
possibility of is remote access, availability of
multimedia databases, etc.
• Access to Internet success rate—how much is
really accessed, number of records accessed
and downloaded, number of accesses to other
electronic publications, response lime, the
cost of accessing. Internet and other electronic
publications through online services, etc.
It is difficult to collect such data since users
can directly access such information through
their terminals; librarians may not come lo know
such events. Eventually each of the users may
have his/her own 'digital library' at very high
cost and the library may become virtually nonexistent.
One aspect of evaluating collection is
keeping track of what is missing and what
should be replaced. Replacement decisions may
be based on reports of requested items not
located and on visual inspection of documents
that have been returned. Further, a sample of
the collection can be surveyed to establish
which subjects are sustaining the greatest losses.
The other aspect of evaluation is to identify less
used document so that they can be sent to a
less expensive building for storing, or can be put
into compact storage in a less accessible area of
the main library building.
But in the context of IT, it is not that easy to
measure the use of electronic records although,
it may comparatively be easy to collect the data.
It requires entirely a different mission to keep
track of frequently used records and organise
infrequently used records effectively in a
distributed text-based systems. Who has to do
this?
All these issues are challenging one in IT
environment.

6. CONCLUSION
IT has its impact on collection development.
It is necessary to monitor what is available on

various networks. It may also be necessary to
search frequently such networks and download
the relevant records depending upon the local
interest. Effective techniques may have to be
developed for storing and searching such
downloaded data. Since electronic publications,
including the CD-ROM databases, are
increasingly becoming popular, the policy
towards collection development should take
care of such trends.

7. FURTHER READINGS
1. Rao,
IK
Ravichandra.
Collection
Development and Management. In The
Proceeding of the Conference on Scientific
Information for Defence, DESIDOC New
Delhi, February 1986.
2. Rao, IK Ravichandra. Advanced information
technologies for libraries in India: Status and
problems. Paper presented at the DRTC
Workshop 1996, 30,
on Advances in
Information Technology: Impact on Library
and Information Field, 28-30 October 1996,
Bangalore.

DESIDOC Bulletin of In! Techno/, 1997,17( 1}

