DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 17, No 1, January 1997, pp. 7-10
©1997, DESIDOC

Impact of Electronic Publishing on Collection Development
A Amudhavalli*
Abstract
This article discusses the definition of Collection Development in IT
environment. Problems of collection development in traditional libraries and
how it can be tackled in IT environment are also discussed. Finally the
problems faced by the library and information centres in procuring
electronic publications are mentioned.

1. INTRODUCTION
Libraries have always been dependent on
development in the publishing industry and in
scholarly research and communication. Changes
in this industry have a direct impact on the
information systems and services. Technology
has altered the mode of publication in such a
way that though the traditional sources of
information continue to be produced, by and
large information market has been flooded with
the attractive electronic form of publications.
Care must be taken that these alternatives to
library are not glorified as able to perform
information services are limited or bound by
any traditions. The library must take initiatives
to take a lead in the exploitation of electronic
information sources, at the same time
acknowledging the problems in doing so.
Electronic sources present the following
problems:
- Integrating them with more traditional forms,
- Costs of acquisition versus access,
* Heade, DLIS
University of Madras
Madras - 600 005.

- Determining what 'collection development'
really means in the electronic environment.
The role of collection development in
dealing with distributed electronic sources may
be little different from the print-on-paper world.
This perhaps raises the biggest question of all as
to what does the future hold for collection
development? This needs to be speculated
based on the trends in this specially.
The most important stage regarding the
evolution of electronic publishing is from the
early 1960s to the present and to be continued
into the future. This has an impact on creators
(authors), producers, distributors, intermediate
users (library & information centres) and endusers. This article concerns with its impact on
the intermediate users.
In the 1960s, the electronic distribution of
information sources had a limited impact
because it largely took the form of distribution
via magnetic tapes for use on large mainframe
computers. The impact increased dramatically
in the 1970s as online networks came into
being and continued to increase as the network
expanded, costs reduced and the volume of
resources available on online multiplied. In the
1980s, various forms of electronic publishing
DESIOOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1997,17( 11)

were available and accessible via conventional
computer networks or television while others
could be distributed in tapes and discs including
CD-ROMs. By 1990s, tele and satellite
communication has widened the scope of
electronic information access.
This ability to access sources online has a
profound impact on the economics of
information
acquisition
(collection
development) and customer services, bringing
in the cost-benefit factor. A system's
effectiveness (quality) can be interpreted in
terms of its capability to achieve its goals and
objectives. The capability is defined in terms of
its utilisation and utilisation depends on the
value or benefit of its users and ultimately the
beneficial effects tend to increase as the
resources increase.
A vast majority of libraries all over the world,
including both the developed and developing
countries, suffer from economic pressure.
Inflation and escalation of prices have caused
many problems in the library and information
centre's (LIC) acquisition policy, particularly on
journal subscription. This has resulted in
inadequate collection.
Another defect from which most of the LIC's
collection suffer from is that of its uptodateaess.
The user group's major worry and complaint of
the LIC is that its collection lacks currency
besides the fact that they are under
stocked/inadequate. Amongst the varied
reasons contributing for this situation, the most
relevant one in this context that can be
identified is the static quality. Once produced,
the text in print forms cannot be altered and
rearranged, though it can possibly be
highlighted.
The third problem is that 'library is a growing
organism'. The LICs suffer from space problem.
The traditional printed material, particularly
those, that are over-sized like newspaper
collection, not only occupy large space, but also
they are heavy in weight to be stored in shelves
and on upper floors and above all to be handled
by the users. This creates a negative effect on
collection maintenance. Preservation of old and
rare printed materials are perennial problems for
collection managers. This situation has

warranted the LICs to take serious steps to
maintain the conventional collection of
information sources.
The key question is the need to restructure
LICs' policy decisions and procedures of
collection development to accommodate the
emerging technologies. The need, cost speed
and users' satisfaction are the essential factors
determining collection development.
DW
Lewis points out that users will demand more
from the LICs than they have in the past
Qualitative services are expected, failing which,
LICs in their central role as providers and
organisers of information, cannot survive and
will become less valuable/beneficial to its user

community. Margaret Johnson opines that 'LICs
will no longer be regarded as the focal point for
information any more if it slips outside their
purview.
The library's significance to the
administration and function of its parent body
will diminish'. If this is allowed to happen, it is
easy to predict a decline in library funding as
well.
FW Lancaster raises the question that 'given
that the library must continue to take a lead in
the exploitation of information sources in
electronic form, what exactly does this imply for
collection development?'.
In the electronic environment, a publication
need not be 'owned' to be readily accessible.
Many sources of information can be made
available to the user community that could not
be available if the library were'to acquire or
purchase and store the same. The above said
problems can be controlled by developing
electronic information access. An electronic
collection can be more flexible and dynamic,
leaving wider variety {world's information
resources) and choice of selecting only that part
of the document (a page or an article) that is
relevant and the whole source need not be
acquired.
The interesting feature of this environment is
its speed and quality. The delivery of
information is so expeditious that the fourth law
is effectively operational. The search options for
an item are much easier and simplified.
Location of an item in the machine readable

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol 1997,17(1)

form is quicker than that of the conventional
printed shelf collection.
It has also been pointed out that 'collecting
electronic information is more problematic than
collecting printed documents. Also collecting
printed documents is not without it problems as
well'. Nevertheless, collection development,
whatever form it takes, still requires policies and
strategies governing the acquisition program.
Simply duplicating the collection practices
evolved for print materials in the network
environment does not seem responsive to
current needs or capabilities.
An obvious challenge in developing
countries is the problem of how to integrate
electronic resources with traditional forms. The
need for total integration cannot be taken for
granted as most of the LICs and library
professionals have taken up. It has been
pointed out that the future LICs must be a
combination of 'actual' and 'virtual' materials
(The 'virtual collection' is an electronically
browsable collection). The next century
collection shall be an accumulation of
information-bearing objects • printed, aural,
graphic and digital * housed within the physical
library; and also indices, abstracts and
catalogues through which, using electronic
channels, the library user has access to
pre-iden lifted resources held by other libraries
and information providers.
One major problem the developing
countries experience is the cost factor involved
in acquisition and access of electronic sources.
Though they are very popular with the library
users, yet they tend to be more expensive than
their printed counterparts, particularly with
regard to the accessory or supporting
infrastructure facilities. It is true, that electronic
resources are economical in space. However,
space economy cannot compensate for the
financial increases elsewhere. Though the
telecommunication and computer technologies
have largely declined in their cost factor, such
reductions do not apply to all the information
technologies concerned with the LICs.
Another problem is the lack of ownership
(only access) of resources to claim funds from
the concerned authorities. The funding bodies

must realise that electronic information
resources are leased rather than owned, and
others do not exist in the library at all. In the
changing context, if the LIC's funding is not
increased, they tend to become useless.
Another problems facing the collection
development issue are identified as:
i)

Finding out what is available;

li)

Evaluating the sources available; and,

iii)

Acquiring and servicing the sources
required.

The electronic information sources not
having adequate bibliographic control, are not
easily located, and are not well reviewed.
Electronic documents are so fluid, interactive,
and are changed frequently and not owned by
any library, that the concept of evaluation has
totally changed from that of the print-on-paper.
More than collection building, it is the
provision of access which has gained
significance. Technology has i profound
beneficial effect on resource sharing programs.
LIC's activities are no longer individualised but a
collective approach is absolutely essential in the
electronic environment. Acquisition policies of
individual LIC's must weigh the merit of
acquiring by cooperative venture and the
funding bodies must come to accept this type
of collection management. And also the
vendors of commercial products must
understand the imperative facing LICs to enter
co-operative venture.
Implementation of innovate technologies
that have revolutionised the LIC's operations is
widespread. All the LICs in developed nations
have totally shifted to electronic environment
and those of them in the developing countries
are in the process of marching towards the new
electronic environment to find their place and
fit into the changing information society, with all
its limitations.

2. REFERENCES
1. Atkinson, Ross. Text mutability and
collection
administration.
Library
Acquisitions: Practice & Theory, 1990, 14(4),
356.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol 1997,17(1)

2. Ghikas, Mary W. Collection management
for
the
21si
century.
Collection
Management, 1989, 11(7), 123.

4.

Lancaster, FW. Libraries and librarians in the
age of electronics. Information Resources
Press, Arlington, 1982.

3.

5.

Lewis, DW. Inventing the electronic library.
CoWege & Research Libraries, 1988, 49, 293.

Lancaster,
FW.
Towards
paperless
information systems.
Academic Press,
New York, 1978.

6. Library Trends, 1989, 37 (3), 265-384.
7.

Library Trends, 1992, 40 (4), 575-830.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol 1997,17(1)

