DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 17, No.1. January 1997, pp. 11-20
1997, DESIDOC

Collection Development/Management in an Information
Technology-Based Environment: Current Initiatives and Issues
S Seetharama*
Abstract
This article discusses the impact of information technology on collection
development and collection management. Collection development policy A
methods, resource sharing and networking, and collection evaluation in ITbased environment are also explained in detail.
design, as the present information systems have
been designed for use by information
professionals rather than users. This, perhaps, is
true in many libraries even today it becomes
now imperative to design information systems
for use by end-users, the primary clientele.

1. INTRODUCTION
The importance of information as a vital
resource in today's society hardly needs
emphasis as information brings people and
thoughts together. It is the exchanges of ideas,
news and data, that makes a society what it is?
In the post-industrial society, it has been said
that what counts is not raw muscle power or
energy but information, and indeed the
advanced economies of the world have already
become information intensive. Consequently,
large investments are being made in the
Information Technology (IT) industry for the
purpose of generating, processing and
disseminating/transmitting information. IT can
be used in libraries and information centres, in
the context of Ranganathan's fourth law 'save
the time of the reader/staff for many purposes.
On the question of the impact of IT on library
and information work, Slamecka,19 as early as
1985, drew attention to what he considers a
significant change required in future systems
" Documentation Research and Training Centre
Indian Statistical-Institute 8th Mile, Mysore Road
Bangalore • 560 059

DESIDOC Bulletin o flnf Techno/,1997,17( 1)

However, while libraries and information
centres have risen to the occasion and are
trying to adapt and adopt IT for their operations,
they are being affected by a number of external
forces-social, economic, political, technological
and internal variables for a change. Thus, the
challenge of change, the pressure for
accountability, and the emergence of enterprise
culture are emphasising the fact that library and
information services need to be proactive rather
than passive and hence, need to be positively
and effectively managed . At this juncture, it
may be us eful to remember that four
interrelated trends of IT-multiple IT, dispersing
IT, accelerating IT, and pervasive IT — can alter,
for example:
•

Objectives and strategies—the nature of
sources and services

•

Operational structures—the ways in which
service(s) are delivered.

11

In addition, the advantages of IT including
accommodation of increased workload,
achievement of greater efficiency, ability for
generation of new services, facilitating
cooperation, etc., can stand in good stead in the
quest for quality and productivity of library and
information sources (collection) and services.
As a consequence, it may be said that we
are in a time when many people involved in the
library community are uncertain about their and
others role in the near and distant future. All
librarians to-day will have to be flexible and
understand the true nature of their existence, or
their missions. Products and services provided
by all will have to change, but missions will stay
the same.

2. COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT IN
IT-BASED ENVIRONMENT
One of the questions for which an answer
should be sought is: What does the future hold
for collection development in libraries and
information handling institutions? At this
juncture, it would be appropriate to recall the
functions
that
relate
to
collection
development/collection
management
specifically
selection,
acquisition.

archiving/preservation, policy making, collection
evaluation, etc. Perhaps, one of the best
explanations can be seen in Cogswell's5 list of
eight functions of collection management (See
table 1 below)
Thus, one can see that while collection
development is perceived as a concept more
appropriate to earlier times of expansion in
higher education and academic libraries and
implies building and growing, dealing with
selection and acquisition of library materials.
Collection management now is a more
demanding concept which goes beyond a
policy of acquiring materials, to policies on
housing, preservation, storage, weeding and
discard of stock. Rather than selection and
acquisition, collection management emphasises
the systematic maintenance and management
of library's existing collection.

2.1

Current Concerns and
Constraints

Continuing economic constraints (cuts in
funding which lead to shrinking book funds,
fewer staff and insufficient space together with
difficulties caused by the prices of books and
serials rising faster than the inflation rate),

Table 1. Collection Management Functions
SI. Management Function
No.
1,

Explanation of Function

Planning and policy making Making a formal Collection Management Policy statement and preparation of
an actual Collection Management Plan according to the statement.

2.

Collection Analysis

Analysis collection strengths and weaknesses according to objective measures
using some tools.

3.

Materials Selection

Selecting materials according to Collection Management Planning.

4.

Collection Maintenance

Making decisions on which to materials to preserve, weed, replace, and store
in order to serve the current and furture needs.

5.

Fiscal Management

Active participation in acquiring a materials budget and allocating it effectively.

6.

User Liaison

Interaction with all types of library users and formal study of library users and
their patterns.

7.

Resource Sharing

Establishing cooperation and communication with other local, national, and
international libraries for resource sharing.

8.

Programme Evaluation

Evaluating Collection Management plans, policies, procedures, and personal by
use and user studies to revise plans and policy documents for Collection
Management.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol. 1997,17( 1)

together with such factors as curriculum
changes, research selectivity, the expansion of
higher education, the 'information explosion,'
and the growth of new information media, lead
to a higher priority being accorded to planned
and coordinated collection management and
stock'revision than used to be the case .n
At this juncture, it would be appropriate to
state that information technology is here to stay.
While technology is either good or evil, it
changes our very nature and must be monitored
closely for its residual effects. Information
Technology is different in nature from the earlier
technologies and its characteristics of sheer
pervasiveness, being an input as well as a final
product and costs falling more dramatically than
ever before have had a significant impact on
library operations, especially, on information
resources development and information
services generation and dissemination. The
challenge we face to-day is not a 'paper less
society' nor the 'electronic information centre'.
The challenge is to maintain, nurture and
optimize the resources of the libraries with the
help of this new technology.

3.1

Collection Development Policy

In an IT-based environment, the entire
approach and philosoohy of collection
development needs to be changed as simply
duplicating the collection practices evolved for
print materials in the new information (network)
environment does not seem responsive to
current needs or capabilities. Nevertheless,
collection development, whatever form it takes,
still would require policies that would govern
the acquisition of both electronic resources and
traditional forms of documents. In this context,
probably, the obvious challenge would be the
problem of how to integrate both.
On the basis of a survey on the extensive
literature generated on changing collection
development patterns, the key issues identified
for redefining a collection development policy
include:
•

Balancing ownership and access;

•

Cooperative efforts; and

•

Evaluation.

3,1.1 Ownership vs Access

3. IMPACT OF IT ON
COLLECTION

In recent years, there has been a perceptible
shift from 'library as a storehouse model' to
library as a gateway model' (See table 2).

That information technology (IT) has had a
significant impact on library operations would be
stating the obvious and is indisputable. In the
context of collection development/management,
the impact of IT has been quite pronounced
whether it relates to collection development
policy, selection and acquisition of information
materials,
resource
sharing/networking,
collection, evaluation, etc.

Echoing similar views, Dougherty and Hugh6
say that the concept of Hie virtual library, i.e., a
library that provides access to electronic and
print materials from many sources, both local
and remote, has achieved a widespread
popularity, while Michalko stresses that the
'research library must move with minimal
disruption from a library model directed

Table 2
Ownership-based Library Model (Library as storehouse)

Access-based Library Model (Library at Gateway)

Emphasis on use of traditional print collections stored locally Emphasis on access to resources that are networked
and physically browsable.
and browsable electronically.
Value is attributed to the size of the collection.

Value is placed on the availability and deliverability

'Just in case' approach lo collection development based 'Just in time' approach to collection management
upon the goal of physical acquisition of resources that form based upon a high reliance on expatiated document
an archival collection.
delivery.

DESIDOC Bulletin of lnf Technol 1997,17(1)

13

primarily at ownership of materials to one in
which access and delivery play a central role*. A
similar line of thinking can be seem in DowlinV
comment for 'the need to transform the library
from a fortress to an information pipeline".

problems of electronic resources associated
with access:

Nevertheless, libraries seeing the merits of
ownership continue to build library collections.
An analysis of university libraries' operating
expenditures in US and Canada (1992-93)
indicate that books and monographs account
for 11.1%, serials 20.8%, other library materials
2.5%, salaries 50.6% and other miscellaneous
items 15% of the total operating expenditure.
Data on the top four libraries is given in Table 3
for purposes of illustration only:

13

Integration of electronic resource with
traditional forms.

•

Costs of Acquisition vs Access.

•

Critical problem of determining what
collection development really means in
electronic environment
Other problems are:

Time, perhaps, has come that it has almost
become established wisdom that the future for
libraries lies in a policy of access rather than
ownership,14 since, on the one hand, much if
not most material will be made available in the
future only in electronic form and, on the other,
economic grounds would force one to access
rather than own.
But, one problem would be that browsing
and serendipity would greatly be impaired by
the access mode. This is inspite of the fact that
online browsing is available, as it has been
found that scanning screens cannot be an
adequate substitute for scanning the printed
page as users do not seem to prefer it. Another
problem is that for many documents, especially
books, monographs, the day of routine online
access is a distant possibility. In addition,
Lancaster
has identified the following

•

>

Electronic resources are not adequately
controlled bibliographically, they are not
easy to identify, and they are not well
reviewed.

>

Non availability of selection tools.

>

Nor is there a developed system of
publication and distribution of electronic
resources.

While Gaunt, on one hand, states that
costs are not the only issues being faced by the
collection development librarian, he identifies
other problems:
(a) Finding out what is available,
(b) Evaluating the sources available, and
(c) Acquiring and servicing the sources
required.
Stoller comments on one specific problem
to be faced in the future, namely, how to deal
with electronic journals and suggests three
options:
(i) To print the journal either directly from the
online file or with the intermediate step of a

Table 3
Name of
University

Rank Volumes in Volumes added

Current Serials Total Expenditure ($)

Library

Harvard University

1

12,605,537

245,643

96,357

57,978,016

Yale University

2

9,327,219

163,217

52,971

33,1 76,000

University of California 3
(Berkeley)

7,981,724

144,157

89,730

32,381,956

University of California 4
(Los Angeles)

14

6,380,409

175,991

94,612

29,346,246

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Tecoh 1997,17(1)

download and manipulation
processing software.

Another important component of the
collection development policy statement that
should form part of it relates to weeding and
stock relegation which it is believer as a positive
and desirable method of improving service to
readers. Obviously, guidelines or criteria for
weeding and the persons who should be made
responsible for weeding need to be outlined.
Collection development methods as well as
methods of evaluation for traditional and
electronic sources need to be indicated in the
collection development policy document.

by word

(ii) To download the online file to an electronic
medium, and provide access through PCs.
(iii j To maintain the file on a mainframe computer
and provide access through LAN.
On the question of the relative effectiveness
of ownership and access in relation to
periodicals and monographs, Line believes
that remote access to both is inferior to onthe-spot access (ownership). Even in the case of
local availability, studies in USA and UK
indicate that though 70% of material wanted by
researchers is held in the library, but only 60%
of the items held are available when they are
wanted. On the other hand, relative costs alone
cannot be considered as adequate criteria for
buying or borrowing in the light of the
importance of exposure and browsing. Further,
cost comparisons are not possible due to two
following reasons:

3.1.2 Cooperative Efforts and Evaluation
In addition, collection development policies
should cover the issue of cooperation and
remote access. This, in effect, suggests the
planning for a resource sharing mechanism
among participating libraries that would
facilitate collective/remote access to the entire
user clientele.

3.2

a) Costs of access are not stable.
b) The expected use has to be estimated before
costs of ownership and access can be
compared, which as all know is very difficult.
But, this issue can be bypassed if the library
passes on the costs of access to users. This
can give rise to a dangerous tendency where
libraries may tend to buy nothing and access
everything.
While the debate on ownership {of printed
material) and access goes on, alternatives have
been suggested, like acquisition or lease of CDROMs (ADONIS) of full text or acquisition of
tailor-made CD-ROMs. Olher possibilities are
synopsis journals, mini print and tabloid
publications.
From the foregoing discussion, it becomes
obvious that while there are merits and demerits
both in ownership and access, a sensible
approach would be to redefine collection
development policy which ensures on-the-spot
access (through ownership) to current material
and remote access to older material. In addition,
it should indicate the strategies to be adopted
for selection and acquisition of resources in
print, electronic and other formats.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1997, 17(1)

Collection
Development Methods

Collection development methods relate to
the procedures of selection and acquisition of
materials for an expanding collection and
decisions on the material to be included in the
collection. While selection and acquisition
methods
to
be
adopted
for
traditional/conventional printed materials is well
known, what one is not familiar is the uses of
electronic facilities (including networks) for
collection development activities. The use of
networks for collection development related
activities in special libraries are given below.
Use of Networks for CD-related Activities
•

Receiving patron requirements for new books,
journals and media.

•

Requesting/providing ILL to other libraries.

•

Requesting/providing missing
duplicates, and exchange.

•

Requesting/ordering library materials.

•

Identifying document sources.

•

Getting quick copyright mission.

•

Communicating with vendors and customers.

issues,

15

•

Accessing electronic journals and newsletters.

•

Subscribing to electronic publications.

•

Searching remote catalogues and union lists.

•

Searching online systems.

•

Scanning journals tables of contents.

•

Retrieving files via FTP.

•

Receiving documents and technical data.

•

Searching files for acquisition lists and articles.
(Source: Special Libraries and Internet)

A comprehensive treatment on the main
uses of networks for collection development
work can be found in library literature and
hence not discussed here. The arrival on the
scene of INTERNET has completely
revolutionised the entire gamut of activities that
constitute library management, be it collection
management,
information
services
management, document delivery services
(electronic), etc.4 However, some of the crucial
issues that need to be addressed in a network
environment include copyright management,
standardisation, training and education as these
would facilitate effective utilisation of valuable
resources and power tools available on
networks.

activities, that RS as an operational concept has
not gained sufficient ground in India.
Perhaps, it is time, that information
professionals realise that provision of access to
information is more important that collection
building. Therefore, a necessity has risen to
strike a balance between local ownership and
network access which should be reflected in the
collection development policy statement.
Consequently, librarians must shift the focus of
their acquisition policy from the collection of
materials by and for an individual library to
policies that weigh the merit of acquiring the
same resources by consortia of local libraries,
regional library cooperative and/or state library
networks.20
However, in the context of electronic
sources, it is not necessary to acquire them so
long as it is possible to remotely access. In such
a situation, selection activity is of different kind
librarians select what to access to satisfy a
known demand rather than what to purchase in
anticipation of future demands.21
The importance and usefulness of networks
a n d n e t wo r k i n g c a n b e g a u g e d f r o m
Chaudhry's4 statement(s) given below:

Resource sharing (RS) has a long and noble
tradition. But, in recent times, RS has become a
central focus of interest to the librarians and
information professionals and a likely direction
for future development. This can be seen from
statements, such as "pride in collection has got
to be supplanted by pride in patronage.";
"libraries should think materials as community
resources rather than with a simple institutional
orientation"; "local ownership to collective
access", etc. Further, the terms, such as,
consortium, network, and cooperatives have
been used to label the organisational
arrangements for achieving a variety of resource
sharing objectives.

"Network' information resources, as
extension of library collections and as
bibliographic and communications utilities with
their unprecedented connectivity, speed of
transmission, and worldwide breadth have
created excellent opportunities for libraries.
Networks provide navigational tools and
associated services which can be used by
libraries to access remote resources for
browsing, searching, and even downloading.
They are redefining the concept of collection
and collection development and transforming
the selection, preservation, communication, and
liaison functions in libraries. They are creating a
powerful new context for the theory and
practice of collection management and
requiring librarians to develop new skills, accept
new responsibilities, and change their ways of
performing various library operations."

While developments in information
technology and its widespread availability in
support of networking, the world over, is the
most significant factor in the growth of RS

Internet is a very good example of network
which facilitates selection and procurement of
information materials, document delivery, and
access electronic journals and specialised

3.3

Resource Sharing/Networking

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1997, 17(1)

materials. Three basic applications of Internet
are e-mail, remote login, and file transfer (FTP)
have been used by librarians to acquire and
process information electronically and to
facilitate access to electronic information .

to satisfy the needs of users. Some of the
collection management performance indicators
useful in this context are relevance, delivery,
effectiveness (use satisfaction), cheapness, costefficiency and staff efficiency.

3.4 Collection Evaluation

4. ROLE OF LIBRARIES AND
LIBRARIANS

Collection evaluation can be viewed in two
senses — macro sense where the focus is on the
entire collection and micro sense which for
cusses on the evaluation of a specific document
or journal. Viewed from another perspective,
there are three fundamental dimensions in
collection evaluation; ownership, availability and
accessibility. While all the three dimensions are
applicable in traditional collections, the concept
of ownership is not particularly relevant to
electronic sources. Whatever be the sense, its
purpose is to determine whether a collection is
doing what it should do in the most
cost-effective manner. Obviously, there is a
need for performance measures. In the
traditional library, the size and variety of its
collections were the main measures of
excellence of an library. Other measures used
include
exhauslivity/completeness,
quality,
document availability, browsability, circulation
and reference use, document exposure (hours
of use of a book by the reader), etc.
Performance evaluation of collections can be
determined through questionnaire surveys,
interviewing, observation, library statistics, and
other collection-centred and client-centred
methods.
But, in the context of electronic resources,
client-centred methods can be used keeping in
view the two dimensions of evaluation—of
availability and accessibility. If they are not
already there, there will be a need for
developing them.
On the other hand, in evaluating traditional
library collections, a host of evaluation methods,
have been developed in recent times which
include: checklist approach, comparative
holdings statistics, availability studies, standards,
formulas, etc.
Whatever be the methods adopted, one
should always keep in mind that the ultimate
objective or purpose of collection evaluation is

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1997,17( 1)

In this changing scenario, libraries and
librarians will continue to play an important role
in
handling
traditional/conventional
and
electronic resources. Unless this is recognised
and acted upon, other professions and
professionals will usurp own roles and functions.
Libraries must be quick to recognise and realise
the advantages of IT and must try to adapt and
adopt it for their operations. Nevertheless, in
attempting to introduce new technologies,
regardless of how marvelous they may be and
regardless of how they enable us to create new
innovative services, one should not forget they
are only the 'tools of our trade'. We should not
be overwhelmed and overpowered by them.
On the contrary, there is a need to re-examine
the
various
collection
development/
management activities for their amenability to
these technologies. If amenable, the activities
can be performed using the new technologies.
If not amenable, some rethinking on the whole
design and operation of the existing system
should be done. In other words, a reappraisal of
the existing system vis-a-vis new technology
should be undertaken.
A similar line of thinking can be seen in the
statement of Margaret Johnson who says
'libraries in their central role as providers and
organisers of information cannot afford to
ignore computer files or to approach them in a
piecemeal fashion' or Alberico's comment that
if we don't become involved at all levels, there is
a very real possibility that resources will shift to
other segments of the economy that can
(handle and) deliver the electronic services that
academic and post-industrial organisations will
need to survive and Summer hill's observation
that clearly groups of local users will have an
ongoing need for the proximate location of
heavily used data. Thus, achieving a balance
between local collections of heavily used

17

electronic resources and the provision of
network access to less frequently used
resources should be the (role) goal of the library
acquisition process in a networked
environment'.

and vendors about site licenses and methods of
royalty and copyright payments. In addition,
they have to be prospectors selecting and
acquiring materials in the complex network
environment.

Atkinson,2 however, believes that the role of
the library in an IT-based environment would
be:

5. CONCLUSIONS

a)

To identify resources that are likely to be of
greatest interest locally and downloading
these to a local database—a kind of deferred
collection development operation (locating
information sources as they are needed
rather than to predict the needs in advance).

b)

To become a publisher and disseminator of
information by uploading rather than
downloading.

Holding a similar view^ Alberico comments
that 'libraries may become publishers by using
the network to build customised multi-media
documents for clients or by providing the
technology/training, and facilities to allow
clients to build their own composite
documents". In other words, library is being
viewed as a creator and disseminator of
information and also have such value-added
responsibilities on user education.
On the role of librarians, Chaudhry4
comments that 'librarians will have to initiate the
transition to an access-based model of service
based upon electronic networks that will
provide bibliographic, numeric, and full-text
information to scholars and researchers. They
will have to create an environment where
access to collective scholarly resources super
cedes the historic quest for the great
comprehensive collections'. Other roles
identified are that of gatekeeper, one who
identifies that potion of the universe of
information resources that is likely to be of
greatest value to a particular user or group of
users. Whatever happens to the library as an
institution, Shreeves 8 believes that clearly
gatekeepers of this type will still be needed in
the future, and perhaps, will be even more
important than they are today. Further, librarians
will have to involve themselves in the access
process and also in negotiating with publishers

18

From this discussion, it becomes clear that
for libraries and information centres, IT is a
crucial consideration as it has an impact not
only on the organisational structure, but also on
the library purpose and service. Hence, libraries
and librarians have little choice but to adapt and
adopt IT for library operations, especially for
collection
development
activities
and
information services generation. Despite its
enormous potential, information technology—be it
optical disc technology or computers and
communications
technology—is
largely
underused by libraries and information centres.
Therefore, it is necessary that information
professionals examine and design appropriate
strategies in the selection and use of emerging
technologies so as to increase productivity in
library operations like collection development
and management, and also in enhancement of
services to the users.
In this process of re-appraisal, it would be
helpful to try the six R's of selecting new
technologies, namely, review the mandate or
mission of the library or information centre;
refocus the direction to keep in step with the
clients and the information environment;
redefine your client's needs; relate with the staff
and suppliers who are providers of external
information; software and technology; revamp
the activities and services; and recreate by using
the tools of the future, i.e., new technology.8
In the context of collection development and
management, it should be remembered that the
key issues to be considered would relate to:
ownership vs access, cooperative efforts, and
evaluation. Ownership implies building up of
collections and there need not be any doubt
about this activity as printed materials will
always be a part of library collections, but the
shift towards networked and local electronic
resources presents exciting possibilities for
reengineering collection development and

DESIDOC Bulletin Of Inf Techno! 1997,17(1}

acquisition processes. In other words, libraries
will need both ownership and access.
The question then arises as to what would
be owned and what to be accessed—access for
older material and ownership for current
material leading to the concepts of 'core access'
and 'core collection'. This is correct, since
increases in acquisition yield diminishing
returns. By implication, it would mean the need
for a policy for weeding and stock relegation
which would lead to 'Leaner, fitter libraries',
which is the need of the hour. In effect, it
implies that 'libraries need to shed the
unnecessary fat of unused old stock, not lose
the muscle that current material gives them'.
This is necessary as otherwise 'it would lead to
the danger of combining bulimia (accumulating
as much old material as they can lay hands on)
with anorexia (starvation of current proteins and
vitamins'. 14 At this juncture, it is necessary to
give a warning that access wilt not necessarily
be cheaper in the future and it would be unwise
to plan on the assumption that it will. Thus,
achieving a balance between local collections of
heavily used traditional and electronic resources
and the provision of (network) access should be
the goal of the library acquisition process in an
electronic networked information environment.
However, it needs to be mentioned here that a
mechanism for document delivery should be
thought of from the beginning.
On the other hand, to keep the information
professionals updated with knowledge and skills
required for handling information technology,
course modules need to be designed both for
formal and continuing education programs. This
is absolutely necessary if the librarians and
information scientists expect to play increasing
roles in establishing connections between
information resources and people in the coming
information society.
At this juncture, it would be appropriate to
quote Foskett who remarks 'At such a historic
moment when new technology offers librarians
and information officers the chance to make a
real contribution to enhancing the cultural
heritage by active exploitations of all its
records, it would be a tragic irony if the medium
becomes the message, technology becomes the
DESIOOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/, 1997, 17(1)

master and not the servant and librarians find
themselves once more cast in the role of
keepers, not of books, but of machines.
Librarians must not neglect their role as
repositories, but become also mediators and
promoters of communication'. In addition
librarians must assume new roles as gatekeeper
(rather as gate opener who opens the
flood-gates of information), and prospectors
relecting and acquiring materials in the complex
network environment. The role of the libraries,
on the other hand, would be to become a
creator, publisher and dissemination of
information and also have such value-added
responsibilities on user education.
To conclude, the challenge we face is not a
'paperless society' nor the 'electronic
information centre'. The challenge is to
maintain, nurture and optimise the resources of
the libraries with the help of new technology.
Hence, we must be ready, emotionally,
professionally and financially to accept and
make* good use of new technology.
Finally, let us create an information future
with technology as though our lives depend
upon it.

6. REFERENCES
1.

Alberico, R. Quoted in Lancaster, FW.
Collection Development in the year 2025.

2.

Atkinson, R. Text mutability and collection
administration. Library Acquisitions: Practice
and Theory, 1990, 14, 356.

3.

Becker, ). How to integrate and manage
new technology in the library. Special
Libraries, 1983,74,1-6.

4.

Chaudhry,
AS.
Exploiting
network
information
resources
for Collection
Development in Libraries. IFLA Journal,
1996,22,191-98.

5.

Cogswell, J. The organisation of Collection
Management
functions in
academic
research libraries. / Acad Librarianship, 1987,
13, 268-76.

6.

Dougherty, RM and Hughes, C. Preferred
futures for libraries. 1991 Research Libraries
Croup. Mountain View, California.
19

7. Dowlin, KE. The Neographic Library. In
Libraries and the Future.
8. Dysart, Jl and Jones, RJ. Toots for the future:
Recreating or Renovating Information
Services using new technologies. Computers
in Libraries, 1995, 15, 16-19.
9. Ear), M. Emerging trends in managing new
information technologies. In Piercy, N (Ed).
The management implications of new
information technology. Croom Helm,
1984.
10- Gaunt Ml. Machine-readable Literary Texts;
Collection Development Issues. Collection
Management, 1990, 13, 89.
11. Jenkins, C and Morley, M. Collection
management in academic libraries 1996.
First Jaico Impression. Jaico Publishing
House, Bombay.
12. Johnson, M. Adding computer files to the
Research Library; Issues in Collection
Management
and
Development.
In
Constance, C (Ed). Computer files and the
research library. 1990. Research Libraries
Group. Mountain View, California.
13. Lancaster, FW. Collection Development in
the year 2025.

20

14. Line, MB. Access Vs Ownership: How real
an alternative is iL IFLA journal, 1996, 22,
35-41.
15. Luijenijk, W. Archiving Electronic Journals:
The
Serial
Information
Provider's
Perspective. (FLA journal, 1996,22,209-10.
16. Michalko, }. Quoted in Lancaster, FW.
Collection Development in the year 2025.
17. Seethraama, S. Guidelines for Planning of
Libraries and Information Centres 1990.
IASL1C, Calcutta.
18. Shreeves, E. Between the Visionaries and
the Luddites: Collection Development and
Electronic Resources in the Humanities.
Library Trends, 7992, 40, 579.
19. Slamecka, V. Empirical issues in National
Information System Design. Paper presented
at the
International Symposium on
Computerised Information Retrieval. Beijing.
1985, p. 15-39.
20. Summerhill, CA. Quoted in Lancaster, FW.
Collection Development in the year 2025.
21. Stoller, ME. Electronic Journals in the
Humanities: A survey and critique. Library
Trends, 1992,40, 647-66.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techmo 1997, 17(1)

