DESIDOC Bulletin of InformationTechnology, Vol. 17, No. 2, March 1997, pp. 3-9
0 1997, DESIDOC

Collection Development in a Resource Sharing Environment
Wajih A Alvi*
Abstract
This article briefly explains the changing phase of collection development
while discussing the information explosion in recent years along with an
example of Chemical Abstracts for the same. I t puts emphasis on
co-operative collection development policies suited to the current
philosophy of providing access to information through a sharing mechanism,
stresses upon the need of improving the quality of library services through it,
and also discusses its advantages.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Collection Development (CD) is an
operation that involves regular addition to the
collection of information sources in print and in
other modern forms, and weeding out on
regular basis, of such materials from the
collection that turn obsolete or deteriorate
physically over time. This plus-minus operation
involves a host of intricacies and is regarded as
a n operation of paramount importance in
offering efficiency, responsive patrons' services
in a library, information storage and retrieval
system, or other bibliographic databases with
similar objectives. No wonder, there has been a
general belief that there is a positive correlation
between the collection size of a library and its
performance in terms of patrons' satisfaction.
Thus collection development is a continuous
process in all types of libraries worldwide. If s
library ceased adding fresh materials to 2 i t s
collection, it would soon relegate into a dead
collection affecting adversely the performance
* Department of Library and lnformation Science
University of Kashmir
Srinagar - I90 006,
jammu & Kashmir

of a library. Naturally, collection development,
as ~vans' puts it, 'is a universal process in the
library world whereby the library staff brings
together a variety of materials to meet patronsf
demands'.
All types of libraries, therefore, draw a sound
acquisition program with a sound acquisition
policy and procedure, and most important, a
selection policy. A standard selection policy is a
sine quo non for a judicious, balanced and
robust collection development. It specifies the
objective of the collection, authority for
selection, procedure for overseeing the
proposed selection, criteria for allocation of
funds and for selection of various types of
materials, priorities in selection, and mechanism
of, and criteria for, weeding out in order to
eliminate the proverbial deed.

2.

IMPEDIMENTS IN
COLLECTION DEVELOPMENT

Over
the years, particularly during the
current century of boon crisis, certain
developments on the intellectual horizon have
impeded the smooth sailing of the libraries on
all fronts a great deal. The collection

Chemical Abstracts were now covered in less
than two years as shown in Table 1. Likewise
information in other fields is flooding the world
day in and day out.

development has been one of the major
casualities and the panacea has been found in
adopting the theory and practice of resource
sharing, which implies total cooperation and
sharing of resources in men, money, materials,
methods, machines and all that constitute the
resources of a library. The first manifestation of
this need for resource sharing was the
interlibrary loan which reflected a library's
inability to meet the information requirements
of its patrons from its individual collection. A
bird's eye view of these maladies facing the
library world becomes imperative to identify the
factors 'that prompted libraries to cooperate
aggressively and design programs for total
lesource sharing.

2.1

Information Explosion

Today, every country is eager to be on the
bandwagon of research and development. A rat
race is in full swing for gaining superiority in
scientific and social research which has become
a key factor for progress, prosperity and
defence. The immediate byproduct of this
unprecedented fillip to research has been too
much of information. It has been estimated that
one half of the present body of knowledge has
been generated in the last thirty years, or that
five to ten times more information is available in
a given subject area than thirty years ago2.
~ s h w o r t h ~hsts tabulated the growth of
information in chemistry by calculating the years
it took Chemical Abstracts to publish successive
millions of abstracts:

No. of Abstracts

No. of years

First Million

37

Second Million

18

Third Million

8

Fourth Million

4.75

Fifth Million

3.3

The author conducted a count of volumes
116 and 117 covering 52 issues for the year
1992 and found that one million entries in the
4

This information explosion has consequently
brought about publication explosion and the
figures are indeed tantalising. ~ e a d e
estimates
~
that 'the world's output of new-books is around
one thousand titles per day'.
an caster^
estimates that there are now about fifty
thousand journals in scientific and technical
areas published worldwide and this number is
steadily increasing at a compound rate of 2% to
4% per year. Then there are other types of print
and non-print materials including the grey
literature. This mushroom growth of literature
which is the intellectual patrimony of whole
mankind has created several bewilderin
situations for libraries worldwide. Allen Kent
has painted a very gloomy picture of this
situation more than two decades ago:

%

_

te There have been 30 million unique titles
published since Gutenberg-how many
libraries have anything more than 5% of
these-some have less than 1/2%.

e There are 50-100 thousand journals published
currently-how many libraries subscribe to
more than 10 to 15%-some subscribe to less
than 1/2%.

e About 500 thousand books will be published
worldwide in 1974-how many libraries will
buy more than 10-15%-some will buy less
than 1/2%.
In such an aweful situation a library is
overawed what to do. The solution has been
found in co-operative collection development
which ultimately paves the way for cooperative
acquisition, processing, maintenance and access
to information.

2.2

Inflation

Though price rise is a common
phenomenon, the price hike in library materials
is a unique one.
Allredge and ~tkinson'
conclude that 'the increased costs of reading
materials over the past decade have far
exceeded the general rate of inflation and the
OESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1997,17 ( 2 )

Table 1. Number of abstracts covered by Chemical Abstracts between Januaryand December 1992.
-

-

-

-

-

Vol.No. issue No.

Date

-

-

No. of Entries

Entries

lanuary 06
lanuary 13
January20

lanuary 27

February 03
February 10
February 17
february 24
March 02

March 09
March 16
March 23
March 30
April 06
April 13
April 20
April 27
May 04

May 1 1
May 18

May 25
June 01

June08

117

26

June29

Total

fanuary-lune 1992

1-26

July 06-Dec 29

Total abstracts
covered in 1992

2,56,066

- 2,68,410

12,344
2,68,410

1-2,64,02 7

2,64,027
5,32,437

result has been a steady erosion of purchasing
power of libraries.'

on libraries. The industry
information in a big way.

Prices of journals are really zooming. De
~unnaro' while surveying the zooming prices
of journals observes that Inorganic Chernica
Acta was available to libraries at an annual
subscription of US $26 in 1970 but cost $235 in
1975, a staggering increase of 804 percent.
Likewise there is a price escalation of secondary
journals which are an essential component of
any information service today.

As more and more people use information,
the patrons population in all type of libraries
increases steadily.
As a library's patrons
population grows, needs increase and diversify.
Libraries began to expand the radius of their
services but the information explosion and price
escalation created hurdles on all fronts.

Moreover, there is a price discrimination in
journals. Publishers employ a three-tier pricing
policy in journals; higher prices for Institutional
subscribers; higher prices for foreign subscribers
as compared to native subscribers, and
comparatively low prices for individual
subscribers. Joyce and ~ e r demonstrate
z ~
a
difference of nearly two hundred percent
between individual and institutional subscribers,
adding that "differences vary from discipline to
discipline."
Astle and ~amakar", while studying native
and foreign subscription variations, conclude
that the US subscribers pay, on an average, 39%
more than their British counterparts on British
journals, in addition to any already existing
difference for institutional subscribers.
For developing countries it is not only the
price escalation that is creating the havoc;
equally tentalising is the frequent devaluation of
their currencies against the mighty dollar,
increasing postal charges and unorganised
publishing and marketing.
As a consequence, libraries are no more in a
position to buy all that their patrons want and
need.
Their budgetary provisions for
acquisitions increase steadily and thus they
spend more, but in return they acquire less.

2.3

Mounting Population of Patrons

In the present information society, the
information i s a much sought after commodity
in all human enterprises. Universalisation of
education, spread of distance and continuing
education, and tremendous fillip to research in
all walks of life, have resulted in greater reliance

2.4

too

exploits

Quality of Library Service

Today's environment of education and
research,
increasing
disciplinary
interdependence and greater and varied use of
information have revolutionised the concept of
library service. The exponential growth of
information has created many a problems for
the patrons as well. They are not able to
assimilate all that they should to keep up and
catch up.
Patrons now expect and demand from their
libraries more responsive and comprehensive
services and filtered quality information tailored
to their exact requirements. The concept of
documentation, information storage and
retrieval, current awareness service, selective
dissemination of information etc. reflect the new
trends in library service worldwide.
The
information technology has offered new
avenues for the growth and sophistication of
these services.
Self-sufficiency in such an intellectual,
economic and social environment is a myth-a
will-of-the wasp-the nearer we feel we have
reached, the farther we find we are. Thus
emerged the concept of resources sharing
which calls for adopting the philosophy of
access as against the past philosophy of
possession.
Collection development in such an
environment became a major casuality.
Individually no library, however resourceful i t
might be, could afford to build comprehensive,
live collection to satisfy the actual and potential
information requirements of its clientele. A
cooperative collection development program,
on the other hand, will allow the users to have
access to a wide variety and amount of
DESIDOC Bulletin of In[ Technol, 1997.17 (21

information sources. It will also lead to
developing a
mechanism of
avoiding
overlapping
rampant
among
libraries
everywhere. Thus a cooperative collection
development program will be in the interest of
both the patrons as well as the librarians.

3.

COOPERATIVE COLLECTION
DEVELOPMENT

Cooperative Collection Development (CCD)
marks a total shift in the traditional library
philosophy-from the philosophy of possession
that libraries worldwide have adhered to for a
long past to the current philosophy of providing
access to the information through a sharing
mechanism, be it manual or mechanical. It calls
for shared acquisitions shared use, and is a
major factor for successful implementation of
any resources sharing program.

A CCD program has several benefits-both for
those who seek information and those who are
obliged to provide it. To the user such a
mechanism will offer an opportunity to have
access to the information sources of a host of
libraries participating in the CCD program. The
librarians will be freed of the frustration that they
experience in the wake of the impediments
discussed earlier. As such a program would put an
end to overlapping, rampant among libraries, the
financial pressure on libraries will show a decline.

3.1

CCD Plan

A CCD programme requires a workable plan
which involves a number of aspects of joint
activity
regarding
selection,
evaluation,
acquisition, processing and utilisation of pooled
funds. The first step in the creation of such a
program is the decision making. The libraries
intending to forge a CCD fraternity should take
a decision to this effect. Because libraries are
noncorporate institutions, such a decision
should require an approval of the parent
institutions and organisations of the libraries
intending to co-operate. Once this fundamental
step is accomplished the cooperating libraries
would do well to establish a Cooperative
Collection Development Committee (CCDC).
DESIDOC Bulletin oilnf Jechnol, 1997,17(2)

3.2

Cooperative Collection
Development Committee

The first step towards any cooperative
program which involves shared interests and
activities is the establishment of a committee to
determine the common goals and common
course of action to achieve the predetermined
common goals.
The CCDC shall act as a coordinating
agency and the nucleus of the acquisition
program of the cooperating libraries. As the
task before the committee is gigantic, its
composition shall include representatives of all
the cooperating libraries and their parent
institutions, subject experts and patrons
representatives.

3.2.1 Functions o f the CCDC
The CCDC shall lay down a broad policy on
the objectives to be accomplished and will
incorporate various decisions to have a set of
procedures to achieve the target objectives. It
will constitute subcommittees to deal with
differents
aspects
of
the
collection
development. Its functions can be grouped into
the following catagories as shown in Figure 1.
1.

General policy

2.

Guidelines

3.

Subject specialisation

4.

Selection policy

5.

Selection evaluation

6.

Acquisition

7.

Centralised processing, and

8.

Distribution

The CCDC shall determine. the collection
development policy (1). The collection
development policy for the co-operative libraries
is then specified as
guidelines ( 2 ) which
embody the regulations agreed upon for
co-operative collection development. These
guidelines shall be based upon the conclusions
of the deliberations of the subcommittee on
subject specialisation (3) composed of subject
experts and subject specialist librarians and
based on the strengths of the collections in
7

COOPERflm/E

DEV€lOPMENT
POUCY

..
DlSTRlsUTlON

PROCESSING

GUIMUNS
FOR CD

COMMITTEE ON
COllECllON
DEVELOPMENT

P R O G M
OF nccpusmw

Figure 1. Functions of the Cooperative Collection Development Centre.
participating libraries. They shall also determine
the selection policy (4). All participating libraries
shall select items in keeping with this policy. As
a centralised acquisition program is envisaged in
the model, the selections by the individual
libraries shall be subjected to evaluation by the
subcommittee on selection evaluation (5) in a
8

systematic, coordinated manner.
The
evaluation, in addition to other criteria, shall
take into account the strengths of the existing
collections and the actual and potential needs
of the selecting libraries. The conclusions drawn
at this stage in conformity with the guidelines
(2) and evaluation policies (4) will be utilised to
DESiDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1997,17 ( 2 )

produce the planned program for acquisition (6)
which shall serve as an overall plan for
co-operative acquisition for the co-operating
libraries. The final ordering will be based on the
final selection refleciing current needs as
expressed in the selection policy (4, the
selection evaluation (5) and the planned
program for acquisition (6). However, provision
for flexibility in policies, guidelines, evaluations
and plans w o J d be essentiat for modifications
in the wake of changing situations, expanding
emphases in participating institutions and
mounting and diversifying patrons requirements;
all these developments will make certain
revisions mandatory.
Once the materials have been received,
verified, physically inspected and formalities for
payment completed, they will be transferred to
the centralised processing component for
processing in accordance with a welt-framed
plan (7). Finally, the processed materials will be
distributed among the libraries for which they
are selected (8).

3.3 Advantages

present spending on materials having less
relevance to the patrons information needs.

The proposed common access to the
resources of the sharing libraries shall entitle the
patrons to exploit the pooled resources thereby
leading to the expansion of services to the
clientele. The union bibliographic database
shall expose the patrons to a vast variety of
resources irrespective of their institutional
affiliations. As cooperative operation shall pave
the way for a common bibliographic centre, a
mechanism could be developed for the
provision of referral and switching services, or to
a choice between the two.
The plan would in due course be able to
develop ways and means of introducing modern
sophisticated current awareness services which
have become the hall mark of any standard
library service today.
These services have
become all the more important today when the
comprehensive secondary services inform the
patrons of the new information scattered in a
huge number of journals and other formats into
which new information is packaged now-a-days.
In order to rJrornote the assimilation of the
relevant information, the sharing libraries would
be able to introduce current awareness service
and its sophisticated version of selective
dissemination of information.

It is evident that co-operative collection
devdopment wj)) offer soju60ns l o the problems
faced by the libraries in the wake
the
exponential growth of knowledge, skyrocketing
of prices and diversified patrons information
needs.

In short, cooperative collection development
and the ultimate multi-purpose resources

Besides such a plan will ensure improvement
and expansion or services in the present day
ailing libraiies. For, efficient and responsive
services are possible only when librarians and
patrons have access to increased resources.
The concept of resources sharing has been
forwarded to increase the accessibility to
extensive collections for both the parties. Thus
the exclusive aim of the co-operative activity is
to increase and expand services to the patrons.

sharing plans are the only solution to the ailing
library environments of the present. Rather
there is urgent need for it. Such plans and
programs have worked wonders throughout the
world and are, therefore, pleaded vehemently at
all levels. Incentives are available. Information
technology offers a facilitating mechanism.
What is needed now is to proceed in this
direction with a strong will supported by
professiona) commitment.

As the co-operating libraries will develop the
mechanism of avoiding overlapping in
acquisitions, they will be able to acquire more
needed materials and improve upon their
services. The common acquisition and joint
evaluation program will fetch to the libraries
high quality materials fully responsive to patrons
legitimate requirements and wil\ bring to hauh

REFERENCES
1. Evans,

Edward G. Developing library
collections. Libraries Unlimited, Colorado,
1979. 19.

2.

US National Industrial Conference Board.
Organising our scientific knowledge for use.
The Board, New York, 1967. 9.

3. Ashworth, Wilfred.
The information
explosion.
Library Association Record.
1974, 76(4), 66.

Library and Book Trade Annual. Bowker,
New York, 1979.332.

4.

Reade, Mitchel. Information. journal of
Information Science, 1991,17(3), 110.

8. De Gannaro, Richard. Escalating journal
prices: Time to fight back. American
Libraries, 197 7,8(2), 72.

5.

Lancaster, F Wilfred.
With libraries or
without libraries.
College and Research
Libraries, 1978,39(5), 347.

9. Joyce, Patrid et al. Price discrimination in
academic journals. Library Quarterly, 1985,
55(2), 275.

6.

Kent, Allen (Ed).
Resources sharing in
libraries. Marcel Dekker, New York, 1974.

10. Astle, Deana L et al. Pricing by geography.
Library Acquisitions: Practice and Theory.
1986, 10(2), 171.

7. Allredge, NC et a/.
Prices of US and
foreign published materials. In Bowker

10

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1997,17 ( 2 )

