DESIDOC Bulletin of lnforrnation Technology, Vol. 17,
8 1997, DESIDOC

No. 2, March t 997, pp. 1 1-13

Collection Development in University Libraries: Policy and

Procedures

Abstract
This article defines Collection Development in university libraries and
discusses centralised and decentralised patterns. It also suggests a pdicy Tor
collection development and concludes that involvement of all the staff
members of the library is essential to develop a balanced collection.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Colection Development includes planning
for the systematic and rational building of a
collection. The term includes all such activities
as assessing the user needs, evaluating the
present collection, determining selection policy,
coordinating selection of items, re-evaluating
and storing parts of the collection, and planning
for resource sharing.
Thus collection
development is not a single activity but a group
of activities. Acquisition is usually distinguished
from coHection development. Acquisition refers
to the process of verifying ordering and making
the payment for the required materials.

2.

CENTRALISED VERSUS

DECENTRALJSED PATTERN
Organisationally university libraries have two
structural patterns, v . ,
centralised vs
decentralised system. In a centralised system,
co((ectiondevetopment of a balanced collection
i s full responsibility of the central library. In a
* Reader and Head
Department of Library and Information Science
University of Glicut
Calicut 673 635

-

decentralised pattern, deue\opment of a sueect
collecrion is the responsibility of the academic
department concerned.

3.

EVOLVING A POLICY FOR
COLLEC7lON DEVELOPMENT

Collection development in university libraries
should be based on proper planning. Library
should have a poky in this regard. The
disciplines in which courses ate conducted can
be easily identified. Total fund available should
be apportioned among various departments of
study and research or among various disciplines
in which courses are conducted. This must be
done on the basis of need and it should be
done /udiciously. Similar decision should be
taken klating to-the peripheral subjects.

CI When new disciplines evolve, speciat funds
should be made available for devefoping a
basic collection in that discipline.

O Books tdating to the academic disciplines
should be based on the recommendation of
subject committees or departmental councils
constituting the teachers of the respective
academic departments.

.

Separate funds should be apportioned for
books of general nature. Books which may be
of interest to the teachers in general may be
purchased from this fund.
Selection of books of this nature should be
done by the university librarian or a senior
most in library staff who has good academic
background and general knowledge.
It should be ascertained that books ordered

have a certain academic standard.
Magrill and Gorbin propose a new allocation
plan for university libraries. According to this
25 per cent of the material budget be set aside
for general reference materials, special
collections and other purchases, that can not be
directly related to specific academic programs.
Another 25 per cent would be allocated directly
to individual academic departments for
purchase of materials that would likely be
needed only for instruction and research in a
single department. The remaining 50 per cent
of the budget would be allocated to eight
disciplinary clusters made up of academic units
sharing research interests and likely to have
similar needs for library materials. The amount
of the allocation given to each disciplinary
cluster and to each individual department would
be based on factors commonly used in budget
allocation formulas, such as:

a Number of student credit hours generated;
a Number of student credit hours by academic
level;

a Number of full time faculty by department;

e

Average cost per book by department, and;

e

Average cost per periodical by department.

3.1

Book Acquisition as a
Continuous Program

Books acquisition should be done as a
continuous program. When the budget
allocation has been made in the beginning of
the year, a meeting of the Heads of
Departments or their representatives be
arranged where an agreed policy be arrived at
and guidelines chalked out relating to the
12

procurement of books. This will help in
minimising the complaints and to streamlining
the procedure.

3.2

Collection Development for
Leisure Reading in Campus
Libraries

Most of the university campuses are away
from cities. These may be situated in remote
villages where there i s no public library. Hence
there may be demand for books for general
reading. Whether campus libraries should
acquire books for leisure reading is a debatable
question. Most of the campus libraries do
acquire such materials. However, it is not very
much desirable. Proc~lringpopular fiction, etc.,
will bring forth many other problems such as
need for frequent rebinding, inviting non-serious
readers, difficulty to maintain standard, and
possibility of selecting cheap fiction, etc.

4.

DEVELOPMENT O F SPECIAL
COLLECTION

Usually when a new course is startctl or
research project on a new topic is started, there
will be somcb special grant from University
Grants Commission or the State or Central
Government for purchasing essential books
relating to the topic and to develop the basic
collection.
However, local environment may compel
collection development on special topics such
as area studies. In such cases initially the books
scattered in different places on shelves in the
library can be brought together and shelved as a
special collection. Further, it should be assured
that every year, some fund is set apart for the
development of this collection according to the
need. The Kerala studies collection has been
developed in Kerala University Library in this
way.

5.

EVALUATING THE
COLLECTION

The schools of library science can take up
user surveys for evaluating the library collection.
The library should try to implement the findings
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1997, 17 ( 2 )

of such surveys to the possible extent. Libraries
also should have some inbuilt mechanism for
assessing user requirements and evaluating the
collections. Cooperation of faculty members
and newly enrolled members should be sought
in this regard. Staff members providing readers
service, can note down their findings relating to
the lacuna in the collection and forward the
same to the acquisition section.

6.

CONCLUSION

Collection development in . a university
library is not an easy job. This should be done

DESIDOC BuLtin of Inf Technol, 1997,17(2)

carefully and should be based on policies and
programs chalked out with the help of a
committee or in a meeting consisting of
representatives of faculty members from various
faculties. The involvement of all staff members
of the library is also essential for developing a
balanced collection.

REFERENCES
1. Magrill and Gorbin. Acquisitions
management and collection development in
libraries. Ed. 2. ALA. 1989. p58.

13

