DESfDOC BuUetin of InformationTechnology, Vol. 17, No. 2, March 1997, pp. 23-26

0 1997, OESIDOC

New Vistas in Collection Development: The lnternet
Perspective
Devika V Aptagiri*
Abstract
The author discusses the constraints and criteria for collection development
in libraries and information centres, and examines the lnternet as a
world-wide source of information and as scope for electronic collection
development. The role of lnternet as more than just a channel for
communication is also discussed. The different roles the Net has to play in
the information scenario, specially in connection with collection
development, are given.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Collection development is one of the
primary functions of any library and information
centre. The collection of a library reflects the
efficiency and effectiveness of its services.
Often 'strength' of collection is used as
descriptor in describing a library. Dr SR
Ranganathan's five laws have profound
implications for policies regarding collection
development. The gist of the these fundamental
laws towards collection development is
reflected in the principle of the best for the
largest at the least cost.

2.

CONSTRAINTS AND
CRITERIA FOR COLLECTION
DEVELOPMENT

There are several
constraints in building a
huge collection, the most obvious being:
Documentation Research and Training Centre
Indian Sca tistical Institute
Bangafore - 560 059

DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/, 1997, l7(2)

cost of publications
Space limitations

CI Manpower limitations.
Criteria for collection development i s derived
keeping in mind, the demands and constraints.
Other factors that add to the constraints are:
Information explosion

D

I n t e r d i s c i p l i n a r y nature of studies and

demands for information
rate of o~so~esccnce

U

Multiple forms of data availability

D Lack of adequate ways of retrieval of nascent
information.

AII or most of the above factors are
interlinked. Research at advanced levels often

leadsinto interdirciplinanl areas. With the mset
of computer applications at most of the
research levels in virtually every field of study,
the available data for input or the intermediate
results of studies have a w r y short life as
nascent information. There is no storage value
for such data as the interactions regarding
23

problems are instantaneous and continuous.
Such a trend and culture may be attributed to
the world-wide network-the Internet.

3.

IMPACT OF INTERNET O N
INFORMATION

The lnternet can be defined as the global
community of information resources. Of course,
this is a take off from more common definitions
of the Net as the 'network of networks',
'world-wide computer network' and 'universal
communication channel'. The lnternet has made
distances insignificant for discussions or group
research work. More than one person can work
on the same project on a machine irrespective
of their locations. All this lays stress on the
importance of the lnternet as a communication
medium which has made the world a global
village. But what constitutes the lnternet is the
tremendous amount of information in
computers across the world. There is no end to
the number of subjects being discussed on the
Net. The Net has become the backbone of
most scientific communications. This being the
case, the Net definitely offers potential for
generating interesting information services in
information centres. The lnternet represents the
present trend in the information flow. The whole
process from generation of information,
dissemination, absorption, and feedback has
become instantaneous with the Internet.

sources exist on the Net. The nomenclature of
these electronic documents is comparable to
the that in any traditional collection, though
some documents may be new, incorporating
multimedia, hypertext and built-in processing
codes. But for the general purpose of
developing a collection, it suffices that the kinds
of documents available on the Net conform to
the kind of collection in libraries and
information centres like dailies, reference books,
reports, periodicals, textbooks, maps and the
like. The following section is an attempt to cover
the various kinds of documents that are
available on the Net and examples of some
titles for each and the addresses to access them.

4.1

Primary Sources

Primary documents may be monographs or
research reports that give the first published
data or information on a topic. Full text of
monographs and research reports are available
on the Net. For examples:
(a) Electronic Journalof Differential Equations

http://ejc.math.gatech.edu.8080/journal
(b) -PC Magazine
fcp: ftp.cco.ca/tech. edu
(c) Good Medicine Magazine

i?ttp.j$hone.cooIware. corn/hea/th/good-med
(d) US Government Publications
ftp: ftp. uu.nevdoc/jiterary/obi/usa

4.

INTERNET FOR COLLECTION
DEVELOPMENT

The concept of virtual libraries and digital
libraries has been discussed at length for its
practicality and feasibility. Has the Internet
taken the information professionals unawares?
The Net was not designed to the world-wide
entity it is today. It rather happened without
plan. maybe that is the reason information
professionals are yet to envisage lnternet as
library without walls that has been discussed
much earlier.
The Net has established itself as the store
house of all world's resources in the electronic
form ready for accessing. Various kinds of
24

4.2

Secondary Sources

Textbooks, reference books, guides to
primary documents, reviews and digests are also
available on the Internet. Though, organising
the mass of information that is available on the
Net is nearly impossible; there are some tools to
keep track of what i s available where. These are
referred to as servers which give information of
files and their location. Archie is an example of
such a tool and it helps the users locate the
information they are looking for, through simple
commands like 'what is' and 'where is'. Some of
the documents falling under this category
available are:
(a) Technical Report Index
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1997,17 ( 2 )

http.j/cs. indiana.edu /cstr/search

B

(b) The Whole lnternet Catdog

(c) Book Reviews

ftp: tzsn.org path:/pub/altbooks.rwiews

(d) The lnternet Resource Guide
ftp: una.hh.lib.urnich.edu pathdinetdirs

4.3

Tertiary Sources

Tertiary sources of information act as guides
to the primary and the secondary sources.
Tertiary sources like guides to indexes and
directories are also available on the Net. some
examples are as below:

4.5

ftp: gopher.cohrado.edu

Libraries Online

lnternet has made it possible to access
library catalogues of libraries world-wide. T h i s is
possible through the online public access
catalogs (OPACs). Example of catalogues online
are:
(a) Media net OPAC

(b) University of Maryland library
ino.umd.edu//ibrary
resources

- Directory of all directory

(a) Directory server
servers

Bubtin Board System on Environment
cue.bc. ca 1ogin:cosy
on lnternet
cybernetcse. fau.edu
login: bbs

and

information

(c) Library of Congress

(b) List of gopher sites
ftp: cwis.usc. edu

(d) Catalogue of catalogues-Guides to several
OPACs

(c) lnternet tools list

ftp: rpi.edu
internet.tools

(d) InterNIC-Directory of directories

4.4

ftp: funet.fi' path: /pub/doc/library

path:/pub/cornmunications/

Other Sources

Apart from the above mentioned kinds of
electronic documents other sources of
information, that are usually discussed as
nonconventional documents human and
institutional resources, discussions and debates
and corporate notes, are also part of the
information of the Net-such as newsgroups and
discussion forums on various topics. The
examples are:
Newsgroup on women in science and
technology
Bionetwomen-in-bioinfo.wise.net
Newsgroup on JFK case
grind.isca.uiowa.edu /info/jfk
Newsgroups on cataloguing
bit.listserv.autocat
DESJDOCBulletin of Inf Techml, 1997.17(2)

5.

CONCLUSION

The discussion focuses on the lnternet as.a
storehouse of documents. Each kind of
information sources used to generate services in
libraries is available on the Internet. The only
constraint here i s the availability of lnternet
access to libraries. But most technical libraries
and research laboratories already have access to
Internet. The world resources are made available
at finger tips. Only a knowledge of what is
available and how to access the documents is
required to make optimum use of the
opportunity the lnternet has given. There are
tools to locate information and to access and
obtain information sources. Most of the sources
are available an anonymous ftp sites.
Thus, lnternet has tremendous prospects for
collection development. Perhaps all that is
needed is orientation of thoughts, in terms of
what is possible using the Internet. If there ever
will be a 'library without walls' that would be
the lnternet within a library. In the scenario of
25

large amount of nascent information availability
and demand for it, Internet is the only solution
for
speedy, expedient and exhaustive
information services.

REFERENCES

2.

Rao, IK Ravichandra & Gopinath, M A (Eds).
In Collection development and document
circulation. DRTC Annual Seminar.
Bangalore. 1992.

3. Levine, john R & Baruodi, Carol. Internet for
dummies. Pustak Mahal, New Oelhi. 1994.

1 . Ed Krol. The whole internet: User's guide
and catalogue. O'Reilly Associates, Inc.,
California.

26

DESIDOC Bulktin d l n f Techno4 1997,17 ( 2 )

