DESIDOC Bulletin of lnformationTechnology, Vol. 17, No. 3, May 1997, pp. 3-7
63 1997, DESIDOC

Use of lnformation Technology in Library & lnformation
Science Education
SS Murthy*

Abstract
IT covers areas which can be grouped into the broad disciplines of
computers and communications covering the development and
management of information systems like libraries, databases and
networks-both online and off-line; and reprography and mass
communication covering the technologies used for presentation and
dissemination of information. This paper briefly discusses the impact and use
of all these technologies on library and information science (LIS) education.

1.

information systems like libraries, databases
and networks-both online and off-line, and

INTRODUCTION

lnformation Technology (IT) is usually
referred to with different connotations. Library
management specialists refer to IT as a
technology used in the operation and
management of activities of libraries and
information
centres.
Computer
and
communication specialists refer to it as their
discipline covering the activities of processing
and communication of data and information.
Those belonging to the field of reprographycovering the areas of photography, audio, video
and optical digital technologies and technical
writing refer to IT as the technology covering
their areas of activity. However, IT can be taken
to cover all these disciplines and areas which
can be grouped into the broad disciplines of

(ii) Reprography and mass communication
covering the technologies used for
presentation and dissemination of
information.
This paper briefly discusses the impact of all
these technologies on library and information
science (LIS) education.

2.

MODES OF LIS EDUCATION

As is the case with education in other
subject disciplines, LIS education is also
imparted mainly in two modes,
(a) the traditional classroom teaching and

(i) Computers and communications covering
the development and management of

(b) the distance education. There may be
variations of either of these modes of
instruction like personal tutions and
selfeducation.

Director,
Defence Scientific information and Documentation
Centre (DESIDOC)
Metcalfe House, Delhi-1 10054

However, after the advent of IT, educational
instruction has taken new modes like television
(TV), audio, video programs, etc. The use of IT

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno!, 16(3), 1997

3

made so far in LIS education can be broadly
cldssified into the modes of:
(a) Audio and
instruction,

video

taped

lectures

or

(b) Online access to course materials,
(c) Video-conference-based
teaching, and

instruction

or

(d) Hypertext and artificial intelligence (Al) based
teaching and instruction.
An offshoot of IT which has entered the LIS
education is that of virtual-reality (VR) which
would provide virtual classrooms, virtual libraries
and similar situations. A few
recent
developments in the use of IT in LIS education,
particularly distance education in the USA and
the UK are briefly discussed below. These
developments are going to have a strong
bearing in the LIS education in several
developing countries also.

3.

USE OF IT FOR LIS
EDUCATION

While computers were first used for
educational instruction in the USA in the 1960s,
telecom networks were started being used for
this purpose in the 1970s. The School of LIS,
University of Wisconsin. Madison has been a
pioneer in the use of audio teleconferencing. It
provides a wide range of continuing education
programs through this mode. Apart from this,
the Lowsiana State University, the University of
Wisconsin-Madison
and
Emporia
State
University use audiographics (a combination of
voice and data transmission using conventional
telephone lines) for both credit and continuing
education programs.
The first use of videoconferencing for
continuing education for LIS professionals was
the 'ALA Satellite Teleconference on Copyright'
which was aired on 7 February 1978. Notable
among the institutions presently developing
regularly iuch video-conferening series are
Nebraska
Library
Commission,
the
Pennsylvania
Commonwealth . Libraries,
Department of Education and the 'Down links
for Excellence' produced by School of LIS,
University of Missouri-Columbia.
4

~ u t t o n 'quotes three generations of distance
learning historically linked to the technologies
used. The first generation is traditional
correspondence teaching in which the sole form
of communication between the student and the
teacher was textual, and information flowed
from the instructor to the student without
discourse.
Student,
peer-topeer
communications were nonexistent in the first
generation. The second generation is of multiple
media. To the text of the first generation, the
second adds other media including video and
audio tapes, and with increasing frequency,
broadcast media ( b o t ~ radio and TV).
Interaction patterns in the secpnd generation
largely remain the same as in the first
generation. In sharp contrast, the third
generation education is social in nature and
emphasis communication among all members
of the academic community.
However,
software
development
for
computer and network-based teaching is a
tedious and costly
. .process. Some of the
American efforts which made a significant
progress in this direction are the Athena Project
at MIT~, the Andrew Project at Carnegie-Melon
University and the work at Stanford University.
They have developed models for such
instruction. The Michigan Community College
Telecommunication Network developed a
programme for training library technical
assistants through telecommunications, primarily
through interactive video. The project began in
1992 and it could provide a state-wide
coverage.
Actual use of TV in LIS education appears to
have begun at Indiana University School of LIS
in the early 1970s. The use of video-taped
courses in this discipline for distance learners
began at the University of Corolina in 1982.
New instructional TV (ITV) courses were
arranged in Corolina State University in Fall
1995. Classrooms were equipped with
oversized TV monitors allowing students at
different locations to see an3 hear each other
and to interact in real time at near broadcast
quality. Classrooms were completely controlled
by the faculty members with simple switching
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno!, 16(3), 1997

operations on computer,
and overhead camera.

3.1

gee, slide projector

E-mail and lnternet Use

In addition to distance learning through
communication networks, two recent and
closely related technologies being used for this
mode of education are e-mail and Internet. In
the e-mail use, in addition to communicating the
instruction texts, an e-mail reflector is also used
to automatically direct them to all the students.
In the use of Internet, a World Wide Web
(WWW) home page is used which gives details
of the course including its purpose,
methodology, grading standards, syllabus,
background materials, etc. Hypertext links to
other relevant web sites which provide access to
a wealth of material that students would not
normally get otherwise. A number of schools
currently use lnternet providing gopher, web
sites and e-mail and conferencing on the Net on
a regular basis.

3.2

America Online (AOL)

lnternet service offers noncredit courses to
about five million people. It expects to offer
credit courses soon in collaboration with
University of California Beryl Extension
Department. Instruction is provided as online
lectures in a virtual auditorium. The text is
actually keysdin on the screen by the lecturer.
Students keyin questions at prescribed timings
during the online session. Libraries of
supplementary course material are also
available. These can be downloaded. AOL users
also have access to WWW. In addition, distance
education web sites3 provide an werview of the
field of distance education. The New York
Virtual College is pioneering supply of
multimedia courseware directly to students'
homes.

3.3

Use of Artificial Intelligence (Al)

Intelligent tutoring systems using Al have
been found to be highly effective in increasing
student motivation and learning. However,
development of these systems is expensive.
Efforts are being made to reduce these costs by
developing authoring tools and creating
courseware in modular fashion. Achieving these
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 16(3), 1997

will be an excellent breakthrough to make ITbased educational systems highly effective.
The ALISE (Association of LIS Education)
'
a lot of
Library Statistical ~ e ~ o r tprovides
details on the use of technology for LIS
education. As per its 1966 report, 17
universities have used some form of
telecommunications
to
deliver
courses.
According to available information, South
Corolina LIS School is the only accredited
programme school which offers complete MLlS
degree
programme
primarily
by
telecommunications. Delivery of courseware is
primarily via live interactive satellite channel
supported by e-mail, electronic and audio
conferencing and gopher and web sites.
In the United Kingdom also there have been
several initiatives in using IT for LIS education. A
prominent such effort is the Computers in
Teachin Initiative (CTI) which was established
in 1985 to promote use of IT (what it calls the
learning technology) in education at various
levels. It also identifies 'courseware' and
'resourceware' for various courses covering
different disciplines.

%

4.

DRIVERS AND INHIBITORS

There are some advantages as 'well as
bottleness in the use of IT in edccation. ~ i x o n
calls them 'drivers' and 'inhibitors'. The drivers
include:
(a)

cono om^ in conducting the programs

(b) Enhancing public image of the universities
(c) Getting competitive advantage in attracting
best students, staff and resources.
The inhibitors include:
(i) Problems of credibility-whether
the
computer-aided learning (CAL) can live upto
its claims are to be satisfactorily answered
(ii) Lack of good quality software for
computer-assisted teaching-software for
computer-assisted learning is to be specially
written and this is a teadeous and costly
process
(iii) High
cost
preparation--course

of
courseware
material preparation

using multimedia with hypertext links for
controlled dissemination and preparation of
home page for web sites would be quite
expensive

'

(iv) Instruction is not individualised suiting the
learners capacity for assimilating the lessons
communicated
(v) Cultural change-the professional culture of
university teachers values a personalised
teaching style and shuns use of materials
prepared by external faculty or other
specialists.

acquiring computers with indigenous software
like
SANJAY and
LIBSYS
and
the
Unesco-promoted CDS/ISIS software and
CD-ROM databases for training their students.
The libraries in the universities are establishing
the e-mail facilities with the support of
INFLIBNET (the Information & Library Network
of UGC) which are generally available for the
LIS departments also. We can thus expect much
more use of IT in LIS education in the country in
the coming years and a similar scenario will be
emerging in many other developing countries
also.
1

While launching any IT-based teaching
programs, these factors must be considered to
avoid problems or failures in their operation of
the programs.

5.

U S E OF IT FOR LIS
EDUCATION IN INDIA

In lndia 69 universities conduct LIS programs
at BLlSc and MLlSc levels8. Out of these, 54
universities conduct MLlSc programs. In
addition,
lndian
National
Scientific
Documentation Centre (INSDOC), New Delhi
and Documentation Research & Training Centre
(DRTC), Bangalore coriduct a master's degree
course in information science. Almost all the
MLlSc courses in the universities have in their
syllabi computerisation of libraries and use of
audio, video and CD-ROMs and also library and
information networks. But many of them do not
have competent faculty to teach these topics.
INSDOC and DRTC are however better placed
in the use of IT in their courses. Their courses
provide substantial use of computers, CD-ROMs
and online networks including operation of
e-mail and lnternet services. Some of the LIS
departments in the universities get these topics
taught by the faculty from the computer science
departments or computer centres of the
universities. But these do not provide students
the right type of training as these computer
specialists do not usually have a detailed
knowledge of the procedures, work flow and of
the services provided in libraries. The situation is
gradually changing as more and more LIS
faculty are themselves undergoing training in
library automation, networking and use of
non-print media. Also, the LIS departments are

As regards use of IT for distance education,
the lndira Gandhi National Open University
(IGNOU) is in the forefront among the lndian
universities. It uses the main Doordarshan TV
channel for telecasting its lessons in various
disciplines. The telecasting of LIS topics is done
usually thrice a month. Time-table for TV lessons
is announced in the IGNOU Newsletter. In
addition, the University has established, in
collaboration with lndian Space Research
Organisation (ISRO), teleconferencing facilities
with its main production centre and earth
station at New Delhi and connecting it to its 17
Regional Centres located at various places in
the country. Teleconference topics and dates
are announced a month before to the
Coordinators at the Regional Centres for
informing the students. The distance learners
can interact with the faculty from the nearest
such teleconference node. The University has
also started during March 1997, telecasting
some of its programs/instruction on Asianet TV.
The University has also been producing audio
and video tapes of lessons and other
courseware and distributing to the learners.
Multimedia courseware is also expected to be
produced soon. Similar efforts are also being
made by other open universities and other
universities providing distance education, in the
country.
The trend in the use of IT in LIS education in
lndia appears to be that in the classroom or
oncampus instruction, use of computers,
CD-ROMs, e-mail and lnternet keeps increasing
progressively,
parallelly
followed
by
development of application software programs
for
library
automation
and
database
DESIDOC Bulletin of lnf Technol, 16(3), 1997

development and management. For distance
education, production and distribution of
courseware in the form of audio and videotapes
is progressively increasing which will soon be
by
multimedia
and
followed
teleconference-based courseware.

I thank my colleagues Sarvashri SC Saxena
and K Sathiyamoorthy for providing necessary
source material for this paper and Kum Vanita
Suri for the formatting and DTP support.

5.1

REFERENCES

Expected developments

The availability of public data networks like
I-Net in the country and the further
augmentation of the already functioning
networks like ERNET, NICNET, etc i s giving a
boost to the Indian libraries and LIS
departments in academic institutions, to use
these networks for information services as well
as education. This combined with the
availability of computers, CD-ROMs, and
multimedia and the related software at reduced
prices will enable LIS education and research to
be mostly IT-based in a few years. Most
academic
institutions
offering
distance
education programs are likely to use audio and
video teleconferencing, interactive teaching
both through satellite channels and also through
some cable TV networks. Parallelly, cable-TV
operators are also likely to make commercially
published multimedia courseware by the turn of
the century or a couple of years thereafter. Siti
Cable, a cableTV operator is already beaming
IGNOU video programs in the city of Kochi
(Kerala) during 0700 to 0730 hrs. Thus in India
in about five to six years we may see distance
education programs in LIS also becoming
available to homes through television channels
and cable TV networks. Teaching through these
channels may be supplemented by course
materials which may be supplied through data
networks in electronic formats or in hard copies.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 16(3),.I 997

5.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

Button, Stuart A. Planning for the twenty
first century. The California State University.
j Amer. Soc. Inf Sci.; 1996,47 (1 1 ), 821 -25.
Lewis, Bob. Computers in higher education
teaching and learning : Some aspects of
R&D. The CTISS File, March 1996,11, 3-7.
Donahue, Stancy. Programs and resource in
distance education. I.Amer Soc Inf. Sci.,
1996,47 (1 I),870-74.
Bech, Joseph et a/. Application of Al in
education. Cross Roads (ACM student
Magazine) Fall 1 996,3(1),1 1-1 5.
Barron, Dapiel D. Distance education in
North American library and information
science education: Applications of
technology and commitment. I.Amer. Soc.
Inf Sci. 1 996,47 (11 ), 805-10.
Darby, Jonathan. Executive review of the
computers in teaching initiative. The CTISS
File, October 1992,14, 52-53.
Dixon, Mary. The uptake of IT as a teaching
aid in higher education : A social
perspective. The CTISS File, October 1992,
14, 57-58.
Universities Handbook. (Ed. 26). Assoc.
lndian Univ, New Delhi, 1995, 1 1-45.

7

