2

r

SHORT COMMUNICATION

Changing Trends in LIS
SK Taneja*
IT, networking, and the expanding
information
market-place
represent
a
combination of factors affecting librarians and
opinion of administrative decision makers about
libraries. Technological advances affect the
fundamental library operations, and can possibly
even change the basic social role of libraries.

A revolution in IT, however, is generating a
convergence in interests and an environment for
interesting and necessary collaborations. A less
visible, but significant collaboration is the one
between librarians and engineers. Engineers and
librarians are two groups that generally are not
exwcted to have any collaborate interest.
Librarians have been quite secure in their own
world
of
collecting, cataloguing, and
disseminating information; whereas engineers
have likewise been contented in their domain.
The tremendous rate of new developments in
computing and telecommunication technology
has forced a transition to new modes of
operation for libraries. Increasingly, information
is being created and offered in a digital format
without ever migrating to paper format. This
change calls for expertise beyond the domain of
library science and involves collaboration and
interaction of librarians, computer scientists,
engineers, and others.
Lancaster predicted that we will soon be
entering the era of paper less society, an era in
which print on paper will be replaced by
electronics. Thus library will not contain any
printed material at all. It may become a room

'Scientist E
DESiDOC, Metcalfe House, Delhi-1 10054

DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 16(3), 1997

-

containing a computer terminal only. But this
prediction seems to have overlooked the fact
that libraries are repositories of the recorded
knowledge of many generations. A library
contains books, journals, newsletters, reports,
video tapes and magnetic tapes each created in
a different era. The future of libraries is a mosaic
that will make libraries more complex. In
addition to book stacks and reading tables,
there will be carrels and computer terminals.
Besides this, there may be remote computer
termipals with databases which have been
locally developed viz., online public access
catalogue (OPAC) of resources in the library.
The rate at which all of this will happen is
difficult to predict. The diffusion rate of new
technologies is slower due to many constraints
such as technical, economic, marketing, copy
right, government regulations, priorities, and
personal attitudes.
Once libraries and their users are
electronically linked through networking,
libraries may provide electronic reference
service. Librarians are aware that users cannot
acquire and maintain the skills necessary to
search the hundreds of available databases.
They have already started serving as searching
intermediaries in most of the libraries. In future,
the user and the librarian may search together
even though they might not be in the same
room. This can be possible through the
development of 'conference searchf-an
electronic linking of the two distant terminals
searching the same database. The librarian
providing the searching expertise and the user
providing the knowledge of the subject matter.
21

As full text databases with reference
information become more common, users find
that they are getting conflicting information
from different sources. The users are, therefore,
turning to the librarian to perform a new role
that of validation and evaluation.
We must understand that technologies come
and go, but the skills of librarianship would
survive. When we talk of the effect of IT on
libraries and librarians, the following questions
arise if we presume that IT may replace library
professionals:
(a) Who will assess the ensemble of material
that is available and determine whether it is
complete; if it is not, what is missing?
(b) Who will do the price verification of
material?
(c) How to find in advance whether or not
valuable information is available?
(d) How to use the expertise and skill of
information manager at conceptual phase in
compiling thesauri and setting up databases
that are useful to information seekers?
lnformation technologies and librarians both
define themselves as dealing in information. It is
commonly understood that advances in IT will
undermine librarianship through automation
and even elimination of libraries in the present
form. If this is the case then the librarians will
have to reorient themselves from the
management of physical information to digital
information media.
LIS professionals have the main challenge of
recognising and grasping new opportunities that
are already available for those who like to notice
the changing trends. While we cannot deny the
fact that the ground under our feet is changing,
the LIS professionals have a unique competitive
advantage over non specialists trying to enter
the new information world. Some wen proclaim
the wonderful new age of electronics librarians,
intelligent agents, and natural language
searching, in which machines will do all the
work, including abstracting.
In the changing environment, the risk to
information professionals may be self inflicted

d k to their failure to be entrepreneural and
seize opportunities. Information professionals
are uniquely qualified amongst all the
professional classes to adopt to changing times
and survive. Many libraries are already in the
automation race and a lot of interesting work is
emerging. Many librarians have seized the
opportunities offered by IT enthusiastically and
are using it to offer new and improved services
to users and raising their profile. In the long
term, the challenge may be to move from
information system supporting primarily retrieval
of bibliographic references to information
systems suppdrting information use.
With the libraries on the super highway, a
question arises whether librarians will be
needed any longer? History is full of
documentation about various classes of
information elites, who were wiped out on the
arrival of new technology. What technology can
give, technology can also take away.
Many of us are aware that utilising
technological innovations such as Mosaic and
Netscape to cruise the Web changes the way
we experience knowledge. It permits
participation with others in adding incremental
to what is known. Many documents are now
more of a collection of perspectives rather than
something that are patentable to one individual.
Browsing on the Web constantly brings one in
contact with information that one never knew
he wanted. We may conclude that librarians
should abandon the ideology of information in
favour of networking.
The emerging communications technologies,
especially the interactive digital devices will
drive the information future. The technology can
handle the data overload but a human being
cannot. It is the use of IT that will give librarians
an audience, an attitude, an amplification of self
that will raise their status in life.

IT is a strong force, but it is not an
independent agent. IT provides librarians with a
range of tools to help in providing efficient and
effective services to library users. In future, use
of such libraries may go up, but the number of
users visiting the library buildings may go down.

01ESIDOC Bulkin d l n f Techno/, 16(3), 1997

