OESIDOC Bulletin of lnformation Technology, Vol. 18, No. 1, January 1998, pp. 11-17

0 1998, DESIDOC

Research in Library and lnformation Science
Late A Tejomurthy
adapted by
PSG Kumar*

Abstract
Research in Library and lnformation Science (115) briefly means the collectisn
and analysis of original data on a problem of librarianship done within the
library schools according to scientific and scholarty standards. This article
briefly describes the research, its need and history, etc in LIS and presents the
pattern and state-of-the-art of research in LIS in lndia. The reasons for slow
growth in research in LIS in lndia and scanty financial support to it have been
explored. Several suggestions to catalyse the research activities in LIS in lndia
have been given. It concludes that there are research opportunities and
research atmosphere in lndia and the library professionals and LIS faculty
should be involved in research to improve information sources and senrices.

1.

WHAT IS RESEARCH

Research is a scientific undertaking which by
means of logical and systematised methods, aims
to discover new facts, or verify old facts and to
analyse their sequences, interrelationships,
casual explanations and the natural laws which
govern them. Research is a careful, critical study
or examination in seeking facts or prinaples;
intelligent and diligent investigation in order to
ascertain some thing. It answers questions by the
accumulation and assimilation of facts which
lead to the formulation of generalisations,
correct or verify knowledge.
Research is an intellectual act that starts with
the a*ing of a question and Progr-S through
the critical and analytical study of evidence and
arrives at new conclusions or new knowledge.

Webstet's New htemational Diaionary defines
research as 'studious enquiry or examination;
*Uniwrsih, Librarian and Head of Demment
~a~&r-UhiversityLibrary
Naepur 440 010

-

specifically and usually, critical and exhaustive
investigation of expimentation having for its aim
the d i h of~ new facts and their correct
interpretation,' tbe revision of accepted
condusions, heodes or laws, in the light of newty
discovered facts or the practical appkcations of
such new or revised condusions, etc'.

Research is governed by the rule of
objectivity and not of subjectivity. A research
may aim at the following objectivities:
(a) to find new generalisationwith old data;
(b) to know old conclusions with new data;
(c) to attempt to
the same set of data;

condu~iomfrom

(d) to put forward an entirely original idea or
theory or to discover an unexplored horizon
of knowledge;
(e) to find or to resolve contradictions existing in
the area of study; and

(9

to continuously develop a discipline or field
of study with the use of scientific and rational
methods.

Research thus helps in examining the validity
of old conclusions or to findout new facts or
generalisations and purport to give a new
insight into the existing problems. Research
means advancement of science and knowledge.
However, it must be kept in mind that a
research may not lead to an ideal solution to a
problem. In fact, a good piece of research must
give rise to some probtems requiring further
research.

2.

RESEARCH IN LIBRARY A N D
INFORMATION SCIENCE (US)

Research in librarianship briefly means the
collection and analysis of original data on a
problem of librarianship done within the library
schools according to scientific and schdarly
standards. Research in this connection broadly
includes investigations,
studies,
surveys,
academic work at the doctoral, postdoctoral
level and research by practicing librarians,
information personnel and documentalists.

2.1

Need for Research

The need for research in librarianship stems
mainly from three reasons:
(a) Educational function-advanced studies in
Librarianship.
(b) Critical function-critical
librarianships.

approach

to

(c) Symbolic function-result
of growing
professionalism in library profession.
Library and information science is actually an
interdisciplinary field. It embraces a variety of
problems, professionals, organisations and
intellectual commitments. The continuity
between an order base of knowledge and
practice
and
newer
concepts
and
methodologies. It implies a balance between
theoretical explorations of information and of
applications to the improvement of information
service, even if in practice, the balance is often
uncertain.
12

Library and information science research
activitiy maintains its historic focus on research
that improves information services. At the same
time it draws techniques from many disciplines
in clarifying its concepts and attacking its
problems.

2.2

History of Research in LIS

Research in librarianship does not have a
long history. When the degree of Doctor of
Library Saence was first established by Melvil
Dewey, the then Director of the New York
State Library School at Albany in 1891, the idea
was that the degree should be awarded Honoris
Causa
for
conspicu~us professional
achievement rather than for research. There is
no record that the degree was ever granted.
The establishment of the Grauate Library School
at the University of Chicago in 1926 included
immediate, provision for awarding the earned
degree of Doctor of Philosophy.
The first doctorate in library science was Mr
Eleanor S Upton for his thesis, A guide to source
of seventeenth centuary English history in
sdected r e m of the Royal Commission on
Historical Manuscripts (Chicago, 1930). The first
school of librarianship of the United Kingdom
was established in 1919 at the University
College, London. Strangely enough provision of
PhD facilities had to wait till 1960s. The
Postgraduate School of tibrarianship and
Information Science
at the University of
Sheffield in 1963 can be considered as the first
milestone in formal doctoral research activity in
United Kingdom.

2.3

Applied Research

Because of the heavy reliance of library
research on the techniques of social science
research, especially statistics, the initial research
in librarianship, no wonder, was considered as
statistical investigation. Because, the methods
and techniques of librarianship itself had been
empirically derived, it is not surprising that
research in librarianship was also emperical in
the beginning Later library research gradually
started plunginginto other types and areas.
Library research and enquiries took not only

the shape of purely historical or descriptive
studies,

but

also

survey

research

and

DEWDOC&rlktin ofInfTechd, 1998,lql)

experimental research. Of late, operations
research techniques have been adapted to
quantitatively analyse library problems and as a
basis for decision making. All these research
efforts which aim at solving the immediate
problems could be termed as applied research.
Applied research is empericai and practical. It
can be helpful for improving took and
techniques.

2.4

Pure or Basic Research

Pure or basic research aims at primarily
obtaining theoretical knowledge and the logical
process involved in the phenomena. It pursues
knowledge for the sake of knowledge itself. It i s
more often than not, an intelkctual exercise
aimed at finding some theoretical conclusions.
A few studies in our subject areas have been
identified as basic research, because they were
directed toward h e fuller understanding of the
subject.

2.5

Bibliographical Research

This is closely related to libraries. This
type of research is concerned with first
idemifyin.g previous work related to the
problem at hand and then submitting it to
some form of analysis in order to arrive at a
clear understanding. Work done by earlier
and more advanced researchers i s also
included in this type of investigation, the
main aim being, to find out what is already
known about the topic-often in order to
establish a base upon which to build a study
which investigates the unknown.
This type of work is usually called as 'library
research'. One should be careful, npt to confuse
between
research
done
in
libraries
(bibliographieal) and research about libraries
(scientific research).

2.6

Team Research

The
complexity,
diversity
and
inter-disciplinary nature of present day
knowledge
demands
cooperative
research by scholars and scientists from
various
disciplines. Such a team
approach only can solve multiple
problems. Team research represents
organisation for the purpose of reducing
DEStDQC B d d n did Twhnd, 1998,18(1}

the

uncertainity o f outcome and
minmising the possibility of failture. Since
all human knowledge constitutes broad
canvas of librarianship, and information
science is a discipline that i s emerging from
cross fertilisation of ideas involving the
ancient art of librarianship, new art of
computing and the art of new media af
communication interdisciplinary and team
research are gaining importance.

2.7

Research in Librarianship in lndia

Thaugh library training classes were started
in Baroda in 1911 and at Panjab University
1915,
systematic training
(Lahore) in
programme to be started In lndia was at Madras
University in 1931 under the leadership of
Dr SR Ranganathan. This course was upgraded
as a full one year postgraduate dipbma course
in 1937. The first Masters programme in library
science was started by the University of Delhi in
1948. University of Delhi has also the distinction
of starting doctoral studies in library science in
India.

2.8

Solo Research by Ranganathan

Ranganathan as a single scholar made
multi-dimentional contribution to various facets
of the discipline. His contributionswere seminal
and had permanent impact on library science.
He wrote more than 60 books and roughly
1500 technical papers. Since the inception of
DRTC, the solo research turned into team
research.

2.9

Research Output in Indian
Universities

There are about 80 library schools in lndia
offering BLlSc programme and over 48
universities offering MLtSc programme. At one
time, there were about 8 universities offering
MPtril programme. Presently about 4
universities are offering M Phil which mainly
serves as a preliminary course to doctoral
studies.
As part fulfilment of these programmes,
students have to submit dissertations. Though
the projects at BLlSc cannot be counted as
research works, those works produced at

MLISc, M Phil and Ph D programmes can be
counted as products of research.
S.No.
1.

Course
BLlSc

2.
3.
4.

MLlSc
M Phil
Ph D

3.

Nature of Work
Assignments, bibliographical
essays, bibliographics, short
essays
Project work/dissertation
Dissertation
Thesis

BlBLlOGRAPHlCALCONTROL OF
RESEARCH ACTIVITIES IN lNDlA

Research moves through stages from the
preliminary exploration of a problem to the
evaluation of published results. At almost every
stage of a research project there are settings for
dissemination activity such as meetings and
conferences and there are sources such as
publications and information services that report
research activity. Researchers as producers and
consumers of information have needs that range
from specific knowledge of techniques to
awareness of research in related activities in India
can be discussed under the following categories.

3.1

Completed Doctoral Research

A bibliography of doctoral dissertations
accepted by lndian universities 1857-1970:
Social Science (Inter University Board of India,
(now renamed as Association of lndian
Universities), New Delhi, 1974) is the only
source for completed doctoral theses in library
and information science. The Univenity News of
the AIU keeps updating the information. IATLIS
Communication, and Herald of Library Science
also provide such information from time to time.

Announcements of ongoing research
activities are reparted in some journals. This is
an occasional feature of IASLIC Newsletter,
ILA Newsletter, and IATLlS Communication.
However, they do not contain any information
on methodology and/or scope of research.

3.3

MLlSc Dissertations

One good source for MLlSc dissertations is
Librarian's Diary (Vijaya Enterprises, Hyderabad,
14

1983). The year-wise listing of MLlSc
dissertations of Bangalore, Bombay, Burdwan,
Madurai-Kamaraj, Osmania, Poona, Rajasthan,
and SNDT universities is available in this
publication. lnformation about Delhi and Punjab
Universities is not available. The unpublished
MLlSc dissertation entitled Annotated and
Classified Bibliography of Project Reports
submitted to the Department of Library Science,
University of Delhi, since 1968 by Syed Reyaz
Ahmed (1979) covers dissertations submitted to
the University of Delhi. Recently Research in
Library and lnformation Science in India. A
Bibliography has been published by PSG Kumar,
A Tejomurthy and H R Chopra. It covers MUSc
dissertations upto 1984 and PhD theses.

3.4

Professional Organisations

We do not have any professional
organisation in India which disseminates the
results of research. It is time we have an
Association of lndian Library Science Schools
with a Research Interest Circle attached to it.

3.5

Research lournals

Besides MLlS dissertations, PhD theses, and
monographs, research work is regularly
published in various lndian periodicals. Some
important journals containing articles of
research standard are:
1. DRTCSeminar. Bangalore. 1962-. Halfyea*.
2.

Herald of Library Science. Lucknow. 1962-.
Quarterly.

3.

Library Science with Slant to Documentation.
Bangalore. 1964-. Quarterly.

4. journal of Libraty and lnformation Science.
Delhi. 1967-. Half-yearly.

5. International Information, Communication,
and Education. Lucknow. 1962-.
6. Annals of LibraryScience and Documentation.
1954-.

Bibliographic control and dissemination of
research knowledge helps researchers in many
ways. we require studies of the type, quantity
and quality of the research, on the number,
characteristics, and most important research
findings. Such studies might contribute to an
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf T e c h d , 1998,18(1)

understanding of the research process and
activity in library and information science, and
improve it in some measure.

4.

INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION
SYSTEM ON RESEARCH IN
DOCUMENTATION (ISORID)

In 1972, the Unesco started, in
cooperation with the FID, the ISORID project
with a view to lesson the time lag in notifying
information and to ensure international
coverage. The major objective of ISORID is to
collect, organise, analyse, and disseminate
information on research activities in
documentation, libraries, and archives. The
ISORID is to include
(a) Research in the field of documentation
including doctoral dissertations and research
in closely related fields applied to
documentations and

5.

TRANSFER CENTRE, INDIA
Under the ISORID programme, DRTC,
Bannalore, has been designated as the National
tnfoimatidn Transfer ~en'lre(NITC) for lndia. lt
has the following responsibilities:
(a) To collect information on research projects
undertaken and research report/publications
published, within the country and make
available to the UNESCO Secretariat;

(b) To provide, on request, similar services to
other interested UNESCO member states,
organisations and specialists; and
(c) To encourage the utitisation within the
country, of the services to be providedby the
Secretariat of UNESCO through ISORID.

6.

(b) Other selected activities of interest to
research and development (not generally
covered by the indexing and abstracting
services). Besides covering r'esearch projects
and research reports, ISORID also covers in
progress research, research methods,
research findings, funds used, etc.

NATIONAL INFORMATION

INFORMATION ON INDIAN
PROJECTS

Seetharama reported 115 research projects
on the basis of India's input to ISORID. The
eight types of categories of research projects
based on the list of subject descriptors used in
ISORID to coordinate indexing and retrieval of
research projects are given in table 1.

Table 1: Research projects based on the list of subject descriptors used in ISORID
No. Subject

No. of Projects

1.

Information Science

2.

Documents
Primary (4); Secondary (11); Elements of documents
. . (1 )

3.

Organisations of information
Systems and networks (2); Organisations (24)

4.

Information work
Processing: Analysis (1); Cataloguing (3); Classification (42);
Indexing and Indexing Languages (13); Supporting media (Computer
programmes, programming) (1)

5.

Document reproduction and reprography

1

6.

Services and information transfer

3

7.

User studies and users

6

8.

Personnel and training

2

Total

1

60

115

Seetharama also categorises library and
information science research in India as under
(Table 2):

Though major research funding makes it
possible to complete projects in comparatively
short time intervals, it is to be remembered that

TaMe2: Research projects on the bash of type of research
Research
Fundamental

Descriptive Exploratory

Total

7.

8

-

100

4

FINANCIAL SUPPORT FOR
RESEARCH

In India, research is conducted by individuals
such as faculty and research scholars using their
own or limited institutional resources. Most of
the research in library and information science
in lndia is personal and is affected to some
extent due to financial constraints. we do not
have a separate national agency for funding
research in our subject.
The UGC caters to library and information
science research as a part of its general
programme. Raja Ram Mohan Roy Foundation
limits its grants mostly to public library studies.
R&D sections of leading industries do finance
some research projects, but generally they are
tuned to the interest and services of that
particular institution. The proposed CLISR
(Council of Library and Information Science
Research) should look to the financing aspects.
Research takes people, brains, energy, time,
money-and it takes a lot of ,them. Not much,
relatively speaking, is being spent on this
activity. Large chunks of money are essential for
library and information science to establish the
kind of research environment that exists in
some other disciplines and then to test the
relationship of that environment to the quality
of education provided within it.
The need for institutional financial support
for research is being increasingly realised in
India. With the infrastructure in library and
information science education we have
developed wer the previous twenty years, and
given the financial support by bodies like the
UGC, ICSSR, Raja Ram Mohan Roy Foundation,
research in library and information science will
most certainly increase in the years to come.

Evaluative

-

Total No. of Projects
8

2

115

good quality research can be done without
major funding.

8.

REASONS FOR SLOW C R O W H
IN RESEARCH

Though lndia has contributed a lot to library
science. We are still lagging behind as far as
is
library and information science
concerned. The reasons for this are not too far
to be identified, the main being:
(a) Traditional methods of teaching, and lack of
research orientation;
(b) Lack of research experience by the faculty
and librarians;
(c) Absence of knowledge about research
methodology;
(d) lnadequate strength of the faculty, which is
overburdened with doing classroom
teaching;
(e) Nonavailability of many qualified research
supervisors;

(f) Earlier intake of inefficient, indifferent, and
disinterested
profession;

persons

by

the

library

(g) lnadequate financial support;
(h) Lack of good library facilities and services;
(i) Absence of essential data;

(i) Entry of majority students to research in
library and information science from an
academic background which does not
prepare them for this specialised activity;
(k) Lack of incentives for doctorates; and
(I) Absence of identification of research areas.
DESIDOC 6uIktin ollnf Technd, 1998,18(1)

The problems can be overcome by
encouraging faculty research. Incentives and
facilities must be provided to the faculty, not
only to do research by themselves, but also to
encourage and guide those who have interest,
motivation, and aptitude for research. The
actual involvement of teachers and students in
research work is necessary, and proper
environment conducive for research should be
created in all library schools, especially those
catering to master's course. One cannot agree
more with Shera, when he writes, a profession,
that would know itself must support and engage
in productive research. But research, important
as it is, is not the b d l and end-all of human life,
or even of human professional life; and wery
librarian does not have to be researcher in order
to prove the hairychested masculinity of the
profession. Research is too important to be left
to dilettani and amateurs, and its pursuit should
be reserved for those who are qualified for it by
aptitude, education and motivation". How
wonderfully true this statement is, even today,
after twentyone years.

9.

SUGGESTIONS

When all is said and done, the research
activity in library and information science in
lndia is not at a very high ebb. It is slowly, but
steadily, pi&ing up the threads, and gaining in
strength from point to point. The increasing
interest and aptitude for research deserve
encouragement, direction,. financial assistance,
and coordination. It requires a concentrated
endeavour on the part of the faculty, working
librarians, and library schools. A few suggestions
are given below to accelerate the speed of
research in library and information science in
our country.
1. On the patterns of the CSIR, ICAR, ICMR,
ICSSR and NCERT, a national body CLlSR
(Council of Library and Information Science
Research) should be set up. This can identify
research areas; formulate national research
policies, design and coordinate research
activities; and work as a dearing house.

2. Library and lnformation Science Clearinng
House need to be established in India, with
responsibilities for monitoring, indexing and
abstracting research reports, conference
DESlDoC BuWn d lnf Tchnd, 1998,18(1)

proceedings and other publications in the
field.
3.

Library and lnformation Research Round
Table (LIRRT) should be established in India.
Its main objectives could be:

(a) To contribute toward the extension and
improvement of library research;
(b) To provide opportunities for discussing,
disseminatingand evaluating library research
projects; and
(c) To orient and educate the members of the
ILA, IATLIC, IASLIC and other professional
bodies, concerning research methods and
their usefulness.
The LIRRT could have an lnformation
Exchange Cell which can provide a platform for
presenting and discussing the completed,
inprogress, and proposed research. Any
individual, library, documentation centre, or
organisation interested in research could
become a member of the LIRRT.
4.

There must be provision for 'Information
packages' (standard searches) on topics of
current interest relating to the library and
library services, with detailed research project
descriptions.

5. An annual list of completed research at the
Ph 0, M Phil, and MLlSc levels should be
issued. Simihdy, a register of current research
in library and information science in lndia
should also be established. This work may be
allotted to one or two library and information
science teaching departments.
6. Research in library and informationscience in
lndia should be made the theme of an All
lndia seminar. In this, bibliographical
organisation of research, dissemination of
research, national research policy, funding of
research, publication of research reports, etc
could be discussed thoroughly and a
consensus arrived at. All efforts and
persuasions must be made to see that the
recommendations of such a national seminar
are implemented, in the real sense of the
term.

10. CONCLUSION
Every profession needs men and women
having imagination, and who can see beyond
the details of their routine jobs. Library
profession is no exception to this and needs
such people. It is this need which advanced
study and research in library and information
science is meant to fill. On the whole, there is
evidence that research in library and
information science in India is alive-although

certainby not without problems. There are
research opportunities and
research
atmosphere in our country. The library
professionals and the library and ihformatbn
science faculty are neither so perfect nor so
dead that nothing is left to be done. It is my
sincere hope that this paper puts its humble,
but firm step in the right direction, and the
proceedings of this national seminar would
bear fruit and deliver the goods.

