DESJDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Ud. 18, No. 1, January1998, pp, 19-24
&, 1998. OESIOOC

Whom Do We Serve3 :Doctoral Research in Library and
Information Science in India
MP Satija*
Abstract
Discovery and dissemination of new knowledge has always been a source of
excitement and incalculable social benefit to the society. Tremendws progress
made by the mankind in the 20th century is only due to research and new
information. Information society subsists on information which is only
generated by research. This article briefly describes the beginning, growth of
doctoral research and proliferation of education in Library and information
Science {LIS) in India. Author's views on the status and quality of research in
LIS in lndia have also been given.

1.

RESEARCH AND SOCIETY

Research is a systematic inquiry to discover
new facts/data or relations between them by
objective methods. !t i s a problem solving
approach. It is always undertaken to answer a
question. Novelty is at the heart of this science;
objectivity is the rule of this art. A scientific
investigation can be repeated with same results
under same conditions. It is a tool and a process
available to everyone. it is universal and
democratic. There is nothing individual,
subjective, mystifying or recondite about it;
rcsearch methodology can be learnt.
The aim i s to solve some immediate practical
problem ar to unravel the mysteries of nature;
or to learn the behaviour or properties of living
or non-living entities in this universe. There may
or may not be immediate practical purpose in
mind. In other words, the research may be basic
or applied though the demarcation between the
two is not as easy; basic research ultimately
proves to be most useful and practical.

DESIMX: Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1998,18(1)

It is the only sure way to constantly add to
the fund of reliable knowledge-knowledge
which is power. Man is an inborn curious being
and a power-seeker. Thus research has ahvays
been going on in every kind of human
society-even in primitive society. Innate
curiosity to know the unknown; or necessity to
seek solutions to some problems endangering
his survival, or the desire to make life little less
difficult has led mankind to probe and
experiment constantly. Man's evolution is simply
not a biological process. It is also due to his urge
and efforts to do research to know the unknown.

Discovery and dissemination of new
knowledge has always been a source of
excitement and incalcubble social benefit to the
society. Advances is knowledge are invariably
accompanied by social change and progress. In
the pre-industrial society research was mostly a
private affair. But the researchers and scholars
were patronised by the kings and elite. After the
industrial revolution the pace of research had to
be quickened to meet the growing demands of
the society. Mounting population pressure,
growing consumerism, Fast depletion of limited
natural resources; perceived need to have
19

political or military edge by one nation over the
others, urge to save time and space, need to find
cures for diseases to prolong health and longevity
have given rise to planned, organised and
coordinated research at national and international
levels. Our security, health, education and
economy depend mostly on scientific research.
Today, research is mostly corporate, team work,
and fully supported by organisations. The result is
economic prosperity. It is too obvious to say that
economic prosperity and military powers of big
nations is only due to research'.
Tremendous progress made by the mankind
in the 20th century is only due to research and
new information.' SR Ranganathan firmly
believed that research is necessary for well-being
of humanity and peaceful coextensive of
nations2. Investment in research yields rich
dividends. Planned and highly organised
research has become the order of the day. Every
government dedicated to democracy and social
welfare not only encourages free research but
also funds it adequately without any undue
interference regarding the results. Government is
the biggest financier for research. In the
information society, the research of perforce, has
acquired new pace and dimension. Information
society subsists on information which is only
generated by research. Researchers are the gods
and information professionals the priests of an
information society.

2.

RESEARCH AND A PqOFESSlON

There is always a prestige in research. Every
profession puts its best brains to do research.
Researchers are always on the forefront of a
profession and impart it new directions and
dimensions3. By definition, a profession is based
on knowledge and research to constantly renew
its knowledge base. A profession cannot survive
without constant and organised research.
Eminent phiiosopher of library science Jesse H
Shera (1903-1982) said that 'research is the
key to the future of the profession and is an
important means by which institutional
programme is enrichedA. To an individual
professional research helps in many ways: It
keeps the intellect burnished and growing,
professional problems are shared with other
colleagues and commonly applicable solutions

are found, professional services are improved
and multiplied5. The accrediting body of the
American Library Association recognising the
importance of research believes that "Research
and publications enrich teaching and learning
while contributing to the body of scholarship
and professional knowledgen6.

3.

DOCTORAL RESEARCH

Once upon a time the title 'Doctor' was
bestowed on a person for life time learning and
scholarship in ~uro~e'.
To promote research
and train manpower, the research had to be
formalised and institutionalised. Programmes for
earning PhD were designed though the
standards remained rigorous. Till recently
European, especially British Universities had
been quite niggardly in awarding PhD degrees;
and PhD has been a rara avis in Britain.
American Universities had been bit generous in
this arena. Standards got relaxed with
proliferation and democratisation of education.
Now a PhD degree at best signifies training in
acquiring attitude for and learning the tools of
research. Strictly speaking, the central
stipulation of contributions to knowledge has
been taken a back seat. A PhD degree hoMer is
no more necessarily a scholar. Vulgarisation has
immensely deteriorated the standards both in
terms of contents and methods.

4.

BEGINNING OF RESEARCH IN
LIBRARY & INFORMATION
SCIENCE

Research in library science is a 20th century
awakening ushered in by the library schools of
the University of Chicago in mid 1920's.
Visionary efforts of the Chicago school bore
abundant fruit and gave a leadership to the
work! in library science research8. Roots of
research in our profession are not deep. Pace of
library research is picking up everywhere.
Thanks to social pressure and induced
inspiration. justifying the PhD programme in our
profession JohnWilkinson recently urged that 'If
librarianship aspires to become a profession, it
should depend upon research to develop its
knowledge
base
and
its
theoretical
frame~ork'~.
DESIDOC Bulletin d l n i Techno/,1998,18(1)

5.

I N D I A N CONTEXT

In India, following the British tradition and
the American precedent set up by Asa Don
Dickinson (1876-1960), Librarian, Punjab
University, Lahore, 1915-1916, the library
schools for professional education have
remained attached to the universities. Gltaw$r
of universities in independent lndia ensured
their constant growth. In a University, apart
from teaching, a teacher is expected to do and
guide research. The third function of a
university, namely service and consultancy has
always remained weak in lndia despite many
university-industry linkage programmes'0.

6.

RANGANATHAN'S WORK

The credit for formal institution of PhD in
library science in lndia goes undeniably to
Or SR Ranganathan (1892-1972). In 1951, he
got it instituted in the University of Delhi
surmounting many difficulties and facing
personal ridicules. The first de jure degree in
library science was awarded to DB Krishna Rao
(d 1985) by the University of Delhi in 1957.
Doctoral research remained in wilderness when
Ranganathan shook the Delhi soil off his feet in
1955. The Documentation Research and
Training Centre (DRTC) which Ranganathan
founded in 1962 i s technically not empowered
to award PhD degrees. Therefore for rest of his
life from 1962 to 1972 Ranganathan onh/
advocated individual and team research with
stress on quality, relevance and basics. No big
research projects were taken up at DRTC
though individual teaders and students
maintained quality and tempo of research. After
the death of Ranganathan almost the entire
DRTC faculty has earned PhDs from other
Indian Universities on topics of research going
on in DRTC. Now the DRTC teachers are
approved PhD guides in many Indian
Universities; and they have already produced
many PhDs.

7.

GROWTH OF DOCTORAL
RESEARCH IN INDIA

Elsewhere in lndia other individual librarians
and library saence teachers eager to earn
doctorates were hampered by the non-existence

of such facilities. In earlier years of 1960's and
1970's some doctorates on library topics by
library professionals were earned from some
other faculties such as sociology, history, hw,
economics, management and the like. The
mantle of reviving and further doctoral research
facilities fell on JS S h a m (192493), then the
U n - W t y Librarian and Head of the
Department of Library Science of the Punjab
University, Chandigarh. Under his guidance the
second de jure PhD in library was awarded in
1977-after a gap of full two decades. Thereafter
there was no looking back. Many universities
folowed suit with mostly the individual efforts
and enthusiasm. Doctoral research got a fillip in
1980's. lndia maintained its Third World
leadership in library research as in library
education and literature. PhD facilities have
rather mushroomed.

8.

PROLIFERATION OF LIBRARY
EDUCATION

At present about 107 institutions mostly
university and colleges have library science
education course; of these MClSc cwse is
being offered by 67 Universities; 11 Universities
offer MPhil, though this degree has no value in
the job market. Today 32 Universities have PhO
research facilities12. One university recently
awarded an DLitt, claimed to be the first such
degree in library science all over the wadd. It
may not be an odious comparison that up to
1986 only 38 universities had master
programmes, and 18 universities provided
doctoral research facilities, though not a l these
18 universities had master programmes then 13.

9.

FACILITIES FOR RESEARCH

A conscientious university teacher is always
in a dilemma over the time to be divided
between teaching and research. Teaching is a
compulsive and urgent duty to be performed.
Students expect their teachers to give them time.
There may be appreciation in good teaching but
the rewards lie in research. University expects its
teachers to do research-its prestige and fame lie
therein. But when it comes to support of
research many universities are neither generous
nor unambialent. Ordinarily piecemea\research
espeaally for research trickles through tedious

and off-puffing bureaucracy. Colleagues are
no~upportive and unappreciative. Library
facilities are poor. Thus most of the teachers are
driven to the passivity of guiding doctoral
research.

10. DETERIORATION O F
STANDARDS
UGC conditions for faculty employment and
promotions have prompted many library
professionals to acquire PhD degrees, though
many may not have the aptitude and the intrinsic
merit for research. Standards have not been
diluted but the intrinsic merit for research.
Supervisors and the examiners have become
obligingly compromising. The cut off date of
December 1992 (then advanced to December
1993) for obtaining PhD degree for getting
exemption from the national level test for
teaching jobs in universities/colleges has done
incalculable damage to research standards.
Facilities for PhD research have been introduced
and expanded mindlessly. As a result, there has
been a bit of doctoral boom; spectacular rise in
PhD awarding universities and awardees, though
many institutions seriously lack resources of
men or material or both. PSC Kumar's
biblio raphy listed 41 PhD theses from 1957 to
1985'.
In a recently published bibliography of
doctoral dissertations in India from 1950 to
March 1997 about 340 titles have been listed''.
This record of 340 dissertations though not
wholly authentic is reliable by and large. Its
demographic study unveils interesting picture
(Table 1):

Table 1. Number of Library Science
doctoral dissertations in India.
Period

No. of PhD Thesis

1997 (upto March)

06

In productivity, the Punjab University,
Chandigarh played the lead upto mid-1980's.
Thereafter it was left behind by the universities
of South in the number game. The universities
which have so far awarded upto nine degrees
are ranked in Table 2.

Table 2. Ranking of Indian Universities
awarding upto nine PhD degrees.
University

Degrees

Karnataka University, Dhatwad

42

Jiwajiuniversity, Gwalior

25

University of Rajasthan, Jaipur

25

Andhra University,
Vishakapatnam

23

University of Delhi

16

University of Pune

16

Gulbarga University

15

University of Burdwan

1.0

Utkal University, Bhubaneswar

10

Banaras Hindu University

9

11. RELEVANCE O F RESEARCH
In a developing country like India, there
could not be a dearth of research problems to
be investigated. But there seems a fa& of
perception to visualise and identify valid
problems for research. A cursory glance on the
topics worked on will at once reveal that topics
chosen do not pose for a problem, but merely
survey the state-of-the-art. The popular areas for
research in order have been : university
libraries, bibliometrics, library use and user
studies, information systems, classification and
indexing, special libraries, library history,
reference service and sources and library
science education. Document selection and
procurement, cataloguing, experimental designs
in library management are the least popular
topics though these seem practical and relevant
to the present needs. That basic research is the

most neglected area is endorsed b another
such SUIWY of doctoral research1! Library
automation, networking and information
technology are just picking up.

The Curriculum Development Committee
(CDC) on Library and Information Science
(1992) of the University Grants Commission
rehashed the importance of research though did
not dwell at length on this aspect in its report.
The blue document listed some areas for
research which are no less broader than the
current papers being taught at h e master lev&
Q

Structure and development of knowledge

Q

Classification, cataloguingand indexing

o Information studies
@

Computer applications

@

Historical studies

Q

Social and economic aspects of librarianship

@

Library and information management and
system analysis

tu

Applications of techniques of library and
information science to evaluate other
disciplines'!

List couM have been more specific Though
not much revered report, it rightty lays emphasis
on standards in research. It uncompromisingly
asks for a clear declaration from PhD candidates
that the 'work is based on the discovery of new
facts by the candidate or the new relations of
faas... and howDthe work tends to the general
advancement of knowledge' 19. It Is normally
expected of every completed piece of research.
But it hardly happens. Evaluation process,
however formal, is easily manipulated without
qualms. Examinen are obliging on reciprocal
basis. In a small profession like ours this
interplay of mutual usability comes in easily. It is
often said jokingly (but understand seriously)
that w e e is recommended to the superior
than to the caddate. It is not to overlook the
genuine research and researchers.

Apart from not so relevant topics, the thesis
have contributed litde towards pushing the
frontiers of knowledge, few are a h o d d of
methodology. Indian libraty research seems to
have no groundings in prevailing ground

realities. Topics are ideal, superficial and
bookish. Even the experienced librarians keen
on earning PhD degree hardly come with a
problem for research. The topic is mostly
suggested by the supervisor who shy away from
controversial topics for research. Criticising
individuals in formal black and white mode or
exposing harmful tendencies of a dass are not
for them. Even a mikl and healthy critiasm is
not tolerated in India. In addition, there is a dire
paucity of data and reference works. Collecting
a
data and information is considered
satisfactory end of the job-the goal of the
exercise. Library associations at all levels seems
to have washed their hands off the research
responsibilities. These even do not collect and
compile statistics of the professional activities of
their jurisdiction. And above all, we must admit
that the library profession has failed to lure best
brains more so to retain them.

12. CONTRIBUTIONS MADE BY
RESEARCH
Contrary to expectations dissertations are
not fountainhead of the rest of the iiterature to
grow and mature. These primarily sources are
distanced from relevance. The National Social
Science Documentation Centre (NASSDOC,
New Delhi) systematically procures a copy each
of research dissertations in social sciences to
preserve and make available to the researchers
for consultation within the premises of its
library. Retrospective bibliographies of LIS
dissertations in India are a~aibble*~.
Latest
information on theses awarded PhD degrees
and PhD research in progress is available in the
featured column of the weekly University News
(1962 +) of the Association of Indian
Universities, New Delhi.
In spite of their availability, these
dissertations are not adequately used by other
researchers; nor are these cited or quoted by
teachers or the textbook writers. Research
results are hardly used by the working librarians
in solving their professional problems.
Conversely there is no precedent of a library
inviting a library school to do research in
problem confronting them. (Conversely there
seems inborn animosity and mistrust between
them). Librarians go in for local ad hoc and

provide solutions for their practicd problems.
Researchers consult a teacher or a fellow
researcher for a topic of research rather than a
practitione?'. Thus research has become
divorced from reality-a theoretical exercise at
best This seems a universal phenomena in
profession as a confirmed by an American
teacher Margaret Stelg:

9. Wilkinson, John. The legitimization of
librarianship. Libri, 1983, 33(1), 39.

"Research done by library and information
science educators seems to receive little respect
from professionals and if they do not find it of
value one has to wonder who

11. Satija, MP. A deserted bastion: Classification
and indexing in India. lnt Cat & Bib Control,
1993,22(3), 5 1-54.

She further quotes the famous Conant report
to prove her point:
"Library educators
seldom
produce
welkesearched literary products...". This is
where library schools mostly fail the
profession23.
It is a time to pause and think why; if we fail
the practitioners and the scholars alike whom
do we serve then?

13. REFERENCES
1. Encyclopedia Americana. Int ed. 1972, Vol
23.410~.
2. Ranganathan, SR PtOtegomena to library
dassification. 2nd ed. Library Association,
London. 1957.466~.
3. Satija, MP. SR Ranganahan and the method
of schce. Acfitya, New.Mi. 1992. pp 1-3.
4. Shera, JH. Introduction to library science.
Libraries Unlimited, Littleton, Colo. 1976.
145p.
5. Notes and news: Library research cirde.
Library Herald, 1958,2, 128.
6. Steig, Margaret F. Change and challenge in
library and information science education.
ALA, Chicago. 1992.96~.
7. Rosenhaupt, Hans and Pinch, Judith.
Doctoral degrees. Encyclopedia of
education. Vol. 3. Mamillan, New York.
1971.118~.

8. Satija, MP. Sources of lndian library and
information science dissertations. Libri,
1989,39(1), 72.

10. Mitra, CR. University-industry interaction
with reference to RECs. University News,
1997, 35(25), 1-4.

12. Handbook on library and information
science 1997. Association of lndian
Universities, New Delhi. 1997. p. Ill.
13. Kumar, PSG. Research in library and
information science in India. Indexed by A
Tejornurty and HR Chopra. Concept, New
Delhi. 1987, p.vii.
14. ibid. p. xvi
15. Sharma, Dev Raj. Doctoral research in
library and information sciences in lndian
Universities. The Author, Palampur. 1997.
48 p.
16. Lahiri, Ramansu. Research in library science
in India (195095): An account of PhD
programme. Annals o f Lib Sc and
Documentation, 1996,43(2), 59-68.
17. Varalakshmi, RSR. Library and information
science research i n India: Subject
perspectives. Lib Sc with a Slant to
Documentation, 1994,31(2), 91-110.
18. University Grants Commission. Curriculum
Development Committee on Library and
Information Science (1992). Report. UGC,
New Delhi. 1992. 107p,
20. Satija, MP. Sources of lndian library and
information science dissertations. Libri,
1989,39(1), 71-78.
21. Prytherch, Ray. Problems of research. Inf
Management Repon Sept 1997, pp. 18.
22. Steig, margaret. op Cit, pp. 98.

23. quoted by Steig, op Cit

