DESlDOC BuUetin d InformationTechndogy, Vd. 18, No. 2, March 1998, pp. 1 12
1998, DESiDOC

Agricultural Research Information System (ARIS) of ICAR
Cajendn Singh* and Kushal Pal'*

The Indian National Agricultural Research System (NARS)with its nationwide
network of educational and research institutions consisting of state
agricultural universities, zonal research stations, ICAR institutes with regional
stations established Agricultural Research Information System in 1995 to
strengthen its research information base with funds from National Agicultwal
Research Project It has two main components: creation of infrastructure for
providing electronic connectivity and creation of MIS and
computerised/electronic databases of Indian research findings of NARS in
various f i d s of agriculture and allied fields. Basic hardware to create m a i l
and internet connectivity has 'already been provided. Local Area Networks
are being created at ail sites. Programmeto strengthen the connectivity using
VSATs and creation of databases has been worked out for the ninth Fie Year
Plan period.

As a consequence of rapid development in
science and technology, there is a virtual
information explosion the world over. For
achieving an optimal utilization of these
developments, it is essential that scientists in the
lndian National Agricultural Research System
(NARS) have a quick access to and free
exchange of information at local, national and
international levels. NARS through its vast
network of 30,000 scientists working at [CAR'S
49 Central Institutes, 10 Project Directorates
( P a ) , 27 National Research Centres (NRCs), 86
All lndii Coordinated Research Projects
(AICRPs), 261 Krishi Vigyan Kendm (KVKs), 29
State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), 120 Zonal
Research Stations (ZRS), m e Central
A@cultural University (CAU), numerous (1000

plus) regional stations and other research
centres has been catering to the agricultural
research and information needs of the farming
community. The JCAR during eighth F i Year
Plan embarked upon a project d l e d
Agricultural Research Informadon System (ARIS)
to bring the power of information techno+ogyto
the NARS. Its implementation started wit), the
financial aid from Wodd Bank (WB) under
National A&cultural Resear& h j e a (WP).
The coverage of the project is being extended
during ninth Five Year Pbn under National
Agricultural Tedwdogy Project (NAP).
In India, direct application of computerized
information systems to the fanners perhaps is
not feasible in the present mditions. However,
informatian management by the research
managers and the use of expert system and
odrer mkroprocesor based systems by the
progressive farmers in commercid horticuttwe
and aquaculture is very much within the reach
Utilization of information system has been

demonstrated by ~nnon' and graphilly
presented in Fig. 1.

2.3 Farmers
The farmers may require information on
input/output prices, market information,
location specific improved varieties, farm
machinery, catde breed, fish, etc., improved
techniques and methods, complete package of
practices, value additions (post harvest), and
information about input supply system.

3.

Figun 1: Flow Diagram of.Infomution
System utilization

2.

INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS
For developing agricuitural and rwal sectors,

the following three levels of users of idmation

system are identified: managers, scientists and
farmers.

2.1

Managers

Managers include research managers at
ICAR headquarters and directors of its central
institutes, vice-chancdlors, deans and directors
of SAUs, secretariesand other decision-making
authorities of
Agriculture and
Rural
Development Departments of States and
NCOs. For effective decision making, thqr may
require information on human & physical
resources; research, extension and development
projects; budgeting; and physical targets.

2.2

Scientists

Scientists indude p e r s o d working io
NARS,
extension,
and
development
dqxartments. Their information requirement can
be related to research and extension trends in
various disciplines: plant, animal & fderies
genetic resources, soil profiles, natural
resources; agroclimate; economic and social
indicators; feedback from fdds; and results of
previous research at both national and
international levels.

PROPOSED INFORMATION
SYSTEM
Keeping in view the total agricultural and

rural development system, constraints and
limitations, and information requirements at
different levels, following objectives are
proposed in formulating a comprehensive
information system (Fig. 2) for effective
agricultural and rural development..

O lmprwed research and p b d n g

0 Checking the duplication of research and
extension projtxts and programming

0
tl
0

Dissemination of research findings
Improvement in feedback mechanism

Better coordination and linkage between and
among different rural development agencies
and banking institutions like Depsnrnent of
Agriculture (DA), Department of Rural
Development (DRD), NABARD, lead banks,
NGOI, and private sector

0

Evolving effective information sharing
mechanisms

0

Electronic interface among scientists,
development agents and farms.

However, it is very difficult to develop and
maintain the proposed informath system by
any single organisation. The decentralised and
stepup process is suggested in order to invdve
mainly $wee key organisadonr, viz, I M , SAUs
and state departments. The three components
of the proposed model will be indepencht in
their structure and functioning.

4.

ARIS

To exploit the potential of modem
computing power in planning and management
of agricukwal research and scientific
MYDOC &IMn of inf T W , 1 9%, 1a21

RESEARCH
INSTlTUTESI
COLLEOES

Figure 2. Information Sptem Model for Agriculture and Rural Development
communication, ICAR started an Agricultural
Research Information System (ARIS). Basic
guidelines to implement this project were
provided by a team of experts from ICAR and
International -Service for National Agricultural
Research (ISNAR). In its report2, a phased
implementation was recommended to create
infrastructure for ARISNET, a national Wide
Area Network for agricultural research.

4.1

Infrastrudural Development

A W m Y by bktional Centre fw software
Technology (NCST), Mumbai showed that ratio
of PCs to scientists at ICAR institutes and SAUs
is very low. Although i t was not an objective of

AR'S
cater to
needs of a
research campus, provirion of baric viment
to act as nucleus to networking within a campus
was con'dered neceSsT. Thus,
including SAUs and their ZRSs as well as ICAR
institutes and project directorates have been
provided with LAN sewer and three or four PC
workstations with associated LAN cabling.
Software for networking, m a i l as wdl as office
automation have been provided along with the
equipment It also included infrastructural
equipment like uninterrupted power supply and
airconditioning units to provide necessary
environment for longer life of these equipments.

In addition to this, bigger \CAR institutes and
SAUs have been provided with UNlX server to
cater to their large user community base. A
summary of equipment supplied to SAUs and
ICAR institutes during 1996 is given in TaMe 1.
Quantities of computer hardware and software
have been worked out to provide connectivity
at department level of all colleges and
campuses of SAUs and to 50 per cent of the
scientific cadre of the ICAR, stationed at more
than 240 locations aH over the country.

4.2

Databaser and Application

Software
Besides creating the infrastructural facilities,
the four information modules, shown in Fig),
are daiwed for ARIS to standardiK
of
the different software for the day to dnl
of the xientists and offce

4.2.1 Agricultural Research Pemnnd
Information Sptem (ARPIS)
To maintain cmputerised biodata and
service history of scientific, technical and
administrati staff working at all lCAR
institutions, a personnel information system has
been planned at ICAR headquarters so as to
provide easy access on different types of

Figure 3. Modules of Agricultural Research Information System
information Like cadre strength, number of
scientists in position, type of trained manpower

available, distribution of scientists according to
sex, caste, state, institute and discipline, etc. The
information on awards won by different
scientists has also been included. This will help
the management in planning the personnel
policies, manpower planning, recruitment,
identification of subject matter specialists in
various fields, research work being undertaken
on different commodities with respect to
agroclirnatic zones and resources used, etc.
The software and database of all ICAR scientists
numbering about 4500 has already been
created. It can generate 36 types of predefined
reports and any number of queries. This will
further be expanded for all staff at KVKs and
scientists working at SAUs.

4.2.2 Agricu/turaf Research Financial
information System (ARFIS)
will maintain computerised monthly
accounts of all !CAR institutes and (CAR
headquarters, grants to SAUs, All India
Coordinated Research Projects (AICRP), AP
Cess Fund Research projects, Revolving Fund
Schemes and General Provident Fund (GPF)
It

8

Scheme of all ICAR institutes. In c o d t a t i o n
with selected SAUs, a financial information
system will also be developed for SAUs after
examining the financial information systems
already in-placeat some of the SAUs.
A software package (ARFIS) has already
been developed to computerise the monthly
accounts of ICAR institutes and has been
successfully implemented in most of the
institutes. Its use has been made mandatory
from April 1, 1997. More than 300 personnel
from account sections of these institutes have
been trained on use of this package.
codification of all accounting heads (institutes,
regional stations, schemes, etc) has also been
carried out

4.2.3 Agricultural Research library
Information Sysfem (ARLIS)
One of the important exercise under ARlS
will be to modernise libraries and to put the
library information on the ARlS network All
librariq of {CAR and SAUs will be computerised
and linked to lARl library which has been
identified as National Agricultural Library. This
wiPl provide scientists an opportunity to access
DEYDOC&I&n

d inf Technd, 1998,18(2)

information in India or &road electronically.
Thus, library automation and their networking
wiH form a signiiant part of the MIS,

and SAARC Agricultural Information Centre
(SAIC).
4.2.4 Agricultural Research Management
Inhnnation System (ARMIS)

Besides modemisation and networking of
libraries of !CAR institutes and SAUs, the
creation of databases and CDs on both national
and international agricdtural research contents
will be a mijw wwk under ARUS. Agricultural
Research Information Cenrre {ARIC), New Delhi
is involved in cornpilation of information on AP
Cess Fund schemes and other research projects
funded by ICAR Also ARIC is serving as
National Input Centre for International
lnformation System (ACRIS) for the Agricultural
Science and Technology, Current Agricultural
Research Information Systems (CARIS) projects
of Food and Agriculture Organisation {FAO)

It will provide access to research managers/
administrators computerised management t d s
using sofiware padcages to information on

different resources maintained under various
databases Reports generation related to
particular aspect will be easy to facikate
decision making Procurement of equipment &
inventory, providing connectivity, system
operation and overseeing, and information on
parlimentary questions and answers w'll also
come under purview nf ARMIS.
A daubase on parliament questions and
answers has been developed and being

Table 1: Summary of Computer Equipment to be provided to SAUs and lCAR Institutes under M I S
Supplied under NARP

Equipment
UNlX Servers

32 users

72

16 usws

23

8 users
LAN Servers

1

I

65

46

180

16 users

92

83

8 users

92

0

230

263

0

!

Heavy Duty

Toid

230
230

(

5K

57

200
220
420
0

(

3

172

300

229

300

Medium Duty

~

Total

1

VSATs

23

20
0

58

Laser Printer

Modem

45

Total
32 users

Total

UPS

P r o m under NATP
i

1

I

115

I

88

1

0

I

140

1

1

t

I

1

successfully implemented at Parliament Section
of ICAR. This is helping research managers in
quickly establishing relationship between
c u y t questions and answers provided in the
past of similar questions.
A scientist recruitment system based on the
current procedures has been developed for the
Agricultural Scientists Recruitment Board
(ASRB), an apex body to recruit scientists for
ICAR cadre. It has already been successfully
implemented at ASRB's Secretariat.
For SAUs, a package called AGRIUNIS~was
developed by NMRM to store and retrieve the
information. Training was given to all the SAUs
to utilise this package but how far this package
is used by SAUs is a big question mark and this
may be because of non-availability of a suitable
follow up.
A management information system (MIS)
developed by ISNAR known as INFORMR will
be suitably modified to integrate with ARlS at
three levels, i.e. national, institutional (ICAR
institutes and SAUs) and research stations (ZRS
of SAU, regional stations of ICAR institutes).

4.3

Training and Manpower
Development

Presently, most of the computer centres are
being handled by statisticians or agricultural
engineers who are having mathematical
background and basic knowledge of
electronics. Computer professionals with
appropriate qualification and experience in
implementing huge databases are not found in
NARS.
In order to develop trained manpower in
computer applications in agriculture, training
programmes on use of computers and
application software packages are being
organised. To modernise the present system of
working in offices, the staff working in technical,
administrative, secretarial, accounting and
auditing sections is being trained in the use of
computers. Besides this, to keep the ARIS
network up & running people from each
campus wilt be provided adequate training for
managing various information servers and
online databases, and administration of LAN
and UNlX networks. Thus, in order to have an
'

effective utilization of the computer resources
supplied to agricultural campuses, the training,
has been divided two major categories.

4.3.1 Users
This includes training the scientists and other
technical and administrative staff to use the
computers and various software packages.
Courses will be planned to give i d o p t h training
for the use of the software packages which will
be used all over the ARlS network. Thus, these
training courses will be used to bring in the
standardization process for data and report
formats (e.g. project budgeting, balance sheets,
research articles, memos, etc). Us& of the
library information system on the ARlS network
will also require considerable training of library
personnel. Similarly, training to use network
services such as e-mail, file transfer, remote
logging,
information
retrieval,
library
information, WWW, etc. will also be arranged.

4.3.2

Management

To keep the ARlS network up and running, i t
is important that a few people from each
campus are provided with adequate training to
manage the equipment installed at their
institutes as part of the network. This will
include monitoring the m a i l flow, the modem,
VSAT and router operations, the LAN and UNlX
server operations, and the various software
installed on the campus under project ARIS.
Minor problems then can be corrected locally.
Also, if the problems are beyond the capabiiities
of the people involved, the same can be
reported to appropriate external agency by the
people managing the system. Training at the
management level will include networking,
setting up various information servers and
on-line databases, and administration of Novdl
Netware and UNlX networks. It will also include
modem, VSAT and router management, basic
PC
hardware
configuration
and
trouble-shooting.
In ICAR system, there are two main institute
i.e., NAARM and IASRl offering computer
related courses to the scientists of the NARS.
Under ARlS programme so far about 800
scientist have been provided training on topics
like PC trouble-shooting, networking, mail,
MSWindows, library information system and

general PC use. Training faalities are being
further strengthened to provide higher levd
computer courses also.

Apart from providing wide area network
services, it is essential that each campus is
equipped with g d local area network
facilities. Under the ARlS programme most of
the ICAR & SACJ'Swere provided with suitable
servers and nodes. Six institutes are already
having VSAT connectivity for more than two
years and 11 more have been provided VSATs
during March 1997. The m a i l connectivity has
been established to 73 ICAR institutes (47
institutes, 9 PDs and 17 NRCs) out of 86 by
linking these institutes through dial-up, including
17 institutes with VSAT connectivity, to the
nearest National Informatics Centres (NIC), a
Government owned national service provider. It
is expected that all of the ICAR institutes &
SAUs will have Local Area Network and access
to the Internet either by VSAT or by dialup
facility by the end of 1998. To provide effective
satellite connectivity 140 more VSATs will be
added to the network during next three years.

5.

MANAGING THE ARIS

The development of databases and
necessary infrastructure is one side of the coin.
After establishing initial infrastructure including
hardware, software and networking, smooth
running of the information system is entirely
dependent on the type and quality of
monitoring. The experiences in computerisation
show that even an established computer
database may fail in absence of adequate
control mechanism by the people who are
supporting and using the system coupled with
low level dependency on the information
system particularly in Indian context. Necessary
monitoring checks will have to be ensured
continuously till the users gain fairly good
confidence and competence in monitoring.
An Information System (IS) Unit consisting of
Assistant Director-General (ADG), Prinapal
Scientist, Senior Scientists and Technical staff is
being created at lCAR headquarters to look
after the integration of installed equipment into
ARlS network. The IS unit will also coordinate
DESIDOC BuI&

d lnf Techd, 1996,18(2)

among ICAR institutes, SAUs and ZRSs for
creation of databases and to ensure free and
useful information exchange over this network.
The IS unit will also play a major role in
further planning of the ARlS network since no
network is static. New nodes will come up, new
services will be offered, traffic vdurnes will
grow and new connectivity options will become
available. Thus, deciding evolution strategy,
creation of databases, evaluation of new
connectivity options and implemention of them
as and when required will be some of the major
tasks of the IS Units.
Creation of monitoring cells is also planned
at each NARS institution. These celk would be
headed by senior professors/researchers/
managers interested in the information systems.
They would directly report to the highest
authority like director general, vice-chancdlor,
secretary, etc. These cells will be suitaMy
supported by competent technical staff and
computer centres of the system. ARlS
coordinators have already been identified and
they are being trained on networking concepts.

6.

CONCLUSION

In view of the gigantic task involved in
successful implementation of ARIS and lack of
technical expertise manpower in ICAR, the
following programmes are recommended to be
taken up with utmost urgency.
Since maintenance of databases will depend
on data inflow from various components of
NARS, the following actions are suggested:
(a) Release of funds of the ICAR, SAUs and
government agencies should be linked to the
submission of relevant data schedules to the
monitoring cells.
(b) Updation of data by the individual scientists
like personnel, resources, and research
results databases should be linked to the
timely submission of the schedules and
annual assessments records. This may sound
very harsh but in reality it is required as the
infurmation is the greatest tool for the better
research results.
(c) It should be mandatoryfor each individual to
fil in the required schedules and help the

organisation in streamlining different
modules of the information system.

In order to capture the data a$source Jwd,
getting the data in time, maintainingdifferent
information systems, there may be some
structural changes m procedural formalities.
tn the recent pastdiRerenr Government agencies (eg NlCSI of NIC, RITES of Railways)
have established a separate public sector
undertaking so that the decisions can be
taken up much faster. 7his way one can hire
the consultants from outside fw software deveiopment or can call experts on deputation
to higher position (even from the system) and
to skip the present bureaucratic delayingprocedures. This will speed up the e k t i v e implementationof information systemsof differ-

Presently the curriculums on computers to
the under gaduate and post-graduate programmes are very limited. Keepinginview of
the changes in the idwmation techno\ogy,
there is a need k Jaok afresh at the cunicu{urnsfw graduates and post-graduatesof different disciplhes of agdcuJture.The concepts
of databases, netwwking, Internet and oAer
advanced areas like CIS, remote sensing, etc.
should be considered for the disciplines like
agtkultutal enginwing. statistics and wok
omics so that these people will be in a right
position to help the development of agricultural research information system and useful
for dissemination of information.

I In order to maintain the huge information
system, recruitment of computer profes
donals should be made by giving a separate
advertisement rather than combining with
the other agricultura) allied subjects.
A comparative study is required with the
other research organisation in India regarding
the implementation of information system
and the difficulties encountered by them. h
study of this nature will be helpful to reduce
the problemsfacedin implementingthe information system.

I Complete development of software by inhouse may not be feasibk keepingin view of
the scarcity of qualifiedmanpower, However,
a collaborative work can be taken with the
other agencies like iSNAR, NCST, Tata Con.
sultancy Sewices and oher leading software
houses in developingthe necessary software
for information systems. The care shauld be
taken that the personnel ol' monitoring cell
are involved in the development of software
so that modifications can be taken up in
house at a later stage.

ent kinds.

7.

REFERENCES

1, Annon, 1993. Guiddiires for ARIS network.

ISNAR, The Netherlands

2. Repart on strategy far development of an
agricultural research information system
{ARIS) for The Indian Council of Agricultural
Research in cooperation w i ~ h ISNAR.
October 1994,

3. Rao, 0 Rama and
AGRIUNIS: A study
universities information
Hyderabad & DST, &}hi.
4.

U

Muraiidhar.

ori agricultural
system, NAARM,
19-94, 1 13-15.

Caiendra Skrgh and Kushal PaJ. Current
status and future plans of agricultural
research information system: 1CAR report.
March 1997.

Singh, Kushal Pal and U.
Muralidhar. Strategies for development of

5. Gajendra

agricultural research inforrna\ion system:
ICAR experience. Paper presented in Project
Planning Meeting
on
Research
Management. ISNAR, Tsukuba, lapan.
Match 24-27, 1997.

