DESlDOC Bulkin of Information Technobgy, Vol. 18, No. 2, March 1998, pp. 13-20
€3 1998, DESlDOC

Growth of Agricultural Libraries in India in the
Post-Independence Era
Chhotey Lal*
Abstract
The author traces the origin and development of agricultural libraries in lndia
beginning with the creation of Department of Agriculture in 1873. The
recommendations of various committees having bearing on library matters
are also discussed and listed the pathos of agricultural libraries, studies the
impact of information technology in the storage and retrieval of agricultural
information. The author sees a bright future for agricultural libraries in the
growing network of informationnetworks.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Immediately after achieving independence in
1947, the Government of lndia under the
leadership of Pandit jawahar Lal Nehru gave top
priority to the development of agriculture. In
1950, lndia had a total food production to the
mark of 55 million tonnes and to meet the
shortage of food grains, the country had to beg
from the foreign countries. For improvement, it
was essential to develop new varieties of crops,
occupy more areas under cultivation and to
develop infrastructure for agriculture research,
education and extension activities. There were
hardly two lnstitutes under fCAR (1929) namely
Imperial Agricultural Institute (1905), New Ddhi
and Imperial Veterinary Research Institute
(1889), lzatnagar and six Government
Agricultural colleges at Coimbatore, Kanpur,
Lyallpur, Nagpur, Sabhor Poona, and Naini
(I 910). In the first phase of Agricultural
Development 31 ICAR Institutes were created
till 1957 and in next four decades from 1957 to
Head (Library Services)
Indian Agricultural Research Institute Library
Dr KS Krishnan Marg
New Delhi- 1 l O O I Z

1997 the number of ICAR lnstitutes went upto
61 (Table 1). On the other side the State
Agricultural Universities (SAUs) were opened
from 1960s onward with the first Agricultural
University at Pant Nagar (1960) and today there
are 30 Agricultural Universities (Table 2).
Accordingly the number of teachers and
scientists in the agricultural universities as well as
the ICAR Institutes increased along with
agricultural students. Today there are 3 1,00(i
scientists and teachers working in the Agricultwal
Research Sector in lndia Fable 3) with 15,300
undergraduate and postgraduate students in.
SAUL Under ICAR only four institutes namety:
IARI, lVRl (lzatnagar), NDRl (Karnal), ClFE
(Bombay) are undertaking post-gradwte teaching
and enrol 1200 students every year Fable 4).

2.

DEVELOPMENT OF
AGRICULTURE IN INDIA
Seventyeight percent of India's population

livs in,,illages
and their main
occupation
is
farming. At the time of independence lndia
had a population of 360 million people, with
about 50 million tonnes of food production.
The improvement in the traditional agriculture

technique to increase the food production was
the basic concern of independent lndia and a
challenge before the Government. Pandit
Jawahar Lal Nehru in 1949, while addressing a
gathering of agricultural scientists and students
at IARI, New Ddhi mid "Every thing may wait
but agriculture cannot". This indicatedthe policy
and priority of the Government. In order to
meet the food needs of the country, the
Government gave all priority to agriculture.
Under the aegis of Indian Council of Agricultural
Research (ICAR), commodity and problem
based institutes were opened throughout the
country to accelerate the researchin agriculture,
animal, veterinary, dairy and fisery sciences.
In the second phase of development,
agricultural education and extension activities
were given emphasis along with research
work. UGC, in 1958, accorded the status of a
deemed university to IARl where education at
Ph D level was started and its earlier Degree
of Associateship was changed to M Sc degree.
Education Commission had recommended
minimum one Agri-tech University in each of
the states of India. As a result SAUs were
started. The first SAU was Govind Ballabh
Pant University of Agriculture and Technology
(Pant Nagar, 1960), Orissa University of
Agriculture & Technology (Bhubaneshwar,
1962),
Punjab Agricultural University,
(Ludhiana, 1962), University of Agricultural
Sciences (Bangalore, 1864), Andhra Pradesh
Agricultural University (Hyderabad, 1964) and
so on. (Table 1).
SAUs work under the control of state
administration. They are funded upto
90 per cent by the ICAR and rest of their
budget is met by state government. Since
agricultural research, education and extension is
the primary responsibility of states, the growth
of SAUs has been faster.

Table 1. Institutid System of ICAR
(1996)
Institutions

Number

Deemed Universities
ICAR Institutes
National Research Centres

30

Project Directorates

10

National Bureau

4

All India Coordinated Research
Projects
Krishi Vigyan Kendras

80

262

Trainers Training Centres

8

National Research Centre in
Agriculture For Women

1

Operational Research Projects
Other Schemes & Projects

400
26

The Green Revolution in 196647 brought
about self-sufficiency in food grains. Since then
the third phase of agricultural development
started to sustain the results of Green
Revolution. Both SAUs and ICAR institutions
started growing with a faster pace. Food
production, from 55 million tonnes in 1950-51,
increased to nearly four times to approximately
approximately 192 million tonnes in 1996-97,
alongwith near targets to achieve sufficiently in
pulses, oilseeds, fisheries and horticultural crops.
White Revohtion has already fulfilled the needs
of the country for milk. Today; the lndian
Agricultural Research System under the ICAR is
one of the largest in the world comprising of
research institutes,
project directorates,
schemes, programmes, etc. (Table 2).

Table 2. Statewise SAUs in lndia
States
Jammu& Kashmir

Number of SAUs
1

Himachal Pradesh
Punjab
Haryana
Rajasthan
Gujarat
Maharashtra
Kerala
Tamil Nadu
Karnataka
Andhra Pradesh
Orissa
West Bengal

2
1
1
1
1
4
1

2
2
1
1
2

Assam
Bihar
Uttar Pradesh
Madhya Pradesh
NEH Region (Central Univ.)
Total

I
2
3
2
2
30

The National Agricultural Research System of
lndia has necessary infrastructure and is well
equipped with laboratories, libraries, manpower,
etc. It also has the largest scientific manpower. It
is estimated that the country today has over
60,000 scientists under various government and
non-governmentorganisations engaged in active
research, excluding technical, administrative and
The
scientific
supporting
personnel.
manpower-management personnel, scientists
and teachers engaged in research, education &
extension work in agricultural sector-has been
estimated to about 31,000 (Table 3).

Table 3. Scientific Manpower Engaged in
Agricultural Research in lndia (1996)
ICAR System
State Agricultural Universities
General Universities and
Affiliated Colleges
Agrobased Industries
Voluntary/Private
Organisations
Related Govt. Departments
Total

6,500
22,000
1,000

250
31,000

Table 4: Students on Roll in Agricultural
Educational Institutions (1998)
P.G./Ph.Ds

Graduates

Institutions

ICAR Institutes

1200

Nil

State Agricultural
Universities &
Colleges (28+172)

6300

9000

DES/DoC Bulktin of lnf Technol, 1998,18(2)

GROWTHOF
AGRICULTURAL LIBRARIES

SINCE INDEPENDENCE
The oldest institutes of IARl and lVRl were
having libraries with good collection consisting
of journals, monographs, reports, bulletins and
theses. The egricultural colleges were having
small libraries and collection of 10,000 to
20,000 books. With the growth of ICAR
Institutes, more libraries were opened and the
state agricultural university libraries played a
vital role in the research and education
programme of the SAUs.

3.1

Status of SAUs and ICAR
lnstitute Libraries

The status of art of ICAR libraries has been
assessed by the following survey teams:
(1) Dr MS Randhawa Committee (1957)
(2) Dr Ralp R Shaw and Dr Krishna Rao
Committee (1956)
(3) The lndo American Agricultural Library
Survey and Study Team (Dr Dorothy Parket
Committee (1958))

(4) Dr Ramaiah Committee (1969)
1,OoO

All the 28 SAUs comprising of 172
agricultural colleges and 4 deemed universities
under ICAR annually enroll about 16,500
students at various level courses under human
resource development programme (Table 4).

Educational

3.

In addition to above, ICAR sponsored
regional agricultural library study teams and
finally a survey was done by IARl library during
1992-93. All important committees have stated
that ICAR libraries were in poor condition in
terms of power collection, inadequate library
manpower and physical facilities as well as
inadequate financial resources to meet the
literature/inforrnation requirements of the
scientists of their respective institutions. So far
as the budget was concerned, the libraries of
ICAR have shared hardly 1.5% or less than that
of the budget of their respective institutes. The
appointed librarians were in the lower cadre at
semi-professional level and they have been
working under the supervision of some
scientists who were nonprofessional. All these
reasons have contributed for the slow pace of
development ICAR libraries which still persist in
most of the libraries. In spite of the
recommendations of various committees
15

regarding the improvement in the physical
facilities of ICAR libtaris, strengthening of
collection of books and journals, appointment
of trained librarians, status of library staff equal
to that of the Heads of Department and
scientists as well as recommendations for a
National Agricultural Library of lndia headed by
the Director.
ICAR, in spite of the recommendations of
Dr Ramaiah committee and Dorothy Parkar
Committee, has not given due status to their
librarians and pay scales. Thus the library
suffered a great

Subsequently, these sections of ICAR Modd Act
were incorporated in the acts and statutes of
almost every agricultural university in India. This
provided the library a rightful place in the
administrative set-up of an agricultural university.

3.1.2 joint Indo-American Teams
Two Indo-American teams in 1950s gave
emphasis on imprwing agricultural education,
research, and extension, which resulted in
additional emphasis on the need for better
libraries. The report of second team headed by
Dr MS Randhawa states:

Libraries, being part and parcel of the
education and research system, are playing vital
role. They provide information support and
function as nerve centre for research activities
around which the progress of the country is
spiralling high. Their development has been
along with the growth and development of
institutions in particular and country as a whole
in general, Libraries have served the nation and
born many constraints during the span of 50
years of independence.

"Libraries are necessary part of the
researcher's tool. Every possible step should be
taken to improve library facilities which are
often
inadequate". Dr
Randhawa
as
ViceChairman of ICAR got a committee.
consisting of Dr Ralph R Shaw and Dr DB
Krishna Rao appointed in 1956 to conduct a
study of library and bibliographic services for
agricultural teaching and research in India. The
recommendations of this committee created
deep awareness among librarians and
administrators for better agricultural libraries.

3.1.1 /CAR Model Act for Agricultural
Uniwrsities in lndia

3.1.3 Indo-American Agricultural Library
Survey and Study Team (1 968)

The ICAR Model Act (under Section 7,
Subsection 10) is regarding the powers and
functions of the University to maintain
laboratories, libraries, research stations and
institutions and museums for teaching, research
and extension. This statement gives a legal base
to the libraries of agricultural universities. The
librarian shall be a member of the Academic
Council and an o f f ~ e r of a university
responsible to the V i h a n c d l o r for all
matters concerning the library and the
purchase, cataloguing and maintenance of
books and journals and operation of the library.
The contents of the Sections 7 and 18 of the
Modd
Act,
incorporating the
ICAR
recommendations of Cummings Committee
Report (Dr Ralph W Cummings as Chairman)
and Sutton Committee Report (Dr TS Sutton as
Chainnan-an Adisor under USAlD Mission to
PAU) has far reaching effects on agricultural
university library organisation, administration,
powers and duties of the university librarians.

This survey team was set up as a result of the
recommendations made at a meeting of the
Directors of Agricultural- Research Institutes
(1967) and it was headed by Dr Dorothy Parker.
The committee visited the then existing
agricultural university libraries. Chief Librarian of
IARl was its member-secretary. This committee
gave 69 recommendations. The most important
recommendations were regarding to:

4 Improvement in the physical facilites to ICAR
institute libraries.

4 Strengthening of the collection of books and
journals.

4 Appointment of trained librarians in the
institute libraries.

4 Status of library equal to that of a Department
of the institute.

4 Status of Librarian on par with Head of the
Department

DESlDOC &Iktin of lnf T e c h d , 1 998,18(2)

+

Making of a National Agricultural Library in
India headed by a Director.

3.1.4 Ramiah C o d t t e e (1969)
This committee was constituted under the
Chairmanship of Dr K Ramaiah, a Member of
Parliament, consisting of scientists like Dr MS
Swaminathan (IARI), Dr CM Sigh (IVRI), Dr NN
Dastur (NDRI),
etc.
to review the
recommendations of Dr Dordhy Parker
Committee which accepted a few out of them.

3.1.5 Regional Agricultural Library Study
Teams (1973)
In 1973, \CAR sponsored Regional
Agricultural Library Study Teams to study the
working of agricultural libraries again. One of
the teams reported that no appreciable progress
was made after Ramaiah Committee and failure
to act upon the recommendations of Ramaiah
Committee was pointed out They also
recommended about the role of libraries in the
development of research, but ICAR had taken
eight years to clear the recommendations of
both Regional Study Teams and Ramaiah
Committee.

3.1.6 /CAR Workshops and Seminars for
Agricultural Libraries
A number of workshops, seminars and
conferences for agricultural libraries were held
under the aegis of ICAR at different places.
Important among them were (i) The first Library
Workshop at Pantnagar, (ii) All lndia Conference
on Agricultural Education relating to Libraries,
JNKW, Jabalpur, (iii)
Workshop
on
Reprography, Ludhiana, (iv) Seminar on
Agricultural Librarianship and Documentation,
Ludhiana, (v) National Conference of
Agricultural Librarians Hyderabad and (vi)
Seminar on Agricultural Librarianship and
Documentation, Pantnagar, December, 1988
and after this no seminar or workshop has been
organised.

3.1.7 Standing Library Advisory
Committee of /CAR
There is a Standing Library Advisory
Committee (LAC) of ICAR to deal with policy
matters concerning agricultural libraries. The
DE9DoC Bulktin d l n f Technd, 1998,18(2)

LAC consists of librarians from some agricukurd
universites and ICAR institutes with Deputy
Director General (Education), lCAR as its
Chairman and the Chid Librarian, ICAR l i i
as its member-secretary.

The above mentioned various committees
gave substantially useful recommendations for
the development of agricultural libraries in the
country.

3.2

APPLICATION OF
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

Information Technology (IT) has come as a
boon to substitute the day by day decreasing
human efficiency, to help to win over budgetery
constraints of libraries and to a great extent to
increase higher utilization of literature resources
and need based information more effectively. IT
facilitates automatic cdlection of information,
storage,
processing and retrieval. The
application of IT in libraries has been in three
dimensions, namely
(i) Computerisation of library resources
(ii) Publishing of CDROM databases, and
(iii) Computer based networking for information
communication.
Computers have been used in various
activities for a long time but in India, particularly
in library field, their use has been for a decade
or so. A survey of agricultural libraries in 1991
reveals that there were hardly a couple of
libraries which made a beginning of computer
use. By the year 1995, CPRl library (Simla) had
computerised total literature on potato available
in the country and outside since 1901 to date,
IARl library in this area has gone much
ahead. It has completed the computerisation of
its book catalogue by converting over one lakh
books
and
monographs
into
machine-readable-form by the end of March
1997. Here data conversion activity continues
for other forms of documents, viz. theses,
bulletins, articles, etc. ICAR Institutes like IIHR
(Bangalore), CPCRl (Kasargod), SAUs like GB
Pant University (Pantnagar), PAU (Ludhiana) and
HPKV (Palampur), etc. have made just a
beginning.

CD-ROMs (Compact Disk-Read only
Memory) were originated in the mid 1980's.
S i flatter (USA) is the largest CD-ROM
publishing company in the world. Today a large
number of CD-ROM databases are available on
a variety of subjects induding agmbblogical
sciences. To name a few are:

FA0 statistics on Diskettes

IARl Library has installed a 28drive CD-Net
consisting of 11 networking terminals providing
simultaneous access to different CD-ROM
database searches, retrieval, downloading and
printing facility. This is in addition to stand alone
single drive CD-ROM search facilities. It also
provides email facilities to its wer 300
registered PG students. Other libraries of GB
Pant University, HPKV (Palampur), PAU
(Ludhiana), Kerala Agricultural University, CPRl
(Simla), IVRl (Izatnagar), NOR1 (Karnal) and
many others have started procuring CDROM
databases in the respective areas of their needs.

World List of Agricultural serials, etc.

3.3

CAB1 Abstracts since 1972 (CAB)

0
0
0

AGRlS CDs 1975 (FAO)
AGRICOLA since 1960 (ML,USA)
Zoological Records (197s)
BiologicalAbstracts (1985)

0

agricultural research centres), FAO's agricultural
statistics and 'Wealth Asia' on CDs. With the
help of a CD-ROM drive attached to a PC,
required specific information can be searched,
retrieved and served in a minimum possible
time.

Chemical Abstracts (1994)
Dement Biotechnology Abstracts (1982)

0 CGlAR Indutes' Libraries fultext databases

A brge number of CDs on various
agricultural and allied subjects are also
published by other organisations other than
Silver Platter. These CDROMs cover abstracts
and full text of journal articles, statistics, fulltext
of books and monographs. Leading publishers
of scientific journals have started publishing
fulltext journals on CDaOMs and to name a
few are:

4 Annual Reviews lnc
4 Blackwe4 Scientific Publishers
4 KluwerAcademicPubIishers
Elsevier S c i i e , etc.
In New Delhi, NISCOM

+

(formerly
Publication & Information Directorate, CSIR) has
published its Wealth of India' (Raw Material
series) an encyclopadedic dictionary of
economic plants on CD-ROM under the tide
Wealth Asia' in 1995. Libraries by subscribing
same important databases on CD-ROMs can
serve better and save their expenditure on hard
copies. IARl library in this process has procured
all CAB1 CDs on plant sciences, AGRIS CDs,
AGRKOLA, Biotechndogy, Zoological Records,
WLAS (World List of Agricultural Serials), CGlAR
CDs (Full text libraries of 16 international

Pathos of Agricultural Libraries

(i) With the application of some Sections of the
ICAR Model Act for Agricultural Universities
(Para 3.1.1 above) and incorporationof some
recommendations of Cummings Committee
as well as Sutton Committee into the Acts and
statutes of almost of every agricultural
university, the SAU libraries went ahead of
ICAR institute libraries which are still in poor
state. Today, Agricultural university librarians
are enjoying the status of a Professor and
professor's pay scale under UGC system with
full administrativeand financial powers for the
organisation and management of their
libraries.
(ii) Contrary to SAU libraries, the pathology and
irony of ICAR institutes' libraries has been that
all good recommendations of Indo-American
Agricultural Library Survey and Study Team
were turned down by the Ramaiah
Committee and recommendations of
RamaiahCommittee accepted by ICAR were
never implemented by the Directors of ICAR
institutes.
(iii) The Standing Library Advisory Committee of
ICAR remained in dormancy for the last 20
yem. However, it was revived in 1995 and
after a couple of meetings again paralysedfor
certain reasons.

(iv) Association of Agricultural Librarians and
Documentalists of lndia (AALDI) in 1988 at
Pantnagar seminar elected new members to
form a new executive committee of AALM,
which could raise the voice of librarians'
grievances and suggest new measures to
accelerate the pace of development of
agricultural libraries. This committee of
AALDI n&er met and since then went into
long dormancy because of the lack of
committment of its members to the
profession.
(v) ICAR librarians have not been granted equal
status and UGC pay scales on par with
scientists of their institutes as well as their
counterparts in SAUs, hence they do not
enjoy adquate administrative and financial
powers to d d o p their libraries by
purchasing new books and journals. They
work through an obsolete bureaucratic
system.
(vi) The surveys made by IARl library staff in 1991

and 1995.96 reveal that ICAR libraries are still
in poor conditions-with poor collection and
inadequate manpower. Budget allocation to
libraries on an average remains below the
mark of 1 per cent as against UGC norm of
6 per cent of a university budget On the
other hand agricultural university libraries
haw built adequate book collection and
subscribe a satisfactory number of
agricultural journals. They have adequate
manpower and financial resources. Here the
library of IARI, New Delhi is an exception to
it by virtue of its national role.
(vii) National AgriculturalLibrary is the need of the

country. Unfortunately, there is no de jure,
National Agricultural Library. However, IARl
Library is playingthe de facto role of National
Agricultural Library since long time.

3.4

Indian Library & Information
Networks

lndia has developed a number of general
and specific purpose networks during the last
14 years, e.g Yikram8-a defence network,
'INDONET' of CMC Ltd., 'NICNET' of Planning
Commission, and 'ERNET' of Department of
Electronics, Government of India, and

'INFLIBNET' (Information Library Network) of
UGC. All these are national networks. Similarly,
at the regional level in the field of library and
information science, there are DELNET,
CALIBNET, BOMNET, etc. DELNET, today,
connects over 65 libraries of Delhi. It provides
e-mail facility at Delhi, national and international
levels through NICNET. The DELNET has OPAC
facility. The nodal libraries can access to union
catalogue of books and journals, and other
materials in host computer located at India
InternationalCentre, New Delhi. IARl library is a
member of Delnet and is participating in its
professional activities. However, some regional
networks have their connectivity with national
networks-ERNET and NICNET which further
have their connectivity with INTERNET.
INTERNET-+ global network today connects
over two million desktop PCs. Hence, i t is
possible that a library can have its connectivity
based on V-SAT or Telecom with NICNn and
ERNET and can have access globally to
important agricultural databases, or library
catalogues in electronic form, home page of an
organisation and can send e-mail to and receive
from any institution or individual on his desktop
computer. One can transfer file, messages,
fulltext,
visuals,
and
can
have
videoconferencing, etc.

3.5

Agricultural Networks Scenario

Today, infact, there is no national or regional
network of agricultural libraries. However, ICAR,
New Delhi has taken inittatives in this direction.
First of all, IARl library ma& a beginning of
computer based activities in 1993 and had
computer connectivity with DELNET through a
modem-telephone line. In 1995, IARl
management started a project of campus
networking through CMC Ltd, and in just one
year, a powerful network having 100 MB fibre
optic backbone was installed and commissioned
in february 19%. This electronic information
network of STAR topology on IARl campus
connects over 50 computers housed in ' 17
buildings remotely located withiig the radius of
two krns. It is further being strengthened
speedily and by the time this paper is pubbhed,
it will have more than 100 connections.

IARI library has installed a 28drive C D N a
consisting of 11 networking terminals providing
simultaneous access to different CDROM
databases search and retrieval, downloading
and printing facility. This is in addition to stand
alone single derive CD-ROMsearch facilities.

The CDNet housed in the library has also
been made accessible from various divisions of
the institute on this network. Agricultural
libraries can join INFLIBNET of UGC as well as
ERNET of NICNET for global access to
information to serve their users. It is to mention
here that IARl network has its V-SAT based main
hub housed in the library and library thus, has
access to global information for library
catalogues, full text journal databases,
magazines, newspapers etc. through World
Wide Web. ICAR has a plan to connect all
agricultural universities and ICAR institutes
through modems and V-SATs with IARl network
as early as possible. Thus libraries of SAUs and
ICAR institutes wiH be on netwok Twenty-six
SAUs have already been provided hardware
support by the ICAR and work of computer
networking is progressing fast under the expert
technical leadership of CMC Ltd.

4.

FUTUREOFINDIAN
AGRICULTURAL LIBRARIES

In spite of some dark spots in the history of
past 50 years of lndian agricultural libraries for
different reasons, now they hiye sunny days and
a bright future. The present trends of economic
globalization has made agricultural globalization
imminent and the second Green Revolution will
be an event of near future. The agricultural
libraries and information centres cannot be

ignosed and they will have to play a vital rok in
the service of the nation. It is emphasized again
that ICAR, New Odhi has plans to develop a
nationwide agricultural information network
connecting all libraries of State Agricultural
Uniwrsities and ICAR research institutes. ICAR
has already taken initiatives to establish
Agricultural Research Information Service (ARIS)
c d s in IARI, IVRI, HPKV, GB Pant University,
Narendra Dev University, etc. by providing
computer hardware, etc. as mentioned earlier.
The ARIS cells will have connectivity with
libraries also for bibliographic information.
As already mentioned earlier that a campus
LAN based on V-SAT in IARI has already been
established, and made operational which
provides connectivity to internet through
ERNET. This will happen in the whole of country
in couple of years. Thus lndian agricultural
libraries with electronic platform will join
information super highway and enter with pride
and smile into the 2 1st century.

5.

FURTHER READINGS

1.

Mandates of the ICAR and its Research
Institutes. ICAR, New Delhi. 1994.166~.

2,

Prasher, RG. Managing University Libraries.
Today & Tomorrow's Printers & Publishers,
New Delhi. 1991.350~.

3.

Final Report of the ICAR Institutes and
Agricultural Universities (Indo-American
Agricultural Library Survey & Study Team
for the ICAR). ICAR, New Delhi. 1968.
182p.

