DESIDOC Bulletin of InformationTechnology, Vol. 18, No. 2, March 1998, pp. 21-30

e 1998, DESIDOC

Growth of Agricultural Journalismand Agricultural Research
Information Centre at ICAR
Dr RD Shanna*
Abstract
Modern agricultural journalism was born in lndia with the advent of printing
when three books on modem methods were got translated by Sir Syed
Ahmad Khan. Now, ICAR publishes four journals and two newdetters in
English and three in Hindi. Overall, about 250 periodicals in lndia are
devoted to agriculture. The paper also describes the Agricultural Research
lnformation Centre (ARIC) at Indian Council of Agricultural Research
Headquarters, India, the databases available, publications broughtout and
services rendered by the centre. Besides the importance of ARIC in SAARC
countries, the proposals for the ninth plan are also discussed.

1.

INTRODUCTION

'With the master of the field, our friend, we
triumph, may bestow upon us cattle, horse,
nourishment for by such (gifts) he makes us

*.

'

'Lord of the fi&, &stow upon us sweet
abundant (water), as the milch cow yields her
milk, dmpping like honey, bland as butter: may
the lord of water make us happy'.

These are some hymns quoted from the
most ancient scripture of lndia called Rigveda
(5000 BC). These are examples of earliest
writings on agriculture, which was regarded as a
holy and dignified occupation. From the various
hymns of Rigwda it appeals that the ancient
Indians have recourse to artificial water supply
when necessary and used to employ horses as
well as cattle in agricultural operations. By 4 BC
Director
Directorate d l n h t i o n and Publications of
~grfcuitue(DIPA)
&
I
Caimd d Agricultwd Research
KrhhiAnusandha B b a n , Pusa
New Delhi 110 012

-

the art and science of agriculture was perfected
to its fullest glory. Rules were laid for
'conservation of germplasm'. The Arthshastraoldest treatise on economics in the world
specifies duties of a superintendent in the
following words: He was to 'collect the seeds of
all kind of grains, flowers, fruits, vegetables,
tubers, roots, creepers, fibre-producing plants
and cotton'. He was to see that the cultivation
of the prime land should not suffer and should
enforce laws governing the proper cultivation of
the soil.

even
made
meteorological
They
observations and laid out rules for selecting
different kind of soils for different crops and
even mentioned the methods of seed treatment.
Following excerpts from Arthshastra are very
educative and informative and are very
interesting examples of earliest agricultural
journalism:
'Lands that are beaten by foam (which
means the lands situated near the banks of
rivers) are suitable for gnrwing vallphacthe
cucurbits (pumpkin, p w d etc.); lands that are

frequently overtlown by water are suit&& for
long pepper, grapes and sugarcane. The lands in
the vicinity of wells should be used for growing
vegetables and tuberous crops, low lands (such
as beds of rivers and lakes) for greens and
marginal furrows between any two rows of
crops are suitable for the plantation of fragrant
plants and medicinal herbs. It might be the first
example of 'proper land-use planning for
agriculture'.
Here is an example of prescribing seed
treatment from the same old treatise, the
Arthashastra : The seeds of grains are to be
exposed to mist and heat for seven nights; the
seeds of pulses are treated similarly for three
nights, the seed material of sugarcane and the
like are plastered at the cut end with the mixture
of honey, clarified butter, the fat of hogs and
cowdung; the seed material of tuberous crops
should be treated with honey and darified
butter, cottonseeds with cowdung'

The Greek ambassador, Magasthanese, at
the court of the Great King Chandra Gupta, was
a contemporary of the author of Arthashastra. In
his published memoirs, he has paid an eloquent
tribute to the abundance of crops in India, to
the fertility of the soil, to the absence of famine
and the peculiar respect in which agriculture
and agriculturists were held. Even at the time of
war the combating armies used to leave the
farmers undisturbed as a matter of ethics of war.
Magasthanese wrote, 'it is a practice among the
nations at war to ravage the soil and thus reduce
it to an uncultivaMe waste. On the contrary the
Indians prevent the occwence of famines (after
war), regards farming community as a sacred
and inviolable class and leave them undisturbed.
These tillers of the soil continue to plough in the
f i d even when a battle is raging in their
neighbourhood, without any sense of danger.
The combatants on eid~erside while waging the
conflict make carnage of each other but allow
those engaged in farming to remain quite
unmolested. Besides, they neither ravage an
enemy's land with fire nor cut down its trees'.
This was the sustainable agriculture at is best
which sustained the Indian people for about ten
thousand years. Now lndia has about 143
million hectares of land under plough out of the

total geographical area of 328.73 million
hectares. It has been estimated that this area
could be stretched to a maximum of 155 million
hectares only without adverse effect on the
fragile eco-system. Out of the net sown 143
million hectares, 83 million hectares is rainfed
which is 69 per cent of the total net sown area.
At the time lndia became independent, it had
about 50 million farms. This number had g;rown
to about 90 million farms by the early 1980s.
There are now about 100 million farms in India.
Today every fourth farmer in the world is lndian
and nearly half of the land of the country is
being utilized for crop production. !jeventy per
cent of the country's current population (nearly
960 million) depends upon the primary sector
of agriculture for its livelyhood. Thirty percent of
the Gross National Product (GNP) comes from
agriculture. Still the growth of agricultural
journalism is very poor in India.

2.

THE SEEDS O F
AGRICULTURAL IOURNALISM

The modem agricultural journalism was
started in the mid nineteenth century with the
publication of translations of three English books
on Weather, European agriculture and
Agricultural implements. This effort was the
result of a letter written on 30 December 1865
by Sir Syed Ahmad Khan-the famous founder
of Aligarh University-to Mr IH Princip-the
Collector of Aligarh. A scientific society was
established in 1865 and a wee&ly paper Nigath
Institute Gazette was started in 1866. This
encouraged people to write on agriculture.
Most of the books and periodicals were
published in Hindi, kngali and other lndian
languages. In 1929 the Imperial Council of
Agricultural Research was established on the
recommendation of the Royal Commission on
Agriculture. Among its mandate was 'to act as a
clearing house of information'. However the
modern publications in agriculture were started
as early as 1906 from the erstwhile imperial
Agricultural Research Institute, Pusa, Bihar. How
this premier institute was started is an interesting
story. The credit goes to Lord Curzon and to an
American Philanthropist, Henry Phipps. George
Nathaniel Curzon became the Viceroy of lndia

in 1898 at the aw of 39. He was M c ,
imaginative and extremely industrious. Cunon
had to deal with the famine of 18901900, a
year after he became Vicemy. All the western
part of lndia was hit by this awful famine. It was
the outcome of a draught in 1887 when the
Monsoon failed totally.
Mr 1E Scott, an American missionary wrote
about the JndEan f a d e in these words. 7be
misery is terrible. But still worse is the fearful
emaciation. L i g skeletons are on every side.
The b a r n lands of the Deccan, none too rich
at best of times, are fast being turned into tracts
of dismal, wn cracked, desert charred earth,
whose friable edges are tau@ by the wind and
sent flying in douds of pungent dust. No water
in the &, no water in the rivers. The central
horror of this famine lies in the fad that the
misery and torment of a water famine haw to
be endured together with a famine of food for
people and fodder for beasts. When the famine
was at its wust, in August, nearly two and a half
million people were on relief works (about a
fourth of the popubtion). All that part of the
Centra! Prwinces in the northern part of the
Deccan, between the N d d a and Godavari,
was dried up'.

The famine convinced Lord Curzon that the
Government of India must pay wgent attention
to agriculture. Curzon had a background of
farming. His father had an estate in Dertr/shre.
In 1895 he married Mary Victoria Leiter,
daughter of Mr Levi Leiter, a Chicago
millionaire. This link with America not only
provided him with a wife, but also h u & t him
in touch with another American miliinaire, Mr
Henry Phipps. A generous donation of £20,000
from Mr Phipps ma& it possible to establish
Imperial Agricultural Research Instibte (IARI) at
Pusa in erstwhile Oarbhanga district of Bihar.
fhe main buiiding was named as the Phipps
Laboratory. The grateful Indians nicknamed the
village PUSA, an acranym drawn from the
phrase, 'Phipps of USA'. This institute is still
famous as 'Pusa Institute', as atthough it was
shifted to New Delhi in the present premises
~ s
in 1934.
after it suffered a d i ~ r o earthquake

3.

RfSE AND FALL OF
AGRICULTURAL JOURNALISM

lARl is not only the nursery of the green
d h oC India, but it is ako the nursery of
green j w a l i s m in lndia In 1906 it started
publication of The Agridural journal of India
and The Memois of the Department of
&cYltue in h&. T)re journal &It
with
subjects connected with field and gaden crops,
economic plants and fruits, soils, mamwes,
methods of cultivation, irrigation, climatic
conditions, insect pests, fungal diseases,
cosperative credit, management of f m stock,
cattle breeding, cattle diseases, farm implements
and the lie. In the memdrs, scientific work
connected with agriculture including agricultural
chemistry economic botany, entdogy, phnt
pathology and baaeridogy found a place.
Separate series were i d for the major
M m s of sdence concerned and each attide
appeared as a separate memoir under the series
into which it fell.

Two new journals, one devoted to research
in agriculture and the other to animal husbanclry
were started by the Publications and
Information Division of the ICAR in 1931. These
were the Indian ) o d of AgnwItwal Sciences
and the Indian journal of Veterinary Sdences and
Animal Husbandry. The second one was
re-named as The India lwmI of Anhad
Sdences. Both continue to be published

lhe Agn'cvltural )oumal of lndia was
renamed as Agriculture and W o c k in India
After nine years of its publication as a bimonthly it was re-christened lndian Fanning in
1940. It was decided to give information in a
non-technical popular st+e in the journal. MI
FM De Mello, the editor of this journal gave it a
popular slant, but ensured quality in artides.
However, w4-m Dr MS Randhawa, the then
secretary, {CAR requested the them ViePresident of the I U I R Sir Herbert Stewart in
1945 to agree to the change Cn the cover
illustration which shoved a miserable dhoti&d
farmer driving a pair of bullock yoked to a
plough, he refused.
After Independence, the 'Imperial' gaw way
to 'Indian' and a need was fek for a journal in

CHSIDOC BuUain d Inf T c d n d , 1998,lWZ)

Hindi-the IinguaStanca d India, to promde
scientific farming. As a result Kheti was born in
1948. A new agricultural digest Krishi Chay4c.a
was started in 1973 and is now a regular
quarterly journal. Later, a horticultural quarterly,
Phal Phod was added. Both these new Hindi
farm perioc!icals were started on the inspiration
from Dr MS Swaminathan, the then Director
General of ICAR.
During the period many journals were born
and many expired. Among the new boms
mention may be made of Indian Horticulture
(born in October 1956), lndian loumal of
Agdcultwe Md Veterinary Education and Indian
Potato loumal (born in 1959), Agricdtud
Resea~h(born in 1961, died 1966), lndian
Livestock (born in 1963, died 1 %6), Pashu P .
(bom in 1963, died 1966). Among the
deceased was a Rice News Letter also. During
the financial stringency of 1966 a number of
journals issued by the ICAR and commodity
committees were thoughdessly discontinued or
merged.

At present, the ICAR is puMiing two
research joumals and two semi-technical
journals, two newletters, lCAR Reporter and
/CAR News in English and three semi-technical
journals in H i n u h e t i (monthly); Phd Phoo/
(Quarterly) and Krihi thyatada (Quarterly).
Besides, it has an ambitious programme of
publication of books, bulletins, monographs,
handbooks, pocketbooks, etc. and is among the
largest agricultural publishers of lndia with an
output of one publication every third day. It has
a copuMication programme also in
coilaboration with the international institutes.
The famous Rice Primer written by Dr BS
Vergara of IRR has been published in Hindi
under this programme.

With the establishment of the Directorate of
Extension under the contrd of Ministry of
Agriculture popular farm periodical like lntmsive
Fanning and Unnat Krishi, Home Science,
Gharani and the ~osamvadhanwere added in
sixties. Out of these the bst two were axed in
the name of economy.
With the birth of Agricultural Universities in
lndia new farm periodicals were started.

Agridtwal MWties at LwlMaMI H h *
labdpur, Patna, Ranchi, Fairaba& Coimbatore,
Hyderabad, etc. have started fanning periodids
and other publiitionr Some private p u b i i h ,
associations of agricultural and anknd scientists,
rural development and agricultural development
organisations, rural banks and nomgovemment
organisations have also entered farm journaiim.
In all there are about 250 farm periodicals all
arer Indii. A weekly newspaper in Hindi,
named Krishak lagat was started by a
farmgraduate in Hindi, Keral Kn'shakan in
Malayabm and Shetkari in Marathi are some of
the most popular journals.

However the fameporting in the press is
very poor. Except Hindu, Business Line, Business
Standard and Times of lndia there is no
newspaper worth its name having a regular
agricultural correspondent. The total space
devoted to agriculture in newspapers is not
even one per cent Only Hindu and Business
Line carries regular columns and pages every
week devoted to agriculture and The Hindu is
also bringing out an Yearbook on Agriculture,
every year, again inspired by Dr MS
Swarninathan to do so. A study has shown that
70 per cent of the agricultural news falls in the
category of informatiw news and opinion and
educative agricultural news got less space. The
only agricultural news service started by UNI is
running sluggishly for want of supporters. Only
the Science Popularisation Unit of DlPA of {CAR
is running a farm feature service in three
languages-Hindi,
Kannada and Assamese.
Earlier, it was functioning in ten languages.
Others were closed down. An attempt is being
made to strengthen it in the 9th fm year plan.

4.

INFORMATION
MANAGEMENT

The Estimates Committee of the Parliament
and the IndoUS Review Team recommended in
the early sixties that research information
services should be set up at the Council's
Headquarters. With this recommendation in
view, ICAR established in 1967 a Research
Project Unit at its Headquarters. Subsequently
in July 1974, Ministry of Agriculture designated
it as the National Input Centre for the

International Infamation System for Agricultural
Science & Technology (AGRIS) of FAO. The
Council then decided to rename it as the
Agriculturai Research Information Centre (ARIC)
in 1977. It was later on designated as the Input
Centre for the Current Asricultural Research
lnformation System (CARIS) of FA0 in 1990 and
the focal point for SAARC Agricultural
lnformation Centre (SAIC) in 1989. It has
already been working as a contad point of
CAB! for providing information for their
publication on List of ReseaKh Workers in
Agridural in the Commonwealth Countn'es.
Broad objectives of the ARlC are:

A central source of information on the
nature, location and status of current
research projects; an aid in analysis of ICAR
research programmes and assistance in the
observation of a uniform project system for
describing and reporting research activites
and systematic maintenance of records of
research projects by way of research
project file system.
2.

A safeguard against duplication of research
efforts and source material for research
coordination.

3.

Generation, analysis, integration and
diffusion of national and international
research information.

4.

Creation of bibliographical databases and
participation in the International
Information system like AGRIS, CARIS,
SAIC, CABI, etc.

5.

DATABASES AVAILABLE AT
ARlC

5.1

AGRIS Database

This database contains four million
biMiographical references (1975 1996) in hard
copy (Agrindex) as well as in computerised form
i.e. on compact disks (CD). The data is received
from FA0 in return to our being an input centre
of AGRIS for India. It is utilized for providing SDI
service to about 250 users annually all over the
country (10,000 references).

-

5.2

CAB1 Database

This database is available on the compact
disk for the period 1984-1986 and contains
about four lakh bibliographical references.
However, this database is currently under trial.
Full facility will be procured aher obtaining the
report of the users about the usefulness of the
database.

5.3

Ad hoc Scheme Database

A database on all the ad hoc research
schemes, under the Council's A.P. Cess Fund, is
available in hard copy for the period 1930 to
1983 and the computerised form from 1984 to
date. The computerised part of database
contains more than 1300 schemes sanctioned
during the last 10 years. The database is a useful
tool for avoiding the duplication of efforts, if
any, in the research already undertaken.

5.4

Research Project Files (RPF)

This database contains information about
7500
research
projects
of
ICAR
institutes/national research centres/project
directorates of ICAR and is an information
repository for reference at ARlC and for the
external visitors/users. These research project
files are available in hard copy.

5.5

Annual Reports

Annual reports of most of the ICAR
institutes/project directorates/nationaI research
centres and state agricultural universities are
avilable in hard copy for reference. The annual
report of an organisation contains information
about the major research activities, research
highlights, staff and budget details, etc. of that
particular organisation. This database is used for
satisfying the user needs about the particular
organisation.

5.6

Directories

Directory of research workers in lndia (1986)
and SAIC Directory of Agricultural Institutionsin
lndia are the two directories available in the
hard copy. First directory provides detailed
information about the research workers
engaged in agricultural sciences at various
locations in lndia while the second one contains

information about different institutions of India
undertakingagricultural research.

5.7

Databzse of AgricuItutal
Pedodicals Published in Indk

%is database pmdies information about
400 Indian agricultural periodicals published in
India. f i e database contains tide of periodicals,
frequency, mailing address, subscription cost,
name of editor, etc.

5.8 Database of SDI Service
Provided lo AgricuJtural Scientist
This database contains information a b u t
300 agricultural scientists. Database provides
the name of users, their address, area of
research and nwnber of references supplied to
individual user.

5.9

Database of Computer Facilities
Available in SAUs and lCAR
Institutes

%is database cantains information about
computer hardware facilities and number of
users avaiIaMe in different SAUs and \CAR
Institutions.

5.10 Database of FA0 Statistics
Tbis d a t b is available in CD and data of
statistics of FA0 upto 1994 are available,

5.1 1 Database of for Scientists
Visiting Abroad
Tbis database on deputation reports of
scientists visiting abroad has been created and
maintained in the computer system. Copies of
reports are available for consuitarion.

5.12 Database of Conferences,
Seminars, Symposia and
Workshop in Agriculture
This database contain informatian about the
conferences, seminars, symposia and workshop
in Agriculture,

6.

ARlC SERVICES

6.1 Indexing & Abstracting
7he agricultural information genesated at
different source is indexed for AGRlS and
CARIS databases of FAO. 8ase material for this
service includes articles from about 200 Indian
journals, books, monographs, annual reports
and annually 2000-3080 articles are indexed
and sent to F A 0 for worMwtde distribution of
information through ACRISCD, Agtindex,
Magnetic tapes, etc.

6.2

Document Delivery

Document delivery services ate prw'&d
fnee of cost to the researchers, students,
scholars etc. all over the country and those from
136 member countries of F A 0 participating into
ACRIS.

6.3

Xeroxing Services

In addition to giving xeroxing services to all
the sections/units of Publications I Information
Division of the Council, this service is also
available to the visitors and requesters to ARK
for satisfyingtheir information needs.

6.4

Reference and Reading Room
Facility

The Centre has a well furnished reading
room which is open to wety visitor for reading
and reference cuktiion purpose where all the
information sources at ARlC could be referred
to by him.

6.5 SDI Service
ARK provides selection dissemination of
information {SDI) services free of cost to all
agricultural scientists. 'These services are given
using the internationaldatabases (ACRlS & CAB
Abstracts) in agricultural artd allied sciences.
AGRlS database contains more than 3.0 million
bibliographical reference (1975 to January
1993) on compact disks (CD)whereas CAB)
database is available on trial basis for the period
1984-86 and contains about four lakh records.

6.6

Referral Services

Some of the requests reaching ARK require
expert guidance on a particular problem in
practical aspects of agriculture and allied fields.
Such requests are referred to the specialists in
agriculture spread over ICAR system and state
agricultural universities. This helps in satisfying
the need of special guidance to the needy
persons to solve their problems.

7.

ARlC PUBLICATIONS

7.1

Directory of Research Worker in

India
This Directory contains the name,
designation, qualifications and specialization of
scientist working in the ICAR research
institutes/laboratories/bureau/national research
centershoject
directoratesfiarious
other
research projects of the Council, state
agricultural universities and updated from time
to time, 1993-94 edition being in progress at

present

7.2

Directory of Confewnces,
Seminars, Symposia, Workshops
in Agriculture

The Directory was first published in 1988
and since then it is continuously being brought
out on half-yearly basis. It provides advance
information
to
the
scientific
community/organisations
about
the
forthcoming conferences, seminars, symposia,
workshops, meetings, melas, exhibitions, etc. in
agricultural and allied sciences so as to enable
the scientis&/researchers/stUdmts to participate
in these activities.

7.3

Indian NationJ Agricultural
Bibliography

The bibliography has four volumes (t to IV)
covering the period 1975-1984. It contains
about 40,000 bibliographical references
covered in AGRlS of FAO.

7.4

ICAR Research, Education and
Extension Institutions and
Projects in lndia

This publication contains a state-wise list of
location of ICAR Institute, projects and centres
concerned with the research, education and
extension in agricultural and allied subjects all
over the country. It was published in 1985 and
then revised in 1987.

7.5

Lists of Research Project of JCAR

ARK is maintaining the Psts of various kinds
of research projects which are conducted under
the financial support from the council. These
lists include ad hoc research schemes, All lndia
Coordinated Research Projects, Fomign Aided
Schemes, etc. in agricultural and allied sciences
which gave information about title, location,
name of the principal investigator, date of start,
data of termination, amount sanctioned, etc, of
all the project

8.

ARIC AS NATIONAL INPUT
CENTRE FOR AGRIS/CARIS

International Information System for
Agricultural Sciences & Tedrndogy (AGRIS) and
the Current Agricultural Research Information
System (CARIS) are the two bibliographical
databases of FAO, Rome. AGRIS comprises of
the research articles published in the core
agricultural research journals of its 156 member
countries. Ministry of Agriculture, Govt of lndia
designated A R K as the Nationai lnput Centre
for AGRlS in July 1974. Since then, ARlC is
scanning and indexing Indian journals in
agriculture and providing input to AGRlS and in
return getting Agrir~dex, AGRISCD as
information supply products. Similady CARIS
contains the records of on-going research
projects in agricultural and allied science. In
1990, ARK was designated as the Nationd
lnput Centre of India for CARIS too.

9.

ARIC AS FOCAL POlNT FOR

SAlC
SAARC Agricultural Information Centre
(SAIC) is working as the source of agricultural

information about the seven member countries
of South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation (SAARC). ARlC has been identifed
as focal point for India by the Governing Body
of SAlC in its meeting held at Dhaka from 4-5
December 1988. ARlC is responsible for
colecbing, compiling, processing and updating
the lndian infortnation at national level. Similarly
information from remaining six member
countries also reaches to SAlC headquarters at

Dhaka.
ARlC has collected the Indian information
and supplied the same to Dhaka for following
projects of SAIC:
@+ Directoryof Agricultural Institutionsin SAARC

Region
$

Directory of on-going Research Projects in
SAARC Region

+ Directory

of Agricultural Scientists &
Technologist in SAARC Region

+B Directory of Agricultural Periodicalspublished

in SAARC counh.ies
@ Directory of Improved Farm Implements

currently used in SAARC countries.

10. ARlC MODERNlSATION IN
THE 8TH PLAN
The Pubtications & Information Division
during the 8th Plan was reorganised to reflect
the challenges of the 21st century. Although the
Publication and Information Division has been
largest publisher of Agricultural information in
the country, the information revolution had
by-passed it. A large number of changes have
taken place in the scenario with the growth of
30 agricultural universities, and other traditional
universities taking on problems relating to
environment and bio-technology and integrated
eco system problems. There has been an
information
explosion.
The
division
unfortunately had not kept pace with the
progress made in this field. It has essentially
remained sub serviant to print media. During
the 8th Plan, it was realised that division be
upgraded to the Directorate which should take
up the work connected with documentation
and selective dissemination with the ICAR-SAUs

system This called for quick upgradation and
integration of services. This has been achieved
during the 8th Plan A Directorate of
lnformation and Publications on Agriculture
(DIPA) has been established at the ICAR
Headquarters at a cost of Rs.359 lakhs with the
revised scientific manpower and a mandate. It
has its own facilities for collection, processing,
storage, retrieval and dissemination of
information on agriculture and allied sciences. A
revolving fund scheme for converting this
Directorate into a profit centre is also under
consideration of the Council. In the nutshdl the
8th plan has completely revolutionalised the
publication and information system of the ICAR.
A project is being discussed with CABI, UK for
publication both in print as well electronically of
their abstracting journals, bibliigraphy and
several text books. These are likefy to be
initiated in the 9th Plan. A total of 770
publications in English, 60 in Hindi were
broughtout during the 8th Plan. In addition to
the printed material broughtout during the Vlll
plan facilities were created to develop and
produce modem information product for
electronic media such as electronic software,
cassettes, films, compact discs and multimedia
products.
A new unit of electronic media was added to
shoulder the responsibility of the electronic
products. Another unit on training and research
in agricultural communication was also added.
A revolving fund scheme was initiated for
increasing the sales and using the income to
further the business. During the 8th Plan period
a revenue of about Rs 100 takhs (Rupee one
crore) was generated through sale of /CAR
publications and through selling the space in
1CAR periodicals. Two new periodicals namely
ICAR News and IC%R Reporter were also added
to the already existing 7 periodicals during the
8th Plan.

11. ARIC-PROPOSALS IN 9TH
PLAN
As most of the facilities were created
towards the fag end of the 8th plan, more
fruitful results are expected during the Ninth
Plan period when the DIPA will be in full swing

and start feeding the rural and agricultural
channel of GRAMSAT/Educational Satellite.
In the next five years, 30 undergraduate and
40 post graduate text books are planned. This
however will be on purely commercial basis and
will be self sustaining.
A new research and training wing w l l be
added to the Directorate so that training is given
to the agricultural scientists in agricultural
journalism,
book publishing information
services and updating their knowledge in latest
agricultural communication technology. This wiU
be an inhouse training and research aimed at
production of video cassettes and multimedia
methodology to be used for agricultural and
allied sciences technology.
A new scheme on production of pocket
books on successful technologies is also being
introduced in English and Hindi.

Publication of a monthly wall news paper on
agricultural research for distribution in
Panchayats in f i languages has also been
proposed. The positives will be supplied to the
willing newspapers also.
An encyclopaedia of Agriculture will be
pubiished during the 9th plan in English and
Hindi. Besides about 150 video films will be
produced on proven technologies. Most of the
journals of ICAR will be made available on
CDROM induding some selected bodies. The
electronic publishing unit and the electronic
media unit are being'supportedby the National
Agricultural Technology Project (NATP) of the
World Bank which is going to be a very
important initiative of refinement, evaluation
and transfer of agricultural technologies from
laboratory to land.
There are no training facilities in farm
journalism except ill-planned, understaffed
graduate and post-graduate courses at a few
agricultural universities. Out of the 129 editors
of farm-journals surveyed only 13 had training in
journalism. Sixty-two per cent of the editors in
government owned farm periodicals had no
rural background. It is only the Directorate of
Information and Publications of the lndian
Council of Agricultural Research which was
highly qualified scientific staff in its Endish and
Df SlDOC Bulktin of Inf Tectmd, 1 9961t ( 2 )

Hindi editorial units. However, they are not
given pay and perks equal to the scientistz and
new generation is reluctant to malting
farmjournalism as a career. Unless efforts are
made to raise the status of the agricultural
journalists in India following the example of the
Council of Scieniific and Industrial Research of
lndia (CSIR), ICMR, DRDO and other scientific
organisations, at par with scientists, the future of
Agricultural journalism in lndia is doomed.
To raise the quality of agricultural jownalisrn
in India, it has been proposed in the ninth five
year plan to further strengthen the Directorate
of Information and Publications of Agriculture
(DIPA) of ICAR and to elevate it to the status of
a 'National Institute for Communication of
Agricultural Sciences (NICAS)'. The CSIR has
already done it in the 8th Pbn by raising the
status of the WD into that of NISCOM-National
Institute of Science Communication. A good
amount of agricultural research funds should be
earmarked
to
run
the
agricultural
communication activities. It is required even at
the International level. An 'International Institute
for Agricultural Communication' should be
promoted
to
provide
leadership
in
communication of agricultural sciences globally.
The agricultura) journalists of the developing
countries require training in latest technologies
of communication. They must be exposed to
the new revolution in electronic media. Almost
80 per cent agricultural technologies are still
awaiting to be transferred to the land from
laboratories. Who will do it? Who will help the
farmers by providing latest information to fight
the droughts and famines. The poor and hungry
world of today and tomorrow will not k able to
sustain without the wwldrride seen armies of
agricultural journalists. Let us resolve to build,
promote and support them everywhere.

FURTHER READINGS
1.

Randhawa, MS. A History of Agriculture in
India. (4 Vot), Indian Council of Agricultural
Research, New Delhi, 1983.

2.

Ostman, Ronald E (Ed). Communication in
Indian Agriculture. Saga Publications lndia
?vt Ltd., New Ddhi, 1989.

3.

Swarninathan, MS. The Green Rdution

6.

and Small Farm Agriculture: Annual Report,
4.

CIMMYT, Msdco, 1990.
Scott, JE. Farninc Land: Observations in
India during the Great drought of
18991904. (Quoted in A History of the
Indian Council of Agricultural Research by

7.

MS Rarmlhawa).
5.

Sidhu, OK, Tyagi, KC and Mishra, SP.
Content and Coverage of Agriculture and
Dairy News in regional and National
D a i k Interaction, 1983,l. 77-90.

8.

Sharrna, RD. Krishnetr; The Agricultural
lnfonnation Network for India, W i y for
Information Science, PID buildins New
Delhi, 1989.
Swaminathan, MS. Report of the Working
Group on Agricultural Research and
Education for the Fortnubtion of the Eighth
Plan. Planning Commission, ICAR, New
Delhi, 1989.
Bhatt, VS. lnformation Resources in
Agricultural Research, In 40 years of
Agricultural Research in India. ICAR, New
Delhi, 1989. p.27282.

