DESlDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vo1.18, No.3, May 1998, pp. 7-1 0
Q 1998, DESlDOC

Marketing in the Library & Information Context
Roshan Raina*
Abstract
The paper justifies the absorption of marketing approaches in the information
context as a means to help the libraries and information centres (LICs)
achieve their basic objective of providing right information to the right user at
the right time and at a right cost. It also advocates that by bringing in
marketing orientation in the LICs, librarians and information managers (LIMs)
will ensure: (i) increased information awareness or consciousness among their
clientele; (ii) optimal utility of the rich learning resources base of their LICs;
and (iii) sustained development of their LICs, through revenue generation.

1.

MARKETING ORIENTATION

Marketing aims at: (i) identification of the
client base; (ii) determination of the needs,
wants, and demands of this client base; and (iii)
fulfilment of the same through designing and
delivering appropriate products and/or services,
more effectively than competitors. The main
focus of the concept, thus, is the clientele, and
the goal is clientele satisfaction. A marketing
exercise in the library and information context
should be carried out with an aim to integrate
library goals and objectives with organisational
goals and objectives. These goals and objectives
describe the desired future of the organisation
and its library. The libraries will' thrive better if
their goals and objectives support the
organisational goals and objectives.

An efficient marketing audit which considers
the mission, goals, and objectives of a library
vis-a-visits organisation leads to better examination
of the librarfs activities, its needs and capabilities.
Librarian
Indian Institute of Management
Prabandh Nagar, Off Sitapur Road
Lucknow 2260 13.

Library i s traditionally a non-profit organisation and only recently such organisations have
become aware of the need to market their
products and services. Library and information
products and services (LIPS) are now getting
recognised as saleable and there is a growing
market for these. Like all other saleable products,
LlPS have to be what the clientele want and in a
form that they can be easily used. The only
difference in LlPS and the other saleable
products is that the former are self-regenerating.
In other words, even after having being
given/sold once, both giver as well as receiver
retain it and the process goes on and on. As
such, one time buyer of LlPS can become
competitor of the one-time seller, in cases.
Given the intangible nature of the
information, it is rather difficult to sell LIPS. LlPS
will, however, sell well if the generators create a
high level of confidence among the clientele in
terms of the: i) benefits; ii) credibility; and iii)
reliability of their LIPS. Also, since the value of
information varies from clientele to clientele as
well as from circumstance to circumstance, right
information to the right user at the right time rs
worth a fortune. The role of information
providers has, therefore, to be more aggressive.
7

In the field of marketing of LIPS, the
providers can only promise a certain amount of
clientele satisfaction: User surveys are essential
to give feedback at regular intervals concerning
the expectations of the clientele. Their
involvement as 'friends of the libiary', and as
'advisory bodies' can reveal' a feedback that
would result in better LIPS.
In other words, feedback becomes useful in
modifying LIPS to meet the changing needs of
the clientele.

1.1

The Challenge

The profession of librarianship has come off
age. Cone are the days when the profession and
the professionals used to do just what they were
asked to do. The profession today, is being
geared to aim at something beyond that.
Something beyond that-in the context of library
and information centres (LICsjmeans that the
librarians and information managers (LIMs) will
have to be more pro-active.They have to:
look for needs, wants and demands of their
clientele;

(1)

(ii) design, develop and provide information
products and services tailored to meet
such needs, wants and demands; and
(iii) extend/reach-out to the clientele with the
information rather than wait for them to
ask for the same.

NEEDS FOR MARKETING

2.

The reasons for this shiftaver are several and
include the following:

2.1

Information for Development

The present age is rightly characterised as

the age of information. The fact that information
is a key resource for the economic,
smio-cultural and political development of a
nation is gaining increasing acceptance. This
being so, availability of right information at right
time and at right cost becomes all the more
critical. It means that LlMs will have to chip in,
accept the challenge and make it happen by
playing a more pro-active role. LlMs will have to
appreciate that just having information and
storing it will serve no purpose unless it is put to
effective use by those who need it i.e., the LlMs

will have to bring the user and information
closer.

2.2 Information Technology
lnformation Technology (IT) has ushered in a
variety of media that can help LlMs in efficient
and effective acquisition, organisation and
dissemination of information. Computers and
CD-ROMs have found increasing acceptance in
LICs; multimedia has shown mu'kh potential for
LICs; and information networks have broken
down time and space barriers. By virtue of
using a variety of IT tools and techniques, LlCs
are now able to generate various kinds of
information products and services in addition to
performing the routine tasks. However, it is a
little unfortunate that these remain largely
underutilised, or even in cases, wholly
unutilised. The reasons cited are several and
include the following:
(i)

efforts in identifying and reaching out the
target clientele are inadequate;

(ii) level of information awareness or
consciousness is still low among the
users and there is a need to raise it further;
(iii) information products and services are
'generator' driven rathei than 'user' driven
and in that there remains a 'linkage gap'
between the generators and users of such
products and services.
In keeping with this scenario, LlMs have, in
all earnestness, started taking active interest in
building a strong image for their UCs as well as
in the marketing of their products and services.
This approach is finding increasing acceptance
among the library authorities as well as library
users who are now, all the time, subjected to
the pressures exerted by several factors.

2.3

Increasing Resource Constraints

LlMs are also deluged with advice as to how
to acquire and organise learning resources and
satisfy the complex and ever increasing
information needs of their users. This situation
gets further compounded when the question of
a resource constrained regime comes into the
picture, even in the context of LICs. LICs, one
time very well accepted as cost centres to cater
to the information needs of their respective
(mostly internal) clientele, are now looked upon
DESILIOC Bulletin of lnf Technd 1 998, 18(3)

as out-reaching centres and, thereby, revenue
generating ones also.

Public funding
being questioned.

2.4

3.

Inadequate Resource Utilisation

UCs have, over a period of time, build rich
learning resource materials. These remain
largely underutilised as their use is generally
limited to the clientele of the organisation of
which the LIC is a part. In such a scenario, while
on the one hand, there is an increasing demand
for availability of right information, and on the
other, it is not possible for everyone to go in for
huge investments in terms of developing
appropriate information infrastructure. Hence
out-reaching is the solution to bridge this gap
and it is the absorption of marketing approach
which can make it happen.
LlMs will have to take up the challenge of
looking out for ways and means to increase
their client base in the external sectors and
open up their resources, facilities and services
to meet the information needs of the clientele
in those sectors, of course, without, in any way,
jeopardising the interests of the internal
clientele. For this out-reaching measure to be a
success, LlMs will have to fine-tune their
resource development and utilisation policies to
meet this challenge.

2.5

Increasing Cost of Information
and IT

Information is becoming increasingly
expensive and so is its packaging and
repackaging. Value addition of the information
makes it wen more expensive. There is a
further rise in the cost of information when IT
(acquisition and upgradation) is to play its role
in designing and delivering information services
and products.

2.6

Decreasing Public Sponsorship

The age-old concept of certain social
services like health, education, justice, etc.
being made available free of cost, is becoming
irrelevant as the time goes by. This is true with
library and information services also. The
institutions engaged in all such services are
being asked to become self-sufficient, if they are
to survive in cost conscious and competition
oriented social and' environmental setups.
DESlDOC Bulletin oilnf TechoI, 1998,18(3)

for

such

purposes

is

FACTORS INHIBITING
MARKETING ORIENTATION

Though there can not be any two opinions
as to whether marketing orientation in LlCs is
required or not, there are some of the following
inhibiting factors that stand in the way:

3.1

Misunderstanding

LlMs still feel that provision of library and
information services is a social responsibility
and adopting marketing approach to them
means only commercialisation, publicity
or public relations.

3.2

Attitude

LlMs have been expressing satisfaction
when they have been able to provide the
information to the client as per his/her specific
request. Attempting something beyond that is
what is required in case the LlMs intend
bringing marketing orientation in their LICs. This
means a major shift in approach of the LlMs is
required for the purpose.

3.3

LIC Versus Parent Organisation

Since LlCs generally exist in relation to their
parent bodies, they are viewed as a subsystems
of the main system. Hence marketing will find
its way in the sub-system only when there is
marketing orientation in the main system itself.
Within the sub-system itself, the marketing
approach has to be accepted by all involved
rather than leaving it to be the domain of only
public relations staff like circulation and
refer~nce.It will yield more encouraging results
if everyone involved in the subsystem i s
groomed to appreciate the client orientation.

3.4

Systems and Procedures

LIMs, because of various well known
reasons like physical verification, audit, etc.,
particularly in our country, have been more
concerned with storage and security aspects of
the information rather than its use. The
methods, systems and procedures followed in
the UCs are therefore, more biased towards this
aspect rather than the use or user aspect. This

also has to be changed. Systems and
procedures should lay more emphasis on the
use and the user o i information rather than on
other aspects.

3.5

Products and Concept of Cost
Free Services

The concept that information should be
made available free has to go as it costs quite a
bit to acquire, organise and retrieve it. In fact, in
view of the utility of information, the thinking
should change to the one where the client
should be happy to pay for it.
Since LlCs are service centres, LlMs will
have to adopt service marketing approach for
bringing in marketing orientation in their
respective set-ups. To achieve this, they
will have to:
(i)

be conscious and responsive to the
mission/mandate o f the parent
organisation of which their LIC is a part;

(viii)ensure that the reputation of information
services
and
products offered
matches with the organisational reputation;
(ix) redesign and redevelop systems and
procedures to have client orientation
in-built in them; and
(x) develop staff to understand and be
responsive to client needs.

4.

CONCLUSION

In sum,. a change-over, as advocated above,
in the LIC context, would call for:
(i)

training and retraining of the library and
information professionals in newer ways of
identifying and undeistanding the user and
his/her requirements;

(ii) sensitising top management to marketing
orientation/approaches; and
(iii) constant interaction between the user,
prdducer and provider of information.

FURTHER READING

(ii) identify the market i.e., the client base in
internal as well as external environment by
following
time-tested
marketing
strategy/research methods;

1.

lain, Abhinandan K. et a/. Marketing of
information products and services.
Ahmedabad, IIMA, 1995.

(iii) identify the needs, wants and demands of
the clients;

2.

Raina, Roshan. Marketing of library and
information products and services.
University News, 1995, 33(33), 8.9.

3.

Rao, S. Sreenivas. Why marketing for
librarians and managers of information
products and services. Paper Presented in
the Workshop on Marketing Manual for
Librarians and Information Managers.
15-18 August, 1996, IIM, Ahmedabad.

(iv) be conscious
competitors;

and

aware

of

the

(v) further develop resources and facilities by
fine-tuning
their
resource
development policies;
(vi) identify, design, package and promote
tailormade services and products to
meet the needs of the clients satisfactorily;
(vii) price the services and products to suit the
pocket of the ctient;

10

DESfDOC Buktin of lnf T h d , 1998, 18(3)

