DESlDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vo1.18, No.3, May 1998, pp. 11-19
Q 1998, DESIDOC

Marketing M i x in the Context of Library & Information
Products & Services
M Janakiraman*
Abstract
Marketing mix paradigm has emerged as one of the dominant frameworks
in the discipline of marketing, both in its academic as well as practical
approach, over the past half a century. The four mix elements, namely
product, place, price, and promotion have emerged as the main set of
marketing tools for planning and strategy formulation. Recently three more
elements-people, physical evidence, and process-have been proposed as
additional mix elements for marketing services. Application of these seven
elements in the library and information context has been explored in the
present paper. Viewing of the mix elements from the consumer's point of
view is suggested. To facilitate this, introduction of 'seven Cs', namely
consumer needs/wants, convenience for the consumer, cost to the
consumer, communication with the consumer, company employees,
concrete evicfence, and course of action, is proposed.

1.

GENESIS AND EVOLUTION
OF MARKETING MIX

Marketing discipline has developed into an
essential business function in the past forty
years. During this period, concepts and insights
have been applied not only for consumer goods
and services but also have been extended to
non-profit organisations, social development
problems and so on.
American Marketing
Association (AMA) has defined marketing
management as the process of planning and
executing the conception, pricing, promotion
and distribution of ideas, goods and services to
create exchange that satisfy individual or
organisational objectives'. Another commonly
used definition is 'marketing is a social and
managerial process by which individuals and

* Indian Institute of Management
Lucknow - 226 0 13
Email:jrama~hotmail.com

DESIDOC Bulktin of Inf Technol,1998,18(3)

groups obtain what they need and want
through creating and exchanging products and
value with other^.'^ It is interesting to note that
both the definitions explain marketing as a
process related to an exchange and marketing
management is the set of activities that facilitate
this exchange.
The use of apt and colourful term 'marketing
mix' was started by Neil H Borden in 1964.'
Borden, in fact derived the term 'marketing mix'
from his associate, James Culliton, who
depicted marketing executive as a 'decider', an
'artist', and a 'mixer of ingredients', who
prepares plans to satisfy the target customer
o w r and above the competitors. He may
choose or adapt the recipe of others, or
develop his own as he goes along. He may
innovate or experiment with ingredients that no
one has tried. Borden liked the idea of calling
marketer as a 'mixer of ingredients'. What the
marketing executive concocted was nothing but
simply marketing mix.
11

Culliton
studied
different
types
of
organisations to understand the nature of
relationship between marketing costs and
performance.' He concluded that the forces
faced by different organisations varied widely,
and accordingly the marketing programmes
differed widely. The logical conclusion is that
the marketing manager can have a variety of
marketing mixes, and he can develop a
marketing plan which incorporates mix
elements as well as the market forces. It is the
problem raised by these market forces that
leads marketing managers to exercise their
judgement in devising mixes or programmes
which they consider as profitable business
operations.There are three important sets of
elements that need to be understood for
deciding the proper mix or programmes
judicially, They are:
(i)

elements of the marketing programme;

(ii) forces that have a bearing on the marketing
operation of an organisation and to which
the marketer decides the mix or
programmes that succeed in the market;
and
(iii) organisation-especially its resources, and
objectives.
(Table 1 and table 2 provide a set of
Borden's marketing mix elements) The industry
consists of many players and the marketer is
representing only one of them. It is competing
with other organisations in many respects.

McCarthy has condensed Borden's twelve
elements into four elements, namely product,
price, promotion, and place (distribution).'
Over a period of time, these four elements have
been referred to as 'four Ps' and became
synonymous
with
marketing
elements.
McCarthy defined marketing strategy with the
following
two
integrated,
but
distinct
components:

1 . Target market: more or less homogenous
set of consumers with whom the
organisation is attempting to establish
exchange relationship.

2.

Marketing mix: the variables on which the
organisation has control and are used in
different combinations/mixes to satisfy the
target market. A typical marketing mix
consists of product or service offerings at d
price, targeting a customer segment In
certain place and a set of modalities to
reach the target customer, and promotion
to tell the potential customers about the
availability of the offering.

The relationship has been pictorially
depicted in figure 1. The whole exercise has to
be
carried
out
in
the
context
of
macroenvironmental variables which are
beyond the control of the decision makers.
These are: political, legal, technological.
economic, social and cultural. The next step is
to decide the target market segment, der~vea
set of feasible marketing mix alternatives and
evaluate the same against the organisational

Table 1: Market Forces Bearing on the Marketing Mix
1.

Consumers' Buying Behaviour-The
habits, life style, purchasing power

2.

The Trade's Behaviour-wholesalers' and retailers' behaviour, as influenced by--their
motivations, structure, practices, and attitudes

3.

Competitors' Position and Behaviour--Industry structure and the firm's relation t h e r e t ~ i z e ,
strength, number of competitors, degree of industry-concentration. Supply and demand
positions, competitve product offerings to consumers, trends in technological impact on the
company products and processes

4.

Governmental Behaviour Regulations on the markets, products, advertising, pricing,
competitions and so on

factors that determined motivation in purchasing, buying

-

Source: Adapted from N Eorden, The Concept of Marketing Mix, lournal of Advertising Research, 1964, 5

12

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1998.18(3)

Table 2: Elements o f the Marketing Mix
1.

Product Planning Product lines to be offered - qualities, design, etc., Markets to sell: whom,
where, when, and in what quantity, New product policy-research and
development program

2.

Branding

Trade marks, Brand policy individualised or family brand, Sale under private

3.

Packaging

Label, package design

4.

Servicing

Providing service, like installation, after sales service, etc

5.

Channels of
Distribution

Channels to use between plant and consumer

6.

Physical Handling Warehousing, Transportation, Inventories

7.

Pricing

Price level to adopt, Specific prices to adopt, price policy, margins to adopt for Corporate image desired, C h a n d mix for advertising

8.

Advertising

Amount to spend on advertising, Copy playform to adopt, Product image
desired, Corporate image desired, Channd mix for advertising

9.

Romotiom

Sampling, trade promotion, gifts

-

lo. Display
11. Personal Selling

Importance for personal selling and the methods to be used

12. Fact Finding and
Analysis

Setting up a marketing information system

Source : Adapted from N Bonden. The Concept of Marketing Mi.Journalof Advertising Research, 1964, 4. The original order

has been changed to bring the elements together as used in McCarthy's 'four Ps' framework.

objectives, resources, capabilities, and so on.
This includes comparison and finding out of
better offeiings to the consumers over and
above the competitors.
Zeitharnl and Bitner argue that 'four Ps' are
inadequate for service marketing context. The
main contention is that. usually services are
produced and consumed simultaneously.
Service delivery personnel of the organisation
and customers frequently encounter each other.
Further due to intangible nature of services,
customers took for additional clues for
understanding the nature of service experience.
These things logically lead to the conclusion
that communication has a major impact in the
service experience. The traditional 'four Ps'
framework needs to be expanded by adding
three more elements which can be controlled
by the service organisation for satisfying the
custorne~;The additional service marketing mix
elements are: people, physical evidence and
process. In the following sections all these
'seven Ps' are described and elaborated in the
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/, 1998,18(3)

context of marketing of Library and Information
Products and Services (LIPS) (Table 3).

2.

PRODUCT4onsumer Needs
and Wants

Products can be anything offered by the
marketer to the customers for attention,
acquisition, use or consumption that would
lead to the satisfaction of want or need.
Hence, product in a broader sense includes
physical goods and services-may be a person
or a place, or an organisation, or an idea, and
so on.
Hence, product in a LIPS context might
include physical goods, such as books,
catalogues, .compact
disks,
microforms,
audiojvideo cassettes, periodicals, etc. Services
can include provision of a photocopy of a
document, information searching, indexing,
reference service, document issue and return,
etc. A product can be a person, like Kishore
Kurnar or Michael Jackson as their concerts or
records can be marketed. We can look at
13

Figure 1: Relationship between target market and marketing mix variables.
places as products in the tourism business.
Hence, product in a broad term refers to
anything that can be marketed, like physical
goods, services, persons, places, organisations,
or ideas.
Kotler recommends that, while designing a
product, the marketer has to consider product
at three levels (Figure 2).' ~t the fundamental
level it is the core benefit, which satisfies the
basic want or need of the customer. In real
terms, every product embodies a want
satisfying service. In a library, the core product
is the information content of the books. If we
try to answer the question why one borrows a
book, it would guide us to the core library
product. In case of literary books it is the
exciting experience, in chemistry handbook it
would be the know-how of chemical synthesis,
and in a library catalogue it is the guidance for
reaching (a destination or a reference for) a
book. Theodore Levitt clarified the meaning of
core product by giving an example, 'p'-'rchasing
agents do not buy quarter inch drills.
quarterinch holes'.' It is clear from the example

that the
benefit is
product and it
needs to be
the consumer
perspective- The res~Onsibilit~
marketing
manager is to sell the benefits to satisfy the
wants and needs of the consumers.
The second level of product which needs
consideration of managers is tangible product.
14

Books, audio cassettes, video cassettes, micro
films, floppies, compact disks are all tangible
products. The immediate question is 'what
about services which are intangible?'. In fact,
there is no totally tangible product and totally
intangible service, a product comes with a
bundle of services and the physical product,
itself. They exist On a ~ 0 t l t i n u ~ mor
. example,
a cubicle in a library is a physical entity but is
WIeant for a service of providing privacy while
reading and writing.
On the other hand, if you consider an m a i l
service provider, like VSNL, Telnet, RPG Sprint
or Hotmail, these are intangible. What one can
see is some screen frames, but they provide the
electronic connectivity. Usually tangible
products exhibit five characteristics, viz. quality
level, features, styling, a brand name, and
packaging.
Third level of product is expected product
.,i the set of attributes of the productnormally
a consumer expects. In a photocopying service,
a wrinkle free and a clear photocopy on a
,,lainsheetmay be an expected product. lnan
institutional library, the collection is expected to
have a focus on the institutional objectives and
the areas of interest. The fourth level of product
is augmented product,
refers to the
attributes that meet the desires of the consumer
beyond their expectation.
Provision of a
DESIDOC Bulletin of lnf Technol, 1 998,18(3)

Table 3: Extended Marketing Mix Elements for Services
Product

Place

Price

Promotion

Physical
good

Channels

Consumer
price

Advertising Company
employee

Servuces

Reach

Trade price Communica Recruitment
tion
Channels

Equipments

Activity flow

Features

Storage

Discount

Sale
promotion

Selection

Aesthetics

Consumer
involvement

Credit
policy

Personal
selling

Training

Functionality

Publicity

Culture

Layout

Accessiries Logistics
Warrenty

Transportation Payment
policy

Brands

Inventory

Packages

Location of
Outlets

People

Physical
Evidence

Process

Interior design Procedures

Attitude

Pack size
Design
Source: V A Zeithaml, and M J Bitner. Services Marketing. McGraw-HillCo, New York, 1996, p. 25.

photocopy facility for the readers or installing
an online access catalogue are some examples.
In most of the cases
augmentation
differentiates the products from those offered
by the competitors. Fifth levelis potential
product which includes the augmentations and
transformations that can happen in the product
offerings in the future. To be successful over a
period of time, organisation must continuously
monitoring
develop product by R&D,
competitive offerings, technological changes,
market dynamics, and so on.

3.

PLACUonvenience to the
Consumers

Inthe *arketing mix elements#
dacerefers
to the creation of special utility to the
It
management Of
distribution channel, physical distribution of
products and logistics. In most of the services,
both production and consumption are
inseparable, so service providers must either be
present themselves when the service is
delivered to the customer or find alternative

ways to deliver without affecting. the quality of
service. Services may be transportable,
depending on the degree to which the service
components are separated from their
production- For example, an electronic data
can be accessed and used anywhere
throughout the world, provided there is a
network connectivity. On the other
a
lending library is location-bounded physically,
and branch libraries hsve to be located at
different places to ddiver the service. Some
information services are distributed through
franchises, for example m a i l service of Sprint

is delivered through RPC-Sprint.
When comparing services with products in
the context of distribution channels, the main
difference is that the channels for services are
almost
direct.
~h~ primary
functions
of
distribution channel members are, stocking and
taking ownership of goods. ina
context
the final
benefit isintangible.
Further, service products are perishable. For
example, in a library, if the books are on the
stacks without borrowers, the unutilised

Figure 2: Levels for designing a product
time--may be days or months without readers
can not be regained. The role played by the
intermediaries gain importance because they
have to perform duties on behalf of the
company without any deviation from the
quality standards set 'by the company. Hence,
the distribution for services are more complex
than physical goods.

4. P R I C M o s t to the Consumers
Price has various names in the society; fare
for taxi, train trave\; tuition fee for education,
honorarium for a lecture, rent for a house, wage
for a worker. From the customer point of view it
is cost and is one of the major deterrent of
consumption of the product. It is important to
note that price is the only element in the
marketing mix that generates revenue, and all
other elements contribute towards cost for the
organisation.
Some of the common decisions faced by the
marketers are how to set prices for a new
product, how to adopt prices over time and
space to match the environmental forces, and
how to act and respond in a competitive
environment. The common basis used for
pricing are primarily based on the pricing
objectives set by the manager. The pricing
objectives may vary from maximising current
16

profits,
maximising
current
revenues,
maximising sales growth, market skimming,
establishing product quality leadership, and so
on.

-

One of the problems associated with pricing
services is the difficulty in defining the service
purchased. To overcome this difficulty, most of
the services are priced based on the quantity of
inputs rather than the service output. For
example, professional services, such as
management consulting, architecture and
tutoring are priced on hourly basis, consulting
doctors charge based on number of visits.
Another problem associated with service
pricing is related to the difficulties in estimating
the cost of service, especially where multiple
services are provided by the organisations.
Public service or non-profit orientation of
the libraries also pose difficulties in pricing of
their services mainly because of problems in
defining pricing objectives.
Very often
trade-offs may be involved in pricing objectives
and
organisational
objectives.
Two
compulsions really force the manager in the
non-profit organisation to consider pricing as a
strategic element. These are: (i) consumers
wouldn't realise and recognise the value of the
product/service unless they pay for the service;
and (ii)more and more organisations are asked
DESlooC Bulktin d lnf Techd, 1998,18(3)

by the government to become financially
self-supporting. Hence, pricing has a crucial
role to play in the context of UPS in the future.

tion with the Consumers
One of the preconditions for exchange to
materialise i s communication between the
players. The marketer has the necessity and
responsibility to communicate with the clientele
of the organisations about the following:
(i) products and services it can deliver;
(ii) quality of products;
(iii) what benefits the products/services can
provide to the consumers; and
(iv) persuading the potential consumers to use
the products/services of the organisation.
Managers use variety of promotion mix,
which are categorised into four main tasks'
namely:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

advertising;
sales promotion;
publicity; and
personal selling
(Table 4 provides a list of examples for
promotion mix elements).

Most of the LIPS are highly intangible and
the experience of the user is the prime
motivator. The difficulties in conveying the
intangible benefits . to the consumers pose
problems in designing promotion strategies.

Normally libraries are not involved in promotion
activities directly, but they use 'publicity' and
'word of mouth references' by the existing usen
for expansion of their services.
However some leading libraries, for example
ELOOR Lending Libraries, Chennai frequently
advertise their services in newspapers with a
view to bring in awareness among the target
audience. On the other hand, the database
products marketer like Center for Monitoring
Indian Economy (CMIE) use demonstration (of
its database packages) as its publicity
mechanism as well as they promote sales by
providing free trials.
In services, the quality perception among
the consumer is created by the assurances and
promises. Marketing communication mix plays
a crucial role in the formation of consumer
expectations.
Hence, it is important to integrate
communication strategies with the service
delivery.

6. PEOPLE-Company

Employees

The front-line employees and the personnel
supporting them from back stage have
considerable influence on the success of
service organisation. 'People' in the marketing
mix elements refer to 'all of human actors who
play a part in service delivery and thus
influence the buyer's perception; namely the
firm's personnel, the customer, and other

Table 4: List of Communication and Promotion Tools
Advertising

Sales Promotion

Publicity

Personal Selling

Print advertisements

Sampling

Press releases

Sales presentation

Radio jingles

Discount coupons

Seminars

Sales representatives

Pack covers

Gifts

Annual reports

Presentations in fairs

Inserts

Rebates

Community relation

Movies

Demonstrations

House magazines
Booklets
Logo and Trade marks
Source: P Kotler. Marketing Management: Analysis, Planning, Implementation, and Control. Prentiie-Hall of India, New Oelhi,
1997, p. 605.
DES/DoC&r/ku'n of Inf T+l,

1998,18(3)

17

customers in the service environment'. Many
times the person with whom the consumer is
having an encounter with the organisation is the
front-line employee, providing the service, i.e.,
'the offering is the employee'.
Hence,
selection, training and motivation of employees
to deliver service, are direct investments in the
service development.
These ernplops
influence the consumer satisfaction greatly.

7.

PHYSICAL E V I D E N C L
Concrete Evidence and
Experiences

Physical evidence (PE) is the environment in
which the services are delivered and where the
firm and the customers interact. PE also
includes any tangible commodities that facilitate
performance or communication of the service.
PE i s an important element that needs to be
designed for effective marketing of services.
PEs that over promise or inconsistent with the
delivery of the services would create a
dissonance in the minds of consumers and
adversely aifect the consumption and consumer
satisfaction. For example, a well lighted reading
hall, properly stacked book shelve, spacious
layout of the reading rooms, stacks etc., would
have a strong impact on the reader. There can
be three types of usage of senricescape
(physical environment where service delivery is
taking place) based on the nature of delivery of
service. There are: (i) selfservice, (telephone
booth, automatic teller machine counter); (ti)
interpersonal services (library, bank, school);
and (iii) remote service (electronic mail service,
telephone company, electricity branch). The
servicescape needs to be designed based on
the nature of service.
The environmental
make
up
the
servicescape are
dimensions that
ambient conditions, physical layout and
functionality, and signs, symbols and artifacts.
These dimensions influence the beliefs,
emotions, and finally the consumers' response
towards the facility.

8.

PROCESS--Course of Action
in Service Delivery

With the increasing awareness of total
quality management, there is shift from just

considering the outputs for evaluation to focus
on the processes that produce the outputs. The
philosophy is that if the processes are set right
and followed correctly, the output will be
automatically within the acceptable limits. This
shift in thinking itself is difficult to implement,
but organisations are slowly moving from
output orientation to process orientation.
Especially, in service organisation the output
variability is higher and difficult to standardize.
To make the service delivery uniform, managen
in
the
service
organisations
started
concentrating on the process control In the
marketing mix elements, "processes refer to the
actual procedures, mechanisms, and flow of
activities" used to ddiver the senrice. Many
times consumers experience not only the final
service, but also several of the steps in the
service delivery. These factors need to be
designed carefully to provide evidence of
quality rather than the otherwise of it.

Segmenting (selection of target market
segment) and designing marketing mix
strategies are closely interconnected.
A
decision maker cannot concentrate on one
aspect and do away with the other component.
These two steps have to be carried out
simultaneously and evaluated against the LJC
resources and objectives. Marketing mix of an
organisation is an evolving phenomenon. In a
given time, mix elements represent the
marketing programme that the decision makers
evolved to solve a problem which they
constantly faced in an ever changing, and
challenging market. Jnshort term, there wwrM
be tactical decisions to mitigate small changes
in the market or organisational goa\s and
resources. However, the overall strategy in
dividing marketing mix is the outcome of long
term goals and plans of the organisation. To be
successful, the managers should have foresight,
and study the trends in various forces, like
economic, social, technological, and natural
environment. They must have ability to foresee
the influence of these forces on the
organisational elements. The managers should
have capability to devise a set of marketing
mixes to successfully navigate in the times of
turbulence. All the seven Ps are important and
DESIDOC Bulletin oilni Techno!, 1998,18(3)

they are essential for marketing mix. Prima facie
there is no element more important than the
other, but the context would determine which
one needs more attention. Further, all the
marketing mix elements are interrelated and
they have to be decided within the same
timeframe. Three marketing mix elements,

people, physical evidence, and
process
suggested by Zeithaml and Bitner (Table 5). The
'seven Cs' should gain precedence over the
conventional way of using marketing mix
elements in future to really become a market
oriented organisation.

Table 5: Consumer View of Marketing Mix Elements
Seven Ps

CorrespondingCs

Product

Consumer needs and wants

Place

Convenience to the consumers

Price

Cost to the consumer

Promotion

Communication with the customer

People

Company employees

Physical evidence

Concrete evidence and experiences

Process

Course of action

First 'four Cs' are f m Lautenbom Robert. New Marketing Litancy: 4 P s Passe; C-Won% Take Ow.AdvertisingAge, Octobcr 1,
1990, p. 26. The remaining three Cs are added.

namely people, physical evidence, and process
are included as additional elements because
they can be controlled (may not be in a very
short time) by the managers and they can have
influence in the customer sales process.
Same marketing researchers do argue that
the marketing mix elements framework, four Ps
framework in particular, is over simplification of
the marketing discipline.
Nevertheless this
concept has sustained and is in use for almost
half a century, which itself demonstrates its
usefulness. The marketing mix concept has
evolved as marketing tools for the sellers, with
the view to influencing the consumers. Robert
Lautenborn' takes a view that these 'four Ps'
have to be looked from the consumer angle,
and based on that organisations should design
their offerings as benefits to the consumers. He
suggested 'four 0'corresponding to the 'four
Ps' of McCarthy, namely consumer needs and
wants for product, convenience to the
consumers for place, cost to the consumer for
price, and communication with the consumer
for promotion. Three more Cs, namely,
company employees, concrete evidence and
experiences, and course of action are proposed
as corresponding consumer based elements for
MSlDOC Bulletin d Inf Technol, 1998,18(3)

10. REFERENCES
1.

American Marketing Association,
Marketing News, March 1985,l.

2.

Kotler P, Marketing management, analysis,
planning, implementation, and control.
Prentice-Hall of India, New Delhi, 1997.
1-35.

3.

Borden Neil H. The concept of marketing
mix. loornal of Advertising Research, June
1964, 2-7.

4.

McCarthy €1, Basic marketing: managerial
approach. Ed 6. Richard D. Irwin, Inc.,
Illinois, 1978. 26-50.

5.

Zeithaml VA, and Mj Bitner. Sewices
marketing. McGraw-Hill Co, New York,
1996. 23-28.

6.

Levitt T. Marketing myopia. Harvard
Business Review, July-August1960, 45-56.

7.

Lautenborn Robert. New marketing litany:
4 P's passe; Cwords take over. Advertising
Age, October 1, 7 990,26.

19

