DESlDOC Bulletin of lnformation Technology, Vol. 18, No. 3, May 1998, pp. 2 1-28
Q 1998, DESlOOC

Marketing Vis-a-vis Revenue Generation in Libraries and
lnformation Centres: An Indian Experience
PC Shah*
Abstract
The paper describes the importance of absorbing marketing principles and
techniques in designing, generating and providing information products
and services. An informative study of National lnformation Centre for
Textile and Allied Subjects (NICTAS), describing its marketing and
publicity activities as well as its future plans has been presented to
illustrate the point that it is the adoption of marketing approach that will
help Library and information Centres (LlCs), not only in their own
self-sustenance but- also in the sustenance and self-sufficiency of their
information products and services.

The challenge of coping with the changes in
social, technological, economical and political
environment has forced the LlCs to change
their time-honoured old practices. Pressure for
accountability and the emergence of enterprise
culture has lead the library and information
professionals to take aggressive actions for
financial self-sufficiency. This has kad to 'User
Pays for HisjHer Needs' principle and
'Profitmaking by .Library and Information
Organisations'.
Hence, in the present era, the library and
information professionals will have to think of
producing an information product which is
useful for revenue generation and for users.

Assistant Director and Head (Retd.)
NlCTAS at ATlRA

Ahmedabad

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techol, 1 998,18(3)

2.

WHY SERVICES/PRODUCTS
AT COST ?

2.1

information is Power

The major inputs which are essential for any
business, industry, teaching, research and
developwent are considered to be only four
M's:
Manpower, Money, Material and
Machines. Now, for developing countries, one
more input which has become essential is
'Information'. This is a very important
commodity. The present day power equation is:
INFORMATION = KNOWLEDGE
KNOWLEDGE = POWER

Hence, INFORMATION
is
POWER.
Information is life saver for industry, business,
etc. Value of information services/products has
been established.

2.2

lnformation and Earnings

1t i s a fact that the information provided
helps users directly/indirectly in earning money,

21

increasing knowledge or solving problems, etc.,
and thereby to earn money.

2.3

Cost of Producing Information

In order to provide correct and timely
information, LIC has to invest and regularly
spend money for hardware, software, manpower,
documents, etc., to keep the information input
base uptodate

2.4

Virtual Libraries

Information Technology (IT) has resulted in
virtual libraries. Users are no longer limited to
their own LICs. Library and information
professionals have also now to cater beyond the
four walls of their LICs. Hence, the number of
users have increased as well as universal
availability of any information has become
possible.

2.5

Limitation of Financial Resources

There is a greater demand of information
and the financial resources of LlCs for
development of information services/products
are limited.

2.6 Increase in Global Competition
Since global competition in information field
has increased, therefore, timely supply of right
information is possible for new advanced IT.
Hence more financial input is needed.
Above mentioned factors have forced
present day LlCs to become self-sufficient in
financial matters In order to provide timely,
efficient and satisfactory services to their
increasing clientele.

3.

MARKETING ACTIVITIES FOR
THE LlCs FOR REVENUE
GENERATION

Professional marketing approaches will help
in achieving maximum utilisation of LlCs
services/products and thus generate more and
more revenue. For this purpose, library and
information managers will have to take initiative
and a lot of freedom has to be given by the
management to the library and information
professionals in their pursuit in this newer thrust
area.
22

In order to generate suitable revenue, it is
suggested that the LlCs put a marketing
programme which includes the following
groups of activities:

3.1

Development and Awareness of
Information

The LlCs should develop information that
can be given to potential end users and make
them aware of the same.
This should include visit or tallks of or
demonstration to potential end users/users'
groups, preparation of attractive well written
brochures describing objectives, services, etc.,
of the LICs, publication of informative articles
about LlCs services/products in a house journd
as well as outside journals.

3.2

Promotion of Services

LlCs should engage in activities that help to
promote the services to the specific individuals
who can get benefit from them.
This should include identification of users'
groups, finding their information needs, sending
them the promotional material/information,
publication of newsletter, periodical surveys of
end users, sending of specimen copies of
information products/pamphlets,
etc.,
to
prospective users, users group meets, provision
of
evaluation
card
alongwith
LlCs
services/products, identification of market
opportunities, etc.

3.3

Marketing in Day-to-Day
Operation

Marketing needs to be added in day-today
operation of the LICs, so that activities are
established and maintained.
This will improve both credibility and service
level of the LICs. This should include help desk
activities like walk-in counselling, quick
response, regular sending of pamphlets to new
prospective clients, etc.

3.4

TraininglOtientation as a
Marketing Tool

Effective training will sell LlCs services.
Training will establish the LlCs as a bonafide
source of knowledge. When users need
DESIDOC &&in

d l n f Technol, 1998,18(3)

This will help in initial acceptance as well as
getting financial support.

information they will immediately think of the
particular LIC as the first place to go, e.g.,
National Information Centre for Textile and
Allied Subjects (NICTAS) organised training

NICTAS has progressed well in all above
mentioned directions of marketing. Result is the
financial self-sufficiency of NICTAS in recurring
expenditureby its
and executed

programmes/seminars On "line
business information, resource sharing, textile
information and documentation, etc.

3.5

marketing strategies.

Word-of-Mouth Endorsement of
Activities

4.

There is a proverb that "If you are satisfied,
tell others, if not tell us". Wordof-mouth
marketing is the most effective way of
marketing. Through word of mouth, current
customers of the LlCs tell potential customers,
the value of the services they receive. This is
most desirable method of marketing, but it is
also one of the most difficult tasks to
implement.
Good 'word-of-mouth' marketing comes out
of excellence
in
products/services.
If
services/products are not good then the
approach affects adversely and that in turn
effect tbe revenue generation.

3.6

Priority Approach

Prioritize the segments you will attempt to
serve First according to your strength in areas.,

NICTAS AND ITS
SERVICES/PRODUCTS

NICTAS is located at ATlRA (Ahmedabad
Textile Industry's Research Association),
Ahmedabad-an
internationally
known
cooperative industrial research institute of India.
Proposal for setting up NICTAS was submitted
to DSlR in 1978. The first financial grant to
NICTAS was released by NISSAT (National
lnformation System
for
Science
and
Technology) in April 1987.
Following decisions were taken before the
formal starting of NICTAS:
(a) All effects must.be made to make NICTAS
self-sufficient .in recurring expenditure
within a maximum of ten years ( Table 1).
(b) No service should be given free of charge,
i.e., all services of NICTAS should be fee
based.

Table 1: NICTAS income and expenditure (Rs. in 1,000) from 198687 to 1996-97

Income

Expenditure

(in thousand rupees)

Period

Capital

Income in Percentage of
Recurring Expenditure

Recurring

DLSIDOC Wkthd l n f T W , 1998,l q 3 )

23

(c) ASfar as possible no free service should be

taken by NICTAS. At least some token
honorarium should be given.

4.1

Users' Groups

Keeping these decisions and various
objectives in mind, NICTAS first identified the
following users' groups who need textile
information:
P Policy makers/Administrators
D Managers

0 Machinery manufacturers
0 Ancillary equipment makers
0 Technologists/Engineers
0 Marketers/Traders/Exporters/lmporters
0 Researchers
o Educationists/kudents
0 Designers/Fashion creators
0 Textile consumers and their organisations
o Entrepreneurs: Decentralised sector (handlooms, powerlooms, processing houses, etc.)
0 Consultants/Trainers
o Chemical and auxiliary manufacturers
0 Fibre manufacturers
0 Garment manufacturers
o Government bureaucrats
0 journalists, writers, etc.
0 Member of Parliament/Legislative Assembly/Local Bodies, etc.

4.2

Major Services of NICTAS

Keeping the above users' groups in mind
and based on the comprehensive survey of 'The
information needs of the textile and allied
industries in India', conducted by ATlRA in
1980, the major services provided by NICTAS
are as follows:

World Literature in Abstract Form on
Textile and Allied Subjects: NICTAS has
CD-ROM databases containing over 2.75 lakh
records on textiles, covering the period 1973 to
December 1997. This is being updated every
three months. One can get search results within
30 minutes.
This is extensively used by textile mills and
technicians, R & D institutions, students and

teaching institutions, etc. NICTAS has also
'Colour Index' on CD-ROM.

Document
Procurement:
Procuring
published papers, patents, standards, etc.,
within one hour to four months, depending
upon users' needs.
Translation Service: English translation of
non-English articles, patents, etc.
Reprographic
Services:
Supply
of
photocopies of articles, etc., from the literature
available in ATlRA library.
Reference Service and Referral Service
Magazine Subscription S a w Photocopies
of content pages of journals received in ATlRA
library, Then photocopies of complete articles.
This helps mills, other commercial firms and
institutions to save on buying expensive foreign
journals without loosing the advantage of timely
access to articles.
Cult (Current Universal Literature on
Textiles): The pin-pointed and current
information to each user to fit the user's
profice. This is provided quarterly.
I

Online
Database
Search:
NICTAS
Globalisation: NICTAS can now search and
provide information on all subjects online as it
can access information available with
knight-ridder information inc., Data Star, STN
and many other databases and web sites.
TEXINCON
(Textile
Information
Condensed): This quarterly publication is a
unique database held in a condensed summary
form (of articles, books, developments, etc.) for
easy access by users' groups. Each TEXINCON
issue also contains one lead artick in a
significant area written by a specialist. Users'
group index and spot light are some unique
features of TEXINCON.
VITAMINS (Vital Information on Textiles
Announced for Moulding Industrialised
Nations): It is a supplement to TEXINCON. It is
published to enable users to glance at relevant
articles, etc., which they have missed.
State-of-the-art Reports: NICTAS has
published six such reports useful to industry.
Now, such reports are sponsored by suitable
manufacturers or industrial companies.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technd, 1998,18(3)

5.

MARKETING A N D PUBLICITY

ACTIVITIES
Following are some of the planned
marketing and publicity activities of NICTAS in
order to maximize utilisation of NICTAS
services and products as well as to make
NICTAS a self-sufficient information centre, over
a period of time.
Regular Press Releases: Regular press
releases are issued giving information/news
about NICTAS recent activities. They are sent to
over 40 textile and allied subjects periodicals
and to various textile teaching and research
organisations in India. Such press releases are
also sent to prospective industrial users also.
Some well responded press releases were on
handkerchiefs, terry towels, denims, industrial
fabrics, rotor spinnings, jute, etc.
Distribution of Pamphlets: Well designed,
informative and printed pamphlets of services
and products are distributed to identified users'
groups. All these pamphlets are written in a
style understandable to users' groups.
Pamphlets on NICTAS, TEXINCON, NACID,
Stateof-the-Art-Reports are regularly distributed
during various national textile conferences.
Specimen copy of TEXINCON is available free
of charge on demand. In the past, multicopies
of these pamphlets were distributed to all
branches of Textile Association (India) and
teaching institutes in India, with a request to
distribute these pamphlets among their
members as well as organise displays for
students. All Directors of 'Textile Research
Associations' are provided multicopies of these
pamphlets and requested to distribute the same
to their member companies with their next
nlailing. All textile milfs, processing houses,
cooperative spinning mills, textile machinery
manufacturers, and textile export houses in
India were sent a copy of each of these
pamphlets.
Reviews: All NICTAS publications are sent to
world leading periodkals/institutions/ experts
to review or to give their opinion of the
publications.

Concession to Students and Teachers:
NICTAS provided 50 per cent concession to the

academicians (students and teachers, mainly)
for subscribing to the TEXINCON and for
literature search from CD-ROM databases.
It gives 10 per cent concession to bonakd
students/teachers
on the purchase of
state-of-the-art reports.

NlCTAS PrtSdd Coupon Bodr: ln order to
eliminate procedural delays, NICTAS has
introduced the 'Prepaid NICTAS Coupon Book'
system.
Following are benefits for users:

u

N o need for preparing a proforma invoice for
advance payment

D Quick service

u High priority
No botheration of paying every time one uses
a service

o

The coupon books are userfriendly

o No time limit for their use
D Unused coupons can be returned any time, at

o

Par
Immediate refund for unused coupons.

Lectures & Paper Presentations. Lectures
and paper presentations by the Head, NICTAS
at textile conferences and live demonstration
during conference/meetings, etc. help in
publicising the services and products.

T a k to Businessfirsdustty: NICTAS is now
approaching 'Chamber of Commerce &
Industry' in various cities to arrange a talk on
how NICTAS/NACID can help them to
improve/expand their business'. Porbander
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, had
invited the Head, NICTAS to give such a talk.
The talk was found very useful by participants
and NICTAS has.started helping them actively
by quickly providing suitable and pinpointed
information.

Usen' Group Meet: One such textile
institutional users' meet was held in January
1996. This helped NICTAS to publicise and
modify its products and services as well as
helped in planning for a few more future
activities for NICTAS.
Quick Response to Users: All minor
querries, photocopies of articles available in

NICTAS/ATIRA, and textile literature searches
are responded within two days.

than 50 packages were sold. Similar packages
for other product areas are under preparation.

Use of Local Branches: Use of local
branches of Textile Association (lndia) for
NICTAS publicity, sale of information products
and for getting advertisements for TEXINCON is
being done.

Co-operation of Textile Research and
Teaching
Organisations:
In
producing
information products and their help in
rnarketing/publicising NICTAS products and
services.

Discount to Booksellers and Advertising
Agencies: NICTAS gives 30 per cent discount
on sales price to booksellers on the minimum
purchase of five copies of any one
state-of-the-art report and 15 per cent discount
on subscription to TEXINCON.

Majority of the textile research and teaching
institutions in lndia are helping NICTAS in the
following ways:

Fifteen per cent discount is given to
advertising agency on booking of an
advertisement .. for TEXINCON on behalf of
NICTAS. Ten per
cent
discount on
advertisement is given to client on giving four
continuous advertisements in TEXINCON.
Sponsorship of NICTAS Information
Products: Manufacturers of related business
enterprises also sponsor NICTAS information
products. NICTAS state-of-the-art reports are
now sponsored by manufacturers or related
business enterprises. Each sponsor gets 50
copies of the report free of charge, which they
can give with compliments to their present
and/or potential customers and earn their
goodwill. Extra copies of such reports are made
available to sponsors at 60 per cent concession.
Recently such a report on 'Rotor Spinning'
was sponsored b
three manufacturers/
suppliers of Rotor Spinning Machines in India.
&
Packaged
Specially
Prepared
Infomation:
Comprehensive
information
packages on jute, terry towel, pollution control,
denims, etc. are developed. There are more
than 100 terry towels manufacturing companies
in India. Keeping this in view, NICTAS did a
comprehensive literature search on 'terry towel'
and made photocopies of selected articles.
Bibliographical details with abstracts of the
literature were supplied, and a comprehensive
package of information on 'Terry Towel' was
made available at a cost of Rs. 1,500.
Availability of this was announced in various
textile journals and circulars were also sent to all
terry towel manufacturing companies and more

(a) Cooperation in summary preparation for
TEXINCON by their specialists.

(b) Distribution of NICTAS pamphlets, etc. to
their member companies and others.
(c) By including NICTAS news/information in
their Newsletters, etc.

(d) By arranging talks on NICTAS.
identification of Prospective Users: From
advertisements and company profiles published
in various dailies, textile journals, etc.,
prospective users are being identified.Various
advertisements of new companies in Times of
lndia and other local dailes, Economic Times
and other business and industry dailies as well
as textile journals are regularly scanned. Varbus
selected pamphlets on activities of NICTAS and
NAClD are dispatched to them. This database i s
also used to send request letters for
advertisements in TEXINCON.

Exhibition/exhibitiomcum-sales: Exhibition/
exhibitionturn-sales at various national and
international level textile conferences also help
in marketing.
Display and Sale of NlCTAS Products at
Airports i n India: NICTAS publications are
exhibited and sold at the bookstalls located at
Ahmedabad, Bombay and Bangalore Airports.
Artides on NICTAS: This is a regular feature.
Articles on NlCTAS & NAClD activities are
regularty published in various journals and
magazines. This has attracted many to use
NICTAS services and subscribe to the

TEXINCON.
Free Supply of Specimen Copy of
7€XINCON: Free supply o f specimen copy of
TEXINCON helps prospective user to assess
hisher utilty of NICTAS products and services.
DESIDOC M k t i n of Inf Technd, 1996,18(3)

Majority o f such users have become regular
users of NICTAS services/products.

Publication
of
WNCON
Users'
Comments: Users' comments with their names
encourage
users
to
send
their
comments/opinions and thereby NICTAS to
improve its products and services.
Advertisements in TEXINCON and Liaison
Visits and Lectutes: NICTAS accepts
advertisements for publication in TEXINCON.
Well drafted letters of advertisements alongwith
NICTAS and TEXINCON pamphlets are seht to
various textile mills,
textile machinery,
auxiliaries, equipment manufacturers, etc. Even
if some of them are unable to give
advertisement, they do subscribe to TEXINCON
and use NICTAS services.
Publication of Live Case Studies: Typical
live case studies of searches done by
NICTAS/NACID are published in suitable
newsletters, journals, etc. This makes readers
aware
of
the
types
of
information
NICTAS/NACID can provide to them.
Publication of TZXNCON Summaries in
Primary Textile Journals: NICTAS has permitted
some of the reputed primary textile journals to
publish selected summaries from TEXINCON.
Due acknowledgements are given by them to
NICTAS. Also they write that full text of these
articles are available from NICTAS. This has
enabled NICTAS to get new users for various
services provided by NICTAS.
Contacts with Foreign Booksellers: Textile
Institute Book Shop, UK and many other foreign
booksellers have been contacted for selling
statebf-the-art reports.
Workshops and Training Programmes:
Workshops and Training Programmes organised
by NICTAS help indirectly i n creating awareness
about NICTAS products and services.

6. FUTURE PLANS & ACTIONS IN

PROGRESS
With regard to marketing o f NICTAS products
and services to increase revenue o f NICTAS, the
following actions have been planned:

DESIDOC Bulktin of Inf Techol, 1998,18(3)

Identification of New Users: NICTAS will
identify and reach those members of ATlRA
and other textile research associations who
have not yet subscribed to the TEXINCON and
are not using NICTAS services.
Liaison Visits and Lecture Tours: A
comprehensive crash programmes of liaison visits
and lecture tours to major cities in lndia were
planned to create awareness about NlCTAS
services and information products among
students, teachers and other users of textile
information. These will be organised in main
textile centres in lndia with the help of suitable
branches of Textile Association (India), textile
trade associations, textile teaching institutes and
textile research organisations of that area. One
such programme was recently organised at SKJTI,
Bangalore under the auspices of Textile
Association (Karnataka Unit).
Display of Posters: NICTAS has planned to
display NICTAS and TEXINCON posters, at all
textile teaching institutions, textile research
associations, and selected textile mills in India
and also in other developing countries.
Such display will help in creating awareness
about NICTAS/NACID services

Textile information Users' Croup (TIUC): A
comprehensive database of NICTAS services
users is under preparation. This will help
NICTAS to remain in constant touch with users
as well as to know their feedback on NICTAS
services.
Preparation of Audio-Visual ater rial:
NICTAS plans to prepare a video film of its
activities and products.
Services to Third World Countries: Special
efforts are under way to sell NICTAS
information products and services outside India,
especially to the neighbouring developing
countries.
More State-of-the-Art Reports: NICTAS is
planning to explore the possibilities that material
suppliers i n textile mills can give stateof-theart
reports or TWINCON as gift to technologists. 10
per cent discount o n TEXINCON and 30 per cent
discount o n state-of-theart reports (on purchase
of minimum fwe copies) may be given to such
bulk buyers.

.

List of Current Projects: It is planned to
procure current project list on Textiles from
Ministry of Textiles, etc. and then each
institution will be informed that NICTAS may
provide all the needed literature/information
support on the projects very expeditiously.

Publication of 'Jndhn Textiie Abstracts':
Proposal to publish 'Indian Textile Abstracts'
has already been submitted to NISSAT for
obtaining initial financial support.

CONCLUSIONS
Continuous modifications/improvernents are
made in NICTAS products and services as per
response
from
users.
Many
new
products/services such as CULT, online
searches, VITAMINS, Spotlight, CD-ROM
Databases, etc. have been started to meet the
users' demand. Marketing is a continuous
process and not a once-a-month or once-a-year
activity. Marketing is a strategy, philosophy and
a way of life for a successful LIC.

