DESlDOC Bulletin of lnformation Technology, Vo1.18, No.3, May 1998, pp. 29-33
1998, DESlDOC

(O

Marketing of Library and lnformation Services at British
Council Library Network in India
M lshwara Bhat*
Abstract
The paper outlines the marketing approaches used in the British Council
Library Network in India. The market analysis is done in order to get a
profile of the customers in these libraries. Excellent customer relations are
maintained by delivering quality service. Customer interaction i s a
continuous process and this is ensured by conscious listening to the
customers, meet the members programmes, questionnaires, surveys, and
suggestion boxes. The libraries use promotional techniques such as
mailshots, distribution of -publicity material, publicity through press and
advertising in order to increase the customer base. Extension activities such
as lectures and seminars attract the target customers to the library apart
from furthering the social cause.

1.

INTRODUCTION

The objective of the British Council (BC)
libraries is to make available the best of British
materials in various areas of development. The
libraries follow standard professional practices
of Britain.
The network consists of four regional
libraries in the metros namely, Delhi, Mumbai,
Calcutta and Chennai and eight British Libraries
in other cities namely, Ahmedabad, Bangalore,
Bhopal, Hyderabad, Lucknow, Patna, Pune and
Thiruvananthapuram. These libraries are
primarily aimed at professionals, government
officiab, NGOs and English language students
though the membership is open to everybody.
For all premium services such as lending,
photocopying, inter library loan and electronic
information searching, there are service charges
though these are highly subsidised. The
lnformation Resources Unit at Delhi sets the
yearly target for each library in terms of
membership, loans, enquiries and other
- activities and monitors the overall performance.

BC libraries are highly market oriented. To
put it in simple words, marketing consists of the
following:
(a) Offering a product or a service as desired
by the customer;
(b) Supplying the product keeping the
supplier's interest in view; and
(c) Ensuring a continuous demand for the
product.

2.

MARKETING TECHNIQUES

Certain marketing techniques tested in BC
libraries are given below:

2.1

Customer Care

The best way of marketing the library
products and services is by word of mouth
publicity. It is said, one satisfied customer tells
five other people, whereas the opposite, one
dissatisfied customer tells 20 others. The library
staff in the network gets both formal and on the
job training in customer care. The training
includes various aspects such as importance of

the customer; internal and external customers;
economics
of
repeated
customers;
communication and interaction skills; telephone
manners; handling diff~ultcustomers; customer
feedback; importance of physical facilities and
environment; customer friendly systems and
procedures and so on. The smior library staFf
gets specialised Trainers' training'. The
customer care aspects are monitored by the
librarian and the regional librarian regularly. The
customer care standards are being examined
especially when the membership in any
particular library goes down. The library staff in
wery library meets at least once a month in
order to discuss the various customer care
issues and sort out the problems faced by
customers at service points. Such customer care
meetings hdp in developing the customer care
attitude among the staff.

2.2

Quality Service

Quality can be defined as the service
standard exceeding the expectations of the
customer. Ensuring comis&ncy in quality is a
diff~ulttask indeed especially in a service
sector such as libraries. No public relation
exercise can substitute a cprrtidy service. The
effort in the BC is a combination of various
operations such as staff training, customer care
meetings, written 'quality sewkc shdards',
monitoring of service quality by tbe senior staff
and finally staff motivation. Every library
prominently displays a copy of Quality Service
Standards which is a statement of pedwmance
level the customer can exprct ftam the liiary.
For example, all
will be replied M n fiw
working days; library wdl not be dosed more
than five working days at a stretch and so on.
Many library staff in the network are trained in
Quality Improvement Processes (QUIP) which
is a technique for systematic improvement of
operations and processes in libraries. Libraries
undertake s h ~ r tterm QUIP projects. Some
specific examples are: how to speed up book
processing and how to reduce queues at the
lending counter.

2.3

Market Segmentation

The membership is grouped into different
occupational categories such as students,
professionals, government officials, NCOs,

retired people, and so on. Further sub
categories are made depending on the subject
interests of the member. The categories are
coded and this is very useful in computer
analysis. This sort of detailed membership
categorisation helps the library staff to get a
good idea of membership profile. Designing of
library services, fixing of library timings, pricing
of products and book acquisition programmes,
are done on the basis of the market profi\e.

2.4

Market Research

The libraries conduct a variety of macket
researches. The automated circu\ation system
has been of great help in this. The loan analysis
of library materials provides an insight into the
subject interests of customers. It is also possible
to collect important market information such as;
which subjects are more popular amongst the
professionals, who is borrowing from a specific
collection; identify areas for strengthening the
cdlection; heavily used and least used stock;
areas which need pruning in he stock; busy
and lean hours, etc.

2.5

Customer Interaction and
Feedback

In any markt dtiwn organisation, intemction
with the customer is a deliberate and pbmed
activity. The purpose is to come closer to the
customer and to have a continuous dialogue with
them. In the case of libraries, the interaction is
very necessary in order to continuously evok
the library services in response to the customer
needs. As customers change, so do their needs,
libmry habits and thek subject interests. New
subjcts also emerge and the l i r y needs to be
equipped with new materials, Fortunately BC
customers are more than willing to tell about their
requirements and also how they feel a b u t the
services. Many a time they even give ideas to the
librarian as to how to make a thing work more
efficiently. The libraries in the BC netwok keep in
touch with the customers in various ways:

2.5.1 Listening to the customer
Gandhiji said, "A customer is not an
interruption of our work. He is the very purpose
of ir'. By talking to the library staff, the
customer does a favour to them. Therefore, the
DESIDOC M k t i n d I n f T ~ h n d 1996,18(3)
,

customer deserves their undivided attention
when he or she has something to say. In this
process, library staff is able to appreciate the
customer's problems and also explain the
constraints if staff has any. The process of
tirmN to the customers is taken seriously in
the BC libraries. A number of improvements
have taken place because of customers'
suggestions. The positive image the library
projects by listening to the customer pays rich
dividends in the long run.

2.5.2 Meet the members
Every library conducts four to six 'Meet the
Members' sessions in an year. Members
belonging to a particular group such as
managers, doctors, engineers, architects, etc.
are invited on an evening and the librarian
solicits their views regarding various library
aspects such as the book stock, periodicals list,
staff assistance or any new service. This serves
as an opportunity to have face to face
interaction with the customers besides being a
good p ~ b i relation
i~
tool to show that the
library cares for the customers. Each session i s
about an hour duration and about 20
customers participate in each session.

2.53 Questionnaires and survqs
The libraries in the network conduct a
random sample customer survey every year.
The sample is about 10 per cent of the library
membership. The purpose is to obtain feedback
from the customers in general. The
questionnaire is deliberately kept short and
simple. This encourages a better response from
the customers.

ia.5.4 Suggestion boxes
The libraries maintain suggestion boxes or
suggestion registers. Replies are usually given
within three working days. In case the
comments given by the member need detailed
discussion, the librarian invites the member for
ameeting when he visits the library next.

are no committees to screen the book orders.
Indeed it is a challenging task and is done by
adopting the best professional practices.
However, there are occasions when important
titles are left out. Members are encouraged to
fill in the book suggestion cards and if the
suggested books fit into the BC policy, they are
procured on a priority basis. Naturally, the
member who suggests the titles will be
informed about the title as soon as it arrives.

3.

CORPORATE IDENTITY AND
IMAGE

Corporate identity aims at communicating an
appropriate message about the organisation, its
intent and purpose to the clientele. The corporate
idenwy policy of the BC aims to project a
reputation for quahi. V d presentation is crucial
in that projection, since it is d l established that
ovw 80 per cent of what is learned comes to us
through sight The style, c o h r and type faces for
posters, notices, external and i n t d environment
publications and communications in the libraries
are considered caddy. In all the bigger tibraries in
the netwnrk, the advice of professional de@ws
has been t a h in onkr to provide a coodnated
and consistent interior design. Apart from his, all
the library support staff has beerr pmvided with
quality uniforms and this also communicates the
corporate identity cleady. The uniform cloth, it is
b d i , promotes unifwm behaviour apart from
projecting a positive image about the omisation.

.4.

PROMOTION OF LIBRARIES

Nowadays it is not enough if you just
provide a good service. We need to 'broadcast'
what we do and this message should reach the
customer quickly. Libraries do have competition
with various agencies such as the mass media,
electronic media, internet, information brokers,
and others. The aim of any promotional activity
in libraries is to increase the customer base.
Broadly speaking, the purpose are:
(i)

Creating a proper mindset among the
customers favourable to the library;

2.5.5 Book suggestion cards

(ii) Telling the potential customers the
availability of your service;

The book selection is done at the BC
libraries entirely by the library staff and there

(iii) Convincing the customers the benefits of
using the service;

(iv) Prompt the customers to accept the
service.
Some of the methods of library promotion
at the BC network are:

4.1

Mailshots

BC libraries send mailshots regularly to
potential customers. Each mailshot contains a
customer friendly introduction letter and the
relevant library brochure. The introductory letter
needs to look personalised and this is possible
now with mailmerging facilities. The letter is kept
short and simple. The addresses of the potential
customers are obtained from various sources such
as directories, membership lists of professional
bodies, etc. Librarians contact the various local
institutions and collect ihe lists of faculty
members, staff and students. These address lists
are used for sending the mailshots. Similarly the
membership renewal notices are sent to members
whose membership has just expled.

4.2

Personal Visits

Senior staff from the BC libraries make
personal visits to customers. Such visits help
establish personal contacts with key contacts in
various institutions, professional bodies and
corporates. The visits could be used either for
getting a new customer or for getting feedback
from the existing customer.

4.3

Presentations at Institutions

Educational institutions are potential places
for catching new customen. Librarians
occasionally make brief presentations at local
institutions and professional bodies. Small
library displays are also arranged on such
occasions and this enables the audience to pick
up the library brochures.

4.4

Brochures, Leaflets, Posters

The design of brochures, leaflets and posters
is w r y important. Nowadays the mail received
by library is flooded with attractive product
literature. Therefore, unless the brochure is well
designed, it will not catch the eye of the
customer. The wording should be carefully
coined, the presentation interesting and the
final product attractive in order to stand out.
The brochure should highlight the benefits to

the customer and should keep the customer
absorbed till the end. It should finally prompt
the customer to act. There are number of good
books available to help libraries design good
quality brochures and posters. With the
availability of easy-touse software, reasonably
good quality brochures can be designed in
house.

4.5 Newsletters
Library Newsletter serves as a media to let
the member know the range of library activities,
either those that have already taken place, or
those that are being planned for the future.
Newsletters can serve as excellent marketing
tools apart from being PR material. Some of the
BC libraries have newsletters brought out
quarterly. These contain information about
important titles added, events held, new services,
fee changes, etc. Their importance can be
enhanced by putting some pictures, snippets or
humour.

4.6

Extension Activities

It is essential that our libraries project an
image of a c t i centres of academic and cultural
activities. It is useful to organise periodic ~Wtiies
such as special book displays, lectures, quiz
programmes, debates, seminars, poetry reading
and so on to project the library as a social
organisation. Social impact is the spin off.
Libraries in the network hold such programmes
regularly. Often displays are organised at outside
institutions on the occasion of high profile
conferences and seminars. CoYaborahn with
other organisations is often found useful and this
ensures good participation and improves the
impact

4.7

Cultivating the Press

Press and media play an important role in
creating a positive image for BC libraries.
Newspapers carry items about new products,
success stories, interviews with the library staff
and so on. It is fortunate that the media atways .
have a close association with libraries and\
information centres. Therefore, cultivating thq
press does not require much effort for
librarians. One needs to understand that press
people haw some constraints. They will not be
interested in boring topics which are not
DLSIDOC&rlktlnd Id Tednd, 1998,18(3)

special. On the other hand, they are on the look
out for interesting stork and unusual
happenings. BC libraries make good use of
press contacts for publicising the different
events and library services.

4.8

Media Advertisements

Media advertisements are to be inserted in
case BC libraries need to publicise a product or
a
programme
quickly.
Newspaper
advertisements are by and large expensive and
therefore, BC libraries resort to media
advertisements only occasionalty. The advice of
professional advertisers are being sought in
order to design the advertisement. This ensures
high impact and value for money.

5.

MARKETING PLAN

Every library has a marketing plan which is
prepared at the beginning of the par. The
marketing plan has the following aspects: mission
statement; strengths and weaknesses; targets fix

the year; services offered; pricing policy; place
reaching the customers; and Promotioe how to
phn tu increase the customer base. The plan has a
set of action points; a time wale and a 'who does
what' xhedole. The action points serve as a
cheddkt Inputs from all the library staff are taken
in the prepafation of the marketing p&n. The plan

itself is worked out in the light of major policy
implications discussed at the Annual Meeting of
librarians held in February every year and
librarians review their individual marketing plans
every month. The marketing plan serves both as
a strategic planning document and as a working
tool.

6.

CONCLUSION

Professional marketing techniques have
been of great help in the success of British
Council and British Library network in India.
Customer care continues to be the main
method of retaining the customers and it
fetches new customers too by word of mouth
publicity. At the same time, library staff have
developed the proactive marketing skills too
which help in market penetration. Quality
service coupled with customer touch goes a
long way in the continuous evolution of library
service in tune with the customers'
requirements.

7.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I wish b thank Mr P Jayarajan, ManagerIndia, Library and Information Services, British
Council for permission to contribute this paper.
Also I wish to thank my colleague, Naz Siddiqui
for her valuable suggestions.

