Information Support for Development Studies
KG Tyagi*
Abstract
This artide deals with various issues connected with information provisions
for decision making and problem solving in socio-economic development.
States that the history of development literature could be traced to the
Second World War period. After. breakdown of the colonial ruk, many
deve(oping nations art? engaged in the task of nation building activities to
improve the quality of Me of their population.
Access to information on development literature, which is mostly available in
grey format, is a complex task. Many funding agencies have provided
support for estatdishing national, regional and international information
network jike DEVSIS, OEVfNSA and DEVLINE. Some of such literatun! can
be accessed through Internet, however, because of various reasons h e is a
big gap (i) between the level of information support available between
different region, between nations and inside a country; [ii) between
information haves and information havenots; (iii)and in the demand and
supply of information. The author suggests that only inter and
intradisciplinaty approach can provide effective information support in this
area. The exchange of knowledge and experience through Networks can
speedup the process of problem solving and decision making in a
development. Helping each other through TCOC modality may help in
upgrading information services in this area.

The period of last fifty years or so can be
called as the era of devehprnent. trs history can
be traced after the second World War which led
to the breakdown of colonial rule in most of the
m i r d World'. On 20th January 1949, the US
President Truman, for the first time, called the
South as underdeveioped region of the world,
andothus a new era was opened for that part of
the world-an era of development. On this day,
the President Truman announced a new
Director

programme far extending the benefits of
American scientific advanced and industrial
progress to this underdeveloped region in the

world.
At the initial stage, this term 'deveIopmentl
was used by its promoters to stand for

'economic growth' and theretore during the
early 1960's development planners were mainly
concerned with issues such as Gross National
Products (CNP),and income disuibution, later
on human development indices were also
inchded in the scope of *IS to refine the term.

National Socia)Science Docurnenfa tion Centre
ICSSR New Delhi.

Development, whether social, economic, or
cullural is however too complex
a
9

phenomenon to be appropriately catered under
a discipline like 'development economics'. It is
influenced by various factors such as ideology,
faith, cultural impact, local issues and national
capacity as well as capability. it may be pointed
out that the terms 'economic growth' and
'development' are not synonymous and
therefore it is essent~dlto adopt a wholistic
approach, so as to understand, the scope of the
term 'development'.

Several information systems such as
POPLINE, and SPINE have also been
established. Though some of these information
systems are mission-oriented yet the information
included in their scope directly or indirectly is
found useful for the developmental studies.
Fellowing is the list of some of the major
information
systems
and services in
development studies at international, regional
and national level.

In most of the developing countries
agriculture has traditionally been the major
source of national income. Some of them have
been able to develop an industrial base and are
in the process to enter the information era.
Developmental efforts in countries which are at
the early stages of development are mainly
directed towards meeting the basic needs of the
population like housing, clothing, health,
education, food etc. Several other countries
however are trying not only to eliminate
poverty, but also to achieve sustained economic
development. A few such countries which have
achieved a atisfactory level of industrial
development are trying to invest some resource
in information sector as well.

2.1

The.UnitedNations Organisation (UNO)
has
been playing a vital role in the devqlopment of
various international information' systems
through its different agencies. They collect,
organise and disseminate large amount of
information and make it available to the users
at a comparatively Ichv price. The Directory of
United Nations Databases and ln formation
Systems contains information of about 1,000
selected information systemslservices and
databases. Some of the major information
networks/centres sponsored by the UN and its
agencies are:

+

Undoubtedly, many countries in Asia, Afi~ca,
Latin America are presently engaged in the task
of national development with the aim to
upgrade the lifestyle and improve the standard
of living of their popuhtion.

2.

INFORMATION SUPPORT FOR
THE DEVELOPMENT STUDIES

Access to local information and statistical
data of developing countries is generally
complex because of their unsatisfactory
bibliographical control and availability mostly in
grey format. Because of inadequate resources
fw library and information services, the
developing countries do not give them due
importance in the allocation of funds for
information support. However, several funding
agencies such as UNDP, IDRC and UN
Economic Commission in different regions have
extended support for development of
information systems like DEVSIS: Africa,
DEVSIS: Asia, and at sub-regional level
DEVlNSA (DEVSIS stands for Development
Science lnformation System).

International Level

DARE (Data Retrieval System of
Documentation in the Social and Human
Sciences) (UNESCO)
United Nations Educational Scientific m d
CulturalOrganisation {UNESCO), Social and
Human Sciences, Documentation Centre, 1
rue Miollis, F-75732 Paris Cedex 15, France.

4 INRES (INRESComputerised Inquiry Service)
Special Unit for TCDC, United Nations
Development Programme, Room 1206, 304
East 45 St., New York 110017,USA.

4 POPIN (Population Information System)
Population Division, United Nations, New
York, NY-10017, USA.

4 AGRlS (International lnformation System in

+
+

Agricultural Sciences and Technology)
DEVSIS (Development Science lnformation
System)
International Development Research Centre,
PO8 8500, Ottawa, Ont K1C 3H9,Canada.

ERIC (Education Resource lnformation
Centre)
US Department of Education, Office of
Educational Research and Improvement
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1998,18(4)

(OERI), ERIC Processing and Reference
facility, 1301 Piccard Dr., Suite 300; Rodcvilie,
MD20850-4305.

2.2

Regional Lewl

There are a number of informstion systems
at the regional level. For example, some of the
information systems in development studies in
the AsiaPadfic region are :

+

+
+
+
+

+

I

Asia Pacific Information Network in Social
Scieces (APINESS); The regional Adviser for
Social and Human Sciences in Asia and the
Pacific, Unesco Principal Regional Office,
920, Sukhumvit Road, PO Box 967,
Prabnong Post Office, Bangkok 10110,
Thailand.
Association of Development Research and
Training Institutions of Asia and the Pacific
[ADIPA).
Association of Development Research and
Training Institute of Asia and the Pacific,
C/o Asian and Pacific Development Centre,
Pesiaram Duta, PO Box 12224,50770, Kaula
tunpur, Malaysia.
Centre on Integrated Rural Development for
Asia and the Pacific (CIRDAP), Dhaka.
Centre on Integrated Rural Development for
Asia and the Pacific (CIRDAP), Chameli
House, 17, Topkhana Road, GPO Box 2883,
Dhaka, Bangladesh.
Regional Network for the Exchange of
Information and Experiences in Asia and the
Pacific (ASTINFO), Unesco, Bangkok,
Thailand.

Out of the databases and information
systems mentioned above, it would be relevant
to briefly describe here the DEVSlS at
International level, and DEVINSA as sub-regional
l e d , as both of these are directly related to
development studies. A listing of a few Internet
sites on Development studies in Asia and Pacific
region is also given.

2.2.1 DEVSlS
DEVSlS is a global decentralised and
missionariented information network. Basically, it
was created for meeting the information needs of
policy-makers,plannersandpro~ctadministrators
in developing nations. This information system was
DES/DOC Bull&

of lnf Technd, 1998,18(4)

Eonaeiwd kx pmukhg infbmath about
smbemmnic
dewlopmental
activities
tlmn&wt
the world It wen infomation
generated in other areas but which is &nt
forthederaebpmentalshtdies.Thisindude&ta

and intormabion from different sectors. Though
the DfVSIS, as a global system c d not be
implemented, yet a number of regional and
subregions( Deve(o-t
I n h a t i o n systems
have ernerd during the last three to four
decades which are funded by various funding
agencies These are: DEVSIS: Canada, ie.
United
Nations
Devdopment
System;
INFOPLAN, i.e. Latin American Phnning
Information Network; CARISPLAN, i.e. Carabian
Information System b r Economic and Social
Planning; and PADIS, i.e. Pan African
Documentation and Information System. In
addition, E X A P and IDNAC, i.e. hternational
Database for Information for N o n - M i
Countries haw also been in existence for a long
time.

2.2.2 DEVINSA
In the South-Asian region, the DEVINSA, i.e.
Development Information Network for South
Asia, was s ~ e in
d 1986 with financial support
from IDRC, Canada. The main objective of this
network is to organise a computerised database
on sodoeconomic development in South Asia
containing
data
primarily
about
nonconventional material like research project
reports, doctwd theses, working papers, etc.,
and share this development information
between academia, policymakers, etc., so as to
contribute to the socioeconomic development
of the region.
DEVINSA is coordinated at the Marga
Institute, Sri Lanka, and the other members of
this network are Bangladesh, India, Male, Nepal
and Pakistan. DEVINSA has been found to be
very useful by researchers, policy-makers and
organisations engaged m developmental studies.
The whole DEVINSA database is available in
printed as weH as in digital format.

2.2.3 Resources on Development
Studies: World Wide Web
Some of the major research covering
developmentinformationontheWorldWide
Web in the Asian-Pacific region, which can
11

be accessed through Internet ate as listed
below:

On Australia
http://iias.leidenuniv.nl/wwwvI/~~~theas
html
On Southeast Ash
http://coombs.anu.edu.au~LPages/
IndonPages~Llndonesia.html
On lndonesia
http://www.univie.ac.at/Sinologie/sg.www
html
On Singapon
http://www.monach.edu.au/ttp/pub/
bane-lao/laoweb/boVLhtrn
On laor
http://www.mtc.com.rny/VirtuaUibrary/
Malaysia.html
On Malaysia
http://www.nectec.or.th/WWW-VL-Thailand.
html
On Thailand
http://coombs.anu.edu.au/WWWVLPages/
VietPages/WWWVL-Vietnam.html
On Vietnam
http://www.columbia.edu/cul/libraries/indiv/area
/sarai
On South Asia
http://webhead.com/WWWVL/lndia/
On India
http://www.catmando.com/wwwvnp.htmI
On Nepal
http://www.univie.ac.at.Sinologie/cn+vwwv.
html
On China
http://www.macau.net/main/macau,vl.html
http://www.bluemarble.net/,mitch/
monglinks.html
On Mongolia
http://peacock.tnjc.edu.tw/taiwa~t~~~~.
html

2.3

National Level

Several countries have either established or
are establishing national information systems for
providing
information
support
for
socioeconomic development at national level.
Some of these are as listed below:
12

2.3.1 United Kingdom
DEVLINE establshed in 1966 in the British
Library for Development Studies, has the most
comprehensive coUection of literature on
development studies in Europe and is one of the
largest in the world.
A large percentage of this literature consist
of nonconventional material. About 2,50,000
monographs and 8000 serial titles are already
listed in its current collection and over 25,000
documents are added each year to this
collection. Most of the literature included deals
with economic and social dwelopments, both
rural and urban and specific areas such as
health education, communication, industrial
development, population and gender studies,
environment, human rights, democracy and
gwernment, etc.

Since 1994, the Library is providing online
information service consisting of database
searchable by MINISIS Software. This is a free
service launched in 1994, accessible over
INTERNET under the name DEVLINE. In the first
phase the DEVLINE provides access to four
categories of information:

0 Bibliographical Information;
0 lnformation on Economic lnformation
Resources;

IJ lnformation of Teaching and Training
Opportunity;

0

lnformation on UK Academic Institutions
working in Developing Countries.

Presently the DEVLINE has one of the richest
collection of developmental studies material
available worldwide.

2.3.2 United States of America
US Agency for International Devdopment
Centre for Development I n f o r m a h and
Evaluation has a huge database on
Development Studies worldwide. This whole
database is available to developing countries on
CD-ROM.

2.3.3 India
In lndia several social science research
have
set
up
documentation centres which not only support
institutions/organisations

DESIDOC & J I M d l n f T d ~ 1998,1q4)
~4

research activities of the parent organisations
but also provide information services to the
outside scholars.
About 27 research institutes in social
sciences are supported by lndian Council of
Social Science Research (ICSSR), and majority
of these are engaged in teaching and research
in devebpment studies. tn addition to library
and information services, a few other major
libraries and information centres providing
information support in Development studies at
national level in the country are:
National Social Science Documentation
Centre (NASSDOC) (ICSSR), New Delhi.

Cl Planning Commission Library, New Delhi.
National Documentation Centre on Mass
Communication, New Delhi.
Research, Reference and Training Division,
Ministry of lnformation and Broadcasting,
New Delhi.
National Council of Applied Economic R e
search, New Delhi.
Research lnformation for Non-Aligned and
other Developing countries, New Delhi.
Social Science lnformation Centres of SNDT
Women's University, Mumbai and MS University of Baroda.
Centre for Development of InstrumentalTechndogy, New Delhi.
NASSDOC established by the lndian Council
of Sodal Science Research (ICSSR) in the year
1969 is providing comprehensive information
support for development studies in India.
lnformation about some of its major information.
products and services includiing the indexing
and abstracting journals brought out by ICSSR is
given in Annexure-A. NASSDOC also have
major international databases in social sciences
available in digtal format mostly in CD-ROM
format. A list of such databases is given in
Annexure-B.

3.

DEVELOPMENT STUDIES
LITERATURE IN INDIAN
LANGUAGES

Most of the information support for
development studies i s in English language. For
developmental activities at local level,

information prwisions would have to be made
in local languages used by people,
administration and the government officials in a
particular state andlor region. Such information
services in non-English languages are either
made by individuals and private ventures by
enthusiastic persons have shown some good
results, however, because of lack of support
from libraries and users several of these services
could not be sustained for long. Even
information about the existence of such services
is hardly known to the potential users. Actually,
the death rate of such new information services
in regional languages is as high as their birth
rate.
India has about 15 official languages which
are being used by academia and state/UT
governments in day-today administration.
Teaching and research work is now increasingly
being done in these languages. Enough
literature is being produced by governments and
other organisations at State/UT Iwel in different
lndian regional languages which does contain
useful information on Development Studies in
the concerned region. Howwer as such
literature i s widely scattered and available
mostly in 'grey' form it is generally out of the
reach of users outside the region, where it is
being generated. Efforts need to be made by
~ t a t e /governments
~~
for starting information
services in these regional languages.

4.

DEVELOPMENT STUDIES
LITERATURE IN DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES

4.1

Certain Problems

One major problem of access to information
in development studies is the non-coverage of
devebpment literature from developing nations
in most of the western databases. There is
therefore a need to develop indigenous
databases in digital format in these countries.
For this purpose, better coordination between
national information centres and other libraries
in the regions is required. lnformation services
at national level should be planned in such a
manner that they are comprehensive, produced
in time, moderately priced and available in

various formats like CD-ROM, Online, printed,
etc
One of the major characteristics of
information in development studies is that it is
not of much use across national M subregional
languages and across countries, Therefore m e
emphasis would have to be laid on the creation
of information services at national b e t . Some
developing countries like India have already
created and developed several information
sharing tools and services like union catabgues,
directories and handbooks, bibligraphical and
statistical databases and other secondary
services. A few centres are providing efficient
document delivery services as well.
It needs to be emphasised here that users
interests in development information are usually
restricted to local {country, state and region)
information only. This is in sharp contrast to the
science and technology Information, where
users cannot afford doing research without
searching the global information databases.
Nevertheless, even in development studies,
there are certain areas which may attract
universal interests. For example in the case of
Indian development literature the interest may
be more from neighbouring countries in the
SAARC region, South and South East Asia.

4.2

Information Support in
Developing Countries

With the advent of PCs in 1980, developing
countries have started using Information and
Communication Techdogies {ICT) on a scab
which, only a few years ago would have seemed
somewhat unimaginable. The lCTs are
undoubtedly playing a useful rde in providing
infomation support in the development in these
countries.
Some of the barriers in the use of the ICTs in
many dedoping countries are hawever
because of the existence of inadequate
infrasrtucture wch as u n r d i a k and erratic
power supply and poor c o m m u n i c a ~system
as well as inwfficient institutional mechanism

and somwhat outdated administrative practices
and procedures. Concerted efforts need to be
made at national, regional and inrwnational
levels to remove these barriers. The
strengthening of communication infrastructureis
needed not ordy for information support but
even fot implementing various development
programmes; promotins peace; eradication of
poverty, illiteracy and ignorance. It may be
added that while the use of #Ts is useful in the
sncioeconomic ckdoprnent of a country their
adoption in the developing world has several
socicwconomic and cultural implications, which
are being widely debated by social scientists
and the rezpective governments. Each country
has therefon to take care of its negative and
positive impacts.

Apart from general theofies, methodologies,
experiences, etc., thee may indude literature
dealing with case studies, with factuaf/numeric
information such as demographic information,
database of experts, expefl institutions, research
in
progress,
institutional
pattern
of
The -n8
countries should not open
administration, macro and r n i c c ~ e c ~ ~ ~ ) m i c
the infonnakm and communication s e d m to
indicators, and others.
other nations b h d y because that has sewera1
sewices implications. The 'information have'
I t needs to be mentioned that majority of
countries can h i t the tde of 'have-nots' in the
the information services and databases
wwW of inCwma&&m ecommy. As major
presently available in tht Asian s\'m are
producm and contrdlers of information and
produced in hard/printed kmnat. There is a
databases the former can isolate the
need for converting such &tabam into digital
' i n f m t i o n h m t s ' countries by putting
format such as CD-ROMs, floppies, etc for
barriers in the access to the vital information
which adequate resources in terms of money,
and data under their wntrd.
manpower and computer hardware and
software are required on priwity basis.
New lCTs and global infbrmation revolution
can in a way widen the gap between the rich
Unless the data and documemtation rervices
and the poor and t)lereby limit the role of the
are avaihbk in digital forma?, the exchan~geof
less psperous countties in the process of
i n h a t i o n , and data will not be very smooth In
gkhlisatjun, worfd peace and stability.
the region.
-

14

D f U D O C ~ d t n Tf w h d , 1998,1b(4)

However, if made easily accessible and properly
utilised they can as well provide more equity
and increase the pace of development in
developing countries. Fortunately, the lCTs can
help in bridging the present w p in the present
work1 by linking isolated researchers with their
colleagues and peen located in the different
parts of the world. The exchange of knowledge
through information networks, can help in the
process of problem solving and decision making
in nation. The lCTs are useful in the
socioeconomic development of a country and
their adoption in the developing world has
several
socioeconomic
and
cultural
implications, which are being widely debated by
social scientists and the respective governments.
Each country has therefore to take care of its
negative and positive impacts. If left unchecked,
the globalisation of information will widen the
information gap between developed and
developing countries. It will further distance
elites from the general population and limit the
traditional social and economic development
efforts.
As mentioned earlier, in development
studies, the information generally tends to be
cultural specific and has geographically
limitations in terms of its utilisation. The
information systems created to handle
development studies are therefore more likely to
be successful at local, national and sub-regional
levels than at international level. Active support
and encouragement from governments is
therefore required for upgrading information
and communication systems,
networks,
products, and lCTs which would enable
developing countries to be well informed and
active participants in their own development
programmes.

4.3

TCDC: Technical Cooperation
Among Developing Countries

The level of development in information and
documentation resources and services in
developing countries varies from country to
country and there is a big gap among them as
'information haves' and 'have-nots'. Some of the
developing countries are already greatly
exploiting information and communication
technology in providing information services.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1998,18(4)

However, in several other countries such
infrastructure is almost nonexistent. A
substantial number of developing countries can
therefore contribute effectively by sharing their
experknces and resources in this area with
other countries which are lagging behind in this
area. There is a need of helping each other
under TCDC modality. Eastablishment of
relations between various countries at bilateral
level for exchange of persons, experiences, etc
under TCDC programme can be very practical
and useful in upgrading information services
and in improving access to information tor
developmental efforts world wide.

5.

INFORMATION MARKET

The information market for development
studies is quite big, complex and active. The
users of development inforrnation are scattered
in academia, business and industry, government
and other sectors. The development information
is being used in different areas such as science,
technology,
agriculture,
medicine
and
engineering. There is a big difference in the
nature of demand for information within the
abwe groups and from one group to another. In
most of the developing countries quite a
realistic information support is available to
academia but certain categories such as
administrators, policy makers, non-government
organisations and grass root level workers still
lack effective information support
There is an imbalance in the infrastructure
and information and documentation services in
developmental studies. What is available is not
known to the users. In the present day world
the distribution between information rich and
information poor is not necessary dependent on
the degree of possession of available
information source but on the utilisation of such
information. There is therefore an urgent need
of creating information locating tools which
provide access to inforrnation sources like
directories, inventories, union catalogues, etc
Unfortunately there is a lack of organised
information about these tools.
A better cooperation between the library
intermediaries, and users of information can be
of great help in this matter. Both are to be
15

exposed to each others tools and techniques in
exploiting and making full use of information.

6.

CONCLUSION

It is relevant to point out the results of
development researchers that have policy
implications are not generafly properly
disseminated among the target group of users
such as policy makers, business and industry
and others which results in grosss under
utilisation of these research findings. The style of
writing of such reports for the peer group has
also to be changed and need to be repackaged
in different formats for different users' groups

specially for administrators and policy makers.
There is no doubt a big imbalance between
the demand and supply of developmental

information not only in India but world wide.
The situation can be improved only by sharing
resources and networking among libraries and
information centres, so that one can reatly make
better use of existing limited resources.
In the end it may be emphasised that
development studies, being of interdisciplinary
nature require information support involving
several disciplines and cannot be just limited to
the traditional disciplines like economic
development. For making effective information
support in this area multiple sources have
therefore to be tapped. Only inter- and
intradisciplinary approach can provide effective
information Support f a development studies in
a realistic manner.

