@\DOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 18, No. 5, September 1998, pp. 3-8

0 1998, DESlDOC

ONLINE PUBLIC ACCESS CATALOGUE
/

A Aruna*

Abstract
Developments in stand-alone systems led libraries to use these systems and
streamline their data processing operations. Apart from routine operations,
the libraries started developing bibliographic databases by inputting the
bibliographic details of the books available in the particular library. Now the
scenario is that these databases are available on networks.

1.

WHAT IS OPAC

Catalogues of an increasing number of
libraries are now available for searching online.
These are known as Online Public Access
Catalogues (OPACs). Such OPACs may be
searched from a terminal within the originating
library or at a terminal elsewhere in the
organisation or remotely via national or
international telecommunication networks.
Obviously, searching a library catalogue at a
distance marks a notable development in the
use of library catalogues.

1.2 OPAC Versus Card Catalogue
The library catalogue exists primarily to
hdicate the books available in a particular
library.
The objectives of the library catalogue, first
Set Out by Cutter in 1967, were:
(1) To enable a person to find a book about
which one of the following is known
0 theauthor

0 the title
0 the subject
(2) To show what the library has
'Car Turbine Researdi Establishment
hn~alore.

R ~ D OBulleti,,
C
of Inf Techno1 1998,18(5)

o by a given author
~3 on a given subject

o in a given kind of literature
(3) To assist in the choice of a book
a as to its edition
OPAC meets all these objectives. Then what
is the difference between OPAC and card
catalogue?
OPAC allows rapid retrieval and postcoordinated retrieval. Postcoordinated retrieval
allows a user to define interactively search
specifications that precisely describe the
information being sought. Card catalogues
support precoordinated retrieval through
standardised headings (entry points) and a
built-in cross-reference structure.

1.3- OPAC and Library Automation
Libraries progressed in utomation by
automating the house keeping procedures, i.e.,
acquisition, circulation control, serials control,
etc. However, integrating (linking) these
activi:ies is much rnore beneficial.
Thus, i t is possible to link the catalogue to
the circulation file so that not only i t IS possible
to know whether a book is in the collection of a
particular library, but also whether i t IS available
on the shelf or on loan at a particular time.
3

I t is important to note that OPACs are not
only des~gnedas an information retrieval system
but as a rnodule o i an Integrated l~brary
management system.

In organisations where LAN/lntranet is
implemented, i t is possible for the user to
search OPAC from the workplace rather than by
a visit to the library. The linking of these
networks to national and possibly international
networks creates the possibility of searching the
catalogue from f a r 4 places.

1.4 OPAC and Information

Retrieval
There is a growing similarity between the
second generation OPAC and traditional
Information Retrieval (IR) system. Many
developments In IR systems have led to
developments in OPAC.
However, we can differentiate the OPAC
and 1R system as shown i n the following table:

2.

TYPES OF OPAC

2.1

First-generation OPACs

Ftrst-generatton OPACs have been derived
from traditional catalogues or computerised
c~rculationsystems. They are also referred as
phrase-~ndexedor precoordinated OPACs. The
number of access keys are limited and they are
siniilar to manual catalogues, i.e., author, title,
class number and possibly subject headings.
First-generation OPACs have the benefit that
usually something is displayed on the terminal
as a result of a search. Thus, if there is not an
exact match, it may display those records which
are nearest to the particular search key. For
example, an incorrectly keyed author search
entered as 'SMTH' may include i n the response
a display including items by 'SMYTH'. If there
are facilities for browsing backwards and
forwards through a sequence this may give the
location of items by the desired author 'SMITH'.

Difference between OPAC and Information Retrieval System

-

OPAC

Information Retrieval System

1.

OPAC is designed for the endusers. It can IR systems are not designed for the end-users and
be easily used by any user for any type of require the skills of information professional. The
query. To make it user friendly, many
search negotiation is carried out by the librarians.
facilities like menus, online user helps,
The librarian has to interact with users to know
online indexes with different approach
their information needs, then formulate search
points etc. are provided (e.g., author,
strategy using vocabulary control devices and
ISBN, class number, etc.).
modify the Strategy i f required.

2.

Records in OPAC database lack abstracts,
and subject description is inadequate.

Records are well-indexed (through descriptors, key
words) and are supported usually with abstracts.

3.

OPAC database includes a library's entire
collection, hence its coverage is on a
wide variety of disciplines and subject
areas.

Coverage is limited in subject scope either to a
single subject or to a range of disciplines linked to
a particular mission.

4.

The underlying assumption in the creation
of OPAC has been that most searches will
be on known documents (documents
whose bibliographic details are known,
atleast partially).

IR systems can be searched by a whole range of
features, such as author, corporate body,
document type etc. The underlying assumption in
this case is that most searching will be for
documents containing information o n a particular
subject.

5.

OPAC provides card catalogue-like
pretoordinated phrase searching and
browsing options.

IR systems mostly piovide postcoordinated
search.

DESIDOC Bulletin of lnf Techno/, 1998, 18(5'

Unfortunately, these OPACs often produce
an output that may not be required because
there might have been an error at the inpur
stage. One of the findings of OPAC research
has been that many users do not spell
accurately. There is no indication to the
garcher that the search term was entered
inaccurately.

2.2

Second-generation OPACs

Second-generation OPACs have their origin
from commercial bibliographic information
retrieval systems of the 1 970s, and accordingly,
have greater similarity to the search services
provided by these systems.
These OPACs are operated by a command
language, which is simplified for use by
inexperienced users. These OPACs provide
keyword searching, that is postcoordinate
searching. Thus, they offer the additional
benefits of search flexibility. They give greater
opportunities for subject access to the records
within the database than the first-generation
OPACs, but this improved subject access is
inhibited by the lack of detailed content
representation within the records.
The searches in second-generation OPACs
are basically of two types:
(a) Phrase searching on pre-coordinatedsubject
headings, and
(b) Keyword searches on indexing data in the
bibliographic records. These searches are
discussed in detail in next section.
Second-generation OPACs suffer from two
problems:
(a) It is very difficult to browse through the
records, and
(b) Large size and wide subject coverage of
many catalogues in comparison with other
bibliographic databases probably haw led to
too many searches suffering from false drops
and/or too many hits.

3.

SEARCHING OPACs

Two
fundamentally
different
search
approaches can be found in OPACs Querying/~uerysearching and Browsing.

~ESIDOCBulktin of Inf Techno[ 1998,18(5)

3.1

Query Searching

Query searching is an appropriate, useful
search option when the aim of the search is
specific, i.e., users information need is fairly well
defined, and this request can be expressed in
the language of the database.
A query consists of term/terms/character/
number/word or words or a phrase, and the
specification (sometimes called the query
formulation),
which defines how
the
component term(s) of the query are to be
interpreted or related for matching purposes
(e.g., using word truncation, range search, field
level search, Boolean combinations, and word
adjacency/proximity operators). The matching
function of an OPAC is the mechanism through
which theretrieval
software makes a
comparison between index terms which
represent documents and query terms to effect
retrieval. The matching criteria are specified
through the ,query by the user, or applied
automatically by the system. Query searching of
either kind utilises an exact matching function
on the manner in which the matching criteria
are specified.

Query searching is of two types:

3.1.1 Phrase searching/Pre-coordinated
search
Phrase searching is done on precoordinated
subject headings. This type of searche is
automatically processed straightforward and the
system looks for the character string or word
adjacency in the specified order. Successful
subject phrase searching in most OPACs still
requires exact match on adeast the initial, main
portion of the subject heading in the catalogue
records.
in some OPACs, when no match occurs on
the user's search term, the system displays
headings in the alphabetical neighbouhood of
the term. This may or may not help the searcher
to find a heading which expresses his search
ir iterest

3.1.2 Keyword searching/Postcoordinated search
In
keyword
subject
search
or
post-coordinated search, query is formulated
usina Ebolear: ex~ressions.This allows search to
5

be performed which can combine terms from
various fields. In Boolean queries, the system's
matching mechanism makes a binary (yes/no)
split of the database between bibliographic
records that
confirm exactly to the
requirements of the query. Partial or 'closest'
matching operations are generally not
supported in second-generation OPACs and
conventional IR systems. The search history is
presented at every stage.

3.2

Browsing

In browsing, user's information needs are
not precisely defined. Browsing can take place
in the set of bibliographic items itself or in the
dictionary-in the set of words or phrases which
appear in the bibliographic item description.
Although browsing may be considered as an
alternative to the matching approach provided
by query searching, in the online context it is
equivalent to browsing the system's indexes.
Browsing is useful for (i) determining the
exact form of entry of a subject heading or
author name, and (ii) finding items similar to an
item known to be useful.
In browsing, the method of indicating the
starting position and direction of browsing also
forms the part of the syntax of system's
language.
Traditional approach of browsing to a search
in a library has been to locate the classification
codes for items under subject headings
appropriate to the search and then to browse

the surrounding shelves for addrtional/related
items. Hence, APPUPA pattern has much hm
advocated. Such browsing could be carried m,
equally well using OPAC, if it has a browsing
capability by making links in the thesaurws,
classification code, subject headings
between records using Hypertext approach.

a

4.

LlMlTATlONS OF OPAC

Despite the increasing use of OPACs
now-adays, there are Inany limitations of
OPACs. These are listed below:

o

D o not provide sufficient assistance in tk
translation of the query terms into the vocabrc
lary used in the catalogue.

o Do not provide online thesaurus aids usefulfor
subject focussing/identifying terms that are
broader or narrower than the topic of search.

o

Do not automatically assist the user by provid
ing alternative formulation of the search statement when the initial approach fails.

o Do not lead the searcher from successful free
text search terms (e.g. title words) to the come
sponding subject headings or class numbers
assigned to a broader range of related materials.

o Do not provide sufficient informationin the retrieved bibliographic records (e.g.,table of
contents, abstracts, and book reviews) to enable the user to judge the usefulness of the
documents.

o Do not rank the retrieval sets in decreasing
der of probable relevance to the user's search
criteria

I. Querying
(A) Phrase Matching (Text strings or controlled vocabulary)

I

(B) Keywoml Matching (Words with Boolean or proximity formulations)
**Query search requirement: Search aimlcriteria specific and precisely defined.

11. Browsing
(A) Preseguenced, linear: Typically, lists of index terms, headings, descriptors or brief tides)

I

I

(B) Nomlinear, multidirpctional(Navigation, chain, relational browsing)
"Browse search requirement: Search aimlcriteria not specific, not known, and/
or cannot be expressed in appropriate query/
indexing language. Two online catalogue search/
access options.

I

I
6

Two online catalogue searches/access options

1

DESIDOC Bulletin oflnf Techno/, 1998. 18(5)

a Do not provide open-ended, exploratory
browsing through preestablished linkages between records in the database to retrieve materials related to those already found.

5.

OPAC OF SUCHJKA

At this point, it is appropriate to evaluate
OPAC module of SUCHIKA software-an
integrated software package developed mainly
for DRDO libraries by DESIDOC.
Following are some of the observations on
the OPAC module of SUCHIKA:

0 It allows query searching of both typesPhrase Searching and KeywordSearching.
It provides the following search techniques:

It doesn't provide negotiation in search
expression, if there have been typographical
errors.
0 It provides online indexes on different access
points, i.e., BASK INDEX-KEY WORDS and
ADDlTlONAL INDEX-AUTHOR, ISBN,
REPORT NUMBER., CLASS NUMBER and
ACCESSION NUMBER.

CI This allows users to know how exactly the
particular author/search term is rendered and
also allows to Browse on these indexes.
It doesn't provide index of precoordinated
(using vocabulary control) terms given in
Descriptors field. Basic index gives the list of
words from Title, Part, Series and Descriptor
fidds.

(a) Word truncation/steming-It provides right
truncation by ?' mark e.g. Computer?

f3 Every time the records are added to database,

(b) Word
adjacency
operator/proximi t y
operator-It is possible to search a phrase
that has two or more search terms adjacent to
each other in the same field, e.g., Allergic
reaction.

0 Data merging details and the index updation

Punctuation is taken care by treating it as
equivalent to space or alternatively use For
example, e.g., CP M
not CP/M
But if two search terms are separated by one
or more stop word(s), it cannot retrieve, e.g.,
Allergic cross-reaction
Allergic-type reaction
Bay of Bengal
(c) Fieldlevelsearch-This search can be done by
using 'IN' operator for following fields-TI,
AU, IS, ON, SE, CN, DE and AN. If IN operator
is not used then search is done on the fields
TI, SE and DE, e.g., Opac in ti

(d) Limitfields/Range search-A search can be
further narrowed down by using limit
',
'<=', I=>
on
'
field
operators i.e, 'c', -I>'d,
'Document type (DT)' and 'Publication year
(PY), e.g., dt-I15 PY>1990
It doesn't take 'Language' field as limit field.
(e) Combining concepts-It allows combining
two or more search terns by using all three
logical Boolean operators, i.e., 'AND', 'OR',
'NOT', e.g., Libraries and Computer?

0 Complex searches are possible with the help
of parenthesis, e.g., ((Classification IN TI) and
(Ranganathan In TI))
DESIDOC Bulletin ollnf Techno1 1998,18(5)

BASIC INDEX and ADDITIONAL INDEX have
to be updated separately giving the range of
record numbers, which is cumbersome.
details are tb be maintained manually in a
register, which is not practical.

0 It doesn't provide online thesaurus to help
searcher in knowing M s and BTs for' his
search terms to improve his search
expression.
El It doesn't provide cross-reference index for
acronyms, synonyms, etc.
To display the search results, it provides
three-options, i.e., titles, short citation and
ffull citation. First option displays 'Browsing
Screen' of titles of the retrieved records for
browsing. Then, it allows to mark the selected
record for display of short/ full citation or for
downloading. This facility to some extent
satisfies the user's browsing activity.

13 As i t is a module of integrated library
managementsystem, it provides the option to
show the issue status of the current record,
i.e., whether the document retrieved is on
circulation or not.

C3 it provides online help to users in conducting
their search.

CI It is user-friendly as it is menu-driven.
Keeping in view the latest technological
developments, this OPAC should include
HypertextIHypermedia features for
emulating Browslng.

It allows remote access through dial-up
mode/l-Net.
It can be concluded that OPAC module of
SUCHlKA falls under secondgeneration
OPACs. Though it has some Imitations (can be
sorted out in future versions), it is a fairiy good
OPAC package.

2.

Hilderth, Charles R (M). The online
catalogue: Devdopmeni and d i r e c k
Library Association, London, 1989.

3.

Hilderth, C h a k R Odme public a c c a ~
catalogs: Annual review of Informationand
technology (ARIST). Vd. 20. 1985.
pp.232-285.

Marcella, Rita & Newton, Robert. A m
manual o f classification. Grover
publications, England, 1994.
5. SUCHIKA ver I.@
User's guide. DESIWC,
Delhi, 1996-97.

4.

REFERENCES
1.

Hartely, RJ, et a.! Online searching:
London,
Principles and practices. ,&B
1993.

