D [ s ~ D O CBulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 18, No. 5, September 1998, pp. 19-24

g 1998, DESIDOC

Trends in IT: The Media Switchover Dilemma
M JaganMohan Rao, B Annapurna, KH Babu and Dr RN Biswas*
,
Abstrad
Many Libraries and lnformation Centres aH over the world are facing the
dilemma of striking a balance between the a g e ~ l dprint media and new
electronic media. An experiment run in the United States during 1991-95
under code name 7ULlP' and the 'CORE' project based at the Cornell
University, US, provide insights into the issue and facilitate the resolution
of the dilemma. The salient findings of these experiments and the likely
shape the search for online information rnay take are briefly discussed.

1.

INTRODUCTION

and the elimination of connect time expenses
involved in the online services.

Libraries and information centres in the
research and development
establishments
subscribe to a number of journals, most of
which are of foreign origin, technical in nature
and expensive. A trend that is discernible in the
field of publishing of technical literature is,
though the print media is retained, electronic
media is also used parallely and in increasing
volume every year. For example, all the IEEE
journals are now available in CD-ROM for
besides print copy editions. The number of
journals switching over to online or CD-ROM
format are increasing every year. AH the
important patents, standards like D O D and
other international standards are now supplied
in CD-ROM form. Many technical books these
days
contain floppies or CD-ROMs
to
augment the information in the book The
major appeal of CD-ROMs is that they bring
ir~forrnationback in the local setting like print
media, and urilike it, the space required to
store the information is much less. The
CD-ROMs are attractive alternative due to the
ease and speed of access to the information
'Defence Research & Deve/opment Laboratory
Hyderabad - 500 058.
DESlDOC Bulletin o l t d Techol, 1998,18(5)

2.

-

ESTABLISHMENT OF DIGITAL
LIBRARIES

In a number of establishments/academic
institutions, 'DIGITAL LIBRARY has been
established to deal with the information in
digitised as well as in electronic form. The
dilemma facing
many institutions is the
apportionment of financial resources between
conventional and new sources of information.
The present status and an intelligent guess on
the future shape the field of information is
likely to take are two vital inputs to resolve both
the long- teim and short-term investment issues.
An experiment involving many of the
parameters like generation and publication of
information in computer accessible form, its
communication to the users, hardware and
scftware issues involved, user preferences etc.
that influence the shape of things to come
were conducted in the United States during
1991 to 1995. The code name of the
experiment was TULIP (The University of
Licensing Program). The
focus
of the
experiment was to test one key aspect,
namely, networked delivery of journals to user's
19

desktop and the extent of their usage. The
results and conclusions of the experiment are
helpful in providing pointers to the resolution of
not only to journals issue but also the future of
information in electronic form. Another study
with similar objectives though specific to the
field of chemistry is the CORE (Chemical
Online Retrieval ~xperiment)' project also in
US, based at the Cornell University. I! is a
large experimental electronic library project
involving realistic laboratory environment. The
objectives
and the
essential conclusions
reported so far in these projects are presented
in brief in this article.

3.

DIGITAL LIBRARY

3.1

Definition

Digital
library' may be defined
as
electronic information collection containing
large and diverse repositories of digital objects,
which can be accessed by a large number of
geographically distributed users. Digital objects
include text, images, maps, sounds, videos,
catalogues and indices, and scientific, business
and
government
data sets as well as
hyper textual multimedia composition of such
elements. In the present day context, in India,
digital libraries are likely to be a part of the
main libraries traditionally holding the print
media documents and would be viewed as
complementary rather than competitor to the
latter.
The key feature of digital libraries is that
they are network-based distributed systems
with individual servers responsible
for
maintaining local collections
of
digital
documents ranging from sets of electronic texts
to video-ondemand services. A 'digital library
would provide a coherent, consistent view of
many repositories of information allowing users
to
searnlessly connect and interact with
information with no regard to geographic
location or time. The term 'seamless' in the
context of digital libraries means that the user
need not be aware of the computer and
communication
related
heterogeneous
environment that could exist between him and
the information sought.

The key components of digital libraries c a
be listed as follows:
(a) Geographically distributed
information collection and users

digital

(b) Information represented by a variety of
digital objects
(c) Large and diverse collections
(d) 'Seamless' access

4.

ADVANTAGES OF DlClTAL
LIBRARIES,

The advantages of digital libraries are many.
In the area of search for information, fast online
search is replacing printed abstract journair
Ubiquity, in the sense a single electronic copy
can be accessed from many locations by many
simultaneous users, is another advantage. The
other advantages are in the
area of
preservation. Since the digital information can
be copied by many without error a d
preserved without
deterioration,
making
upto-date current literature available to users
and access to new kinds
of multimedia
materials have no equivalent in any traditional
format.

5.

THE TULIP STUDY

The TULIP study by a consortium of one
of the leadlng technical literature publishers
(Elsevier Science) and
nine
renowned
universities (Carnegie Mellon, Cornell, Georgia
Institute of Technology, MIT, California,
Michigan, Tennesse, Washington and ~irginia)
is to jointly test the systems for networked
delivery and use of journals at the user's
desktop. The technical conclusions of the study
are the following:
(a) The first technical conclusion was on the
web. The web is a set of protocols that give
Internet users interactive access to a huge
variety of content on the Internet. In many
people's view, the web is the content itself
and not the underlying protocols. ~hough
the web does not provide some real-time
functionality features like image-zooming
available in the windows applications, users
favoured and shifted to the web.
(b) The bandwidth restriction and other
limitations of the prevailing transmission
DESIDOC Bulletin oilnf Techno/, 1998,18(~)

schemes do not permit large scale lnternet
FFP (File Transfer Protocol) transfer. FTP i s a
program used on lnternet to connect one's
computer with the remote host computer
and allow search and selection of files for
transfer.
(c) The elecironic collection building of
institutions is likely to be layered, composed
of local servers for primary relevant material
and remote servers for material of secondary
importance.

6.

EASE OF USE

The TULIP study has brought out that the
end users have certain requirements regarding
functionality, ease of use and critical mass of
electronic information services. With respect to
ease of use, the services should be as intuitive
as possible and should be preferably from a
familiar interface. The access to all information
should be from one source. The
search
capabilities should be very effective with high
processing speed. The information should be
timely and there should be linking of
information. The quality of image text should be
good. The number of journals covered should
be sufficient and their time coverage should
be adequate. While there is enthusiasm about
the desktop access to electronic inforrnation,
the end of print media is far away still, if at all
it happens. The reason is that there are
practical benefits of paper products besides
'emotional' ties with paper for many users.

7.

NEW DEVELOPMENTS

New developments are taking place every
day in the areas of communication and
lnternet technologies. More powerful and
versatile browsers like Microsoft lnternet
Explorer Release 4 came to the market in
October 97. By the end of 1997 an exclusive
net-Internet 2' will start operating in US for
sophisticated academicians who are presently
hampered by the slow speed of all and
sundry users of present Internet. The Internet 2,
the special Internet, is planned to operate at 2.4
gigabytes per second speed with the half of a
new routing and switching technologies called
Gigapops built on ATM switching system. The
spread of lnternet 2 facility across the
continents cannot be far behind. This is exactly
DESlDOC Buktin of lnf Techol, 1998,18(5)

the place where the other recent dwelopment
in co~munication called FLAG (Rbre-optic
Link Around Globe) will fit it. The project
FLAG when completed will be the
longest cable link measuring about 28,000 km
and will provide data transmission speed of
5.3 gbps (gigabytes per second) comparable
to futuristic low flying satellite constellations
like Iridium and' Tele disk All these
developments are going to have direct and
indirect impact on the digital library functions
and popularity.

8.

THE CORE PROJECT

The CORE project is primarily concerned
with the conversion of large text and graphics
collections to an electronic format and use the
same to serve the document delivery needs of
scholars
in a distributed networking
environment. The technological problems of
full-text retrieval and delivery are investigated
in this project. The
five objectives of the CORE
L
project are to
(a) Define a suitable archite;ture for delivery of
full-text inforrnation in a distributed
networking
environment
with
heterogeneous workstations;
(b) Convert and mount a critical mass of
chemistry journal data in a database format
suitable for effective retrieval and display;
(c) Study the elements of full-text interface
functionality necessary to serve the needs of
scholars in a network document delivery
environment;
(d) Advance the understanding of suitable
document mark up for electronic full-text
databases; and
(e) Investigate inforrnation retrieval questions
germane to the coming era of full-text
delivery.

9.

DATA ACQUISITION

The data acquisition in CORE project was
both by scanning paper and scanning film. It is
reported that while paper scanning
was
relatively straightforward and routine, the film
scanning was more complicated and the
quality was much lower than that of the
former. The users familiar with high quality of
the normal printed journals would find the
21

reprints from the scanned matter needing
much improvement.
The study of
response time
ksws
confirmed the need as in the case of TULIP
experiment the desirability of faster response
for browsers. In order
to
serve
as
replacements for the paper, online full-text
systems should faithfully project the illustrations
in the journal articles. The CORE project
investigated this aspect using the data provided
by American Chemical Society (ACS). The ACS
was one of the
leaders in
computer
typesetting of primary journals for more than
two decades and their proprietary data markup
has been effective
for the database
maintenance.
For
the
definition
of
deviceindependent and system-independent
methods of representing text in electronic
form the I S 0 standard (60-8879, 1986) widely
known
as SGML
(Standard Generalised
Markup Language) is followed.
In the CORE project, the ACS structured
files were translated to confirm to this I S 0
standard. The issues and problems associated
with the conversion of database to SMGL, its
design and use have been addressed to in the
CORE project.

10. LESSONS FROM CORE
PROJECT
Some of the lessons learnt from the CORE
project about building and use of large digital
library systems are summarised below:
(a) Work involved in the creation and
management of data even from only one
publisher and in only one subject area is
enormous
and certainly no less than
interface work.
(b) In particular, data which involve more than
flat ASCII file are tricky.

(c) There is inadequate standardisationof special
character
sets,
procedures
for
subscripting/superscripting and so on which
is essential for user comfort.
(d) In order to find all the special cases for the
format conversion software scanning few
articles are not enough, but gigabytes of data
should be scanned.

(e) The value of pictures to the users has clearly
emerged. They frequently look first and
mostly at the pictures.

(1) The users are very interestedin browsing. The
search metaphor is not the only way to look
at digital library and further work to cater for
users who do not know what they want until
they see it is needed.

11. TRANSITION TO DIGITAL
LIBRARIES
The pace at &ich Digital Libraries would
evolve depends on many factors. The TULIP
report generated some important
insights
concerning this question. These are summarised
below:
(a) At the moment, managing large digital
collections locally is harder and more
expensive than managinga comparable print
collection.
(b) Not everyone is ready for digital collections,
nor will
they be soon. A couple of
technological breakthroughs and more
importantly crossing psychological barriers
will be needed to make the digital library
widely acceptable. Whether one talks of
large local stores of data, or regional
networked collections, or single remote
hosts, the number of academic libraries,
really ready to support digital collections, is
still small.
(c) Users will only move to electronic
publications when they find the content they
need in sufficient quantity. The sufficient
quantity of needed information is akin to the
'critical mass' required to sustain the chain
reaction in the atomic world. Having
journals in electronic form and bringing
them to the desktop, are necessary but not
sufficient conditions for the scholarly user.
One must deliver a certain 'critical mass' of
needed information to warrant learning a
new system or accessing information in a
different way.
(d) For the publisher, expanding electronic
publishing (internationally) offers challenges
very different from paper
Publishers have been delivering a u~iifom
product which
required comparatively
much less local training or support all over
the world. With electronics, this is not the
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1998, 18(5)

=me; the process is more complicated and
requires a different magnitude of
involvement from the publisher.

12. O N U N E SEARCH: PROXY
SEARCH ENGINES
The popularity of online search through
parch engines depends on how easily the
relevant information can be reached by the
users through them. This in turn is influenced by
the indexing of the resources and making
them available for easy access. In this context,
Proxy Search Engines (PSE) which help to
reduce network traffic and the number of
requests to be answered by primary servers
are importants.A proxy web server intercepts
user's requests for web pages, checks if there is
a copy of the required page in the local cache,
and responds to the user with this page if it is
up-to-date. If there is no such copy or it is
outdated, the proxy sewer retrieves the original
copy, places it in the cache and sends it to the
user. In the near future, it is likely that online
search would be carried not by isolated PSEs
but by a network of interacting information
brokers exchanging information in a rational
way. These brokers are called What's Hot'
brokers and enable information demand to
meet information supply.

13. BENEFITS A N D DRAWBACKS
O F ELECTRONIC JOURNALS
The most important benefit of electronic
journals is the saving in the time involved from
submission of the article to its reaching the
reader'. The electronic journals also save the
time of the user normally spent in sifting
information by allowing Boolean search of
the full-text to browse and read only the
selected item. The drawbacks are mostly
technological in nature and include low
resolution of display units, reduced and
restricted images and poor printouts. Also
the requirement of availability of the user end
gadgets and software are not totally
standardised and frozen for
effective
exploitation of the journals.

DESIDOC Bunecin of Id Techol, 1998,18(5)

14. C O N C L U S ~ ~ N
The TULIP and CORE studies have
brought out most of the relevant factors that
govern the switchover decision from print to
electronic media in respect of technical
journals. The conclusion of these studies help
the institution in decision making on the
journals issue. At the extreme, some may
choose to continue with the print media while
others prefer to switch over
entirely to
electronic media Both these have their pitfalls
and prices to pay. As a middle course, some
institutions may opt to partly switch over to
the new media in respect of selected journals
and those no longer available in the print media
or if available have both print and electronic
media copies of the same journal. In
conclusion, it is safe to say that emerging
information technologies are making a definite
foray in the field of library science. Digital
is
a
library is still evolving, as it
multidisciplinary concept involving highly
sophisticated hardware
and software
technologies. The real place of digital libraries
in our set up would largely be governed by the
demand from usen, availability of necessary
infrastructure and economics of information
transfer from source to end user.

REFERENCES
1.
2.

3.

4.

5.

TULIP Final Report, ISBN 0-44482540.1,
Elsevier Science.
Entrich, Richard, et a/. Making a digital
library: The contents of the CORE project
ACM Transactions on Information Systems,
1997, 15(2), 103-23.
Rajasekhar, TB. What is new in computers?
Digital Libraries: Resonance, 1997, 4,
60-73.
Bob Woods. Faster and costlier 'Internet 2'
coming up. Computer Today, 1997,
13(152), 100.
Kosymnin, Arkadi. From bookmark
managers to distributed indexing: an
evolutionary way to the next generation of
search
engines. IEEE Communications
Magazine, 1997, 35(6), 146-5 1.
23

6.

24

Lakshmana Moorthy, SA & Karisiddappa,
CR. Electronic publishing: Impact and
implications on library and information
centres. In Digital Libraries Dynamic %re

house of Digitized Information, edited by
NM Malwade, et al. New Age
tntemational Limited Publishers, b b e ~
Ddhi, 1996, pp 15-35.

DESOOC BuUetin of lnf Technd, 1998,18(5)

