DESIDOC Bulletin ofInbnnation Technology, Vol. 18, No. 5, September 1998, pp. 25-32
43 1998, DESIDOC

Research on University Library Finance in India
K Navalani* and PC Sehgal**
Abstract
Education and libraries play a significant role in bringing about qualitative
improvements in human resources. Finance plays a vital rde in growth and
development of libraries. This article presents statistical data about finances
of university libraries of seven states taken from Ph.D theses of library &
information science scholars.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Human resources constitute the ultimate
basis for generating wealth for nations. The
development of human resources is indeed
both a means as well as an end in itself; and
therefore, almost all exercises pertaining to
socioeconomic policy formulation, and the
planning and implementation strategies thereof,
focus essentially on attaining the goal of human
resource development'. It i s the development of
human resources of a nation, not its capital or
its material resources, that ultimateiy determine
the character and pace of economic and social
development which, in effect, influence the
quality of life of people.
The national policy on education rightly
states that higher education provides people
with an opportunity to reflect on critical social,
economic, cultural, moral and spiritual issues
facing the humanity. It contributes to national
development
through
dissemination
of

specialised knowledge and skills. It is, therefore,
a crucial factor for sur~iva\~.
Library is regarded as the heart of any
education system. It is difficult to conceive how
higher education system can achieve its goal of
human resource development in a library. It is
here that students and teachers come in
contact with scholars of the past and present
and drink deep the knowledge and wisdom of
the society to develop their intellectual horizon.
Thus, higher education and libraries are
inextricabty linked and help society by
providing the necessary manpower in different
fields, open new frontiers of knowledge by
research, leading to all-round national
development.
As education, research and development,
information and knowledge have economic
value, as they have significant beating on
productivity, universities spend on research and
development for this purpose.

2.
* Retired Professw,
Department of Library and Information Science
Punjabi University
Patiala.
*Assistant librarian
Punjabi University Library
Patiala.
DESlDOC BuRetin of Id Techol, 1998,18(5)

EXPENDITURE ON R&D

The expenditure on R&D as a percentage of
GNP for the whole world in 1990 was 2.55 per
cent. For the developed countries, this
percentage has gone up from 2.22 per cent in
1980 to 2.62 per cent in 1985 and further to
2.9 per cent in 1990, whereas in the case of
25

developing countries the percentage of these
three years were 0.52 per cent, 0.54 per cent
and 0.64 per cent, respectively. In other words,
the developed countries, by understanding the
importance of research and development in
national development, spent four times more of
their GNP than their counterparts in developing
world, on R&D. And in terms of actual money, i t
is much more. Deployment of resources for
higher eduqtion, research and libraries are
essentially treated as investment, the fruits of
which are reaped both by the individuals and
the society for longer periods. Therefore, the
task of making provisions for them is assumed
mostly by governments.
Finance plays a vital role in growth and
development
of
university
libraries.
Consequently, various commissions and
committees on higher education and libraries
have considered this factor from time to time
and have suggested means for making provision
for university libraries. Man, seminars and
conferences have also given attention to this
factor of university iibary.
In view of such a significant role of higher
education and libraries in bringing about
qualitative improvements in human resources,
the aspects of costs and finance of the system
become an interesting area of investigative
research. Some of the scholars have taken up
this topic of finance of .university libraries for
Ph.0. theses in India.

3.

FINANCING OF SOME
UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES IN
INDIA

3.1

Delhi

The Maulana A n d Library: A Major Library
of the World (1877-1988) by Ishrat Ali Qureshi7
is a case study of the library. It also compares
the library with two other central university
libraries, viz., Delhi University Library and
Benaras Hindu University Library. This doctoral
dissertation also touches upon the finances of
university library. Its findings are:

(a) The percentage of the libmy budget to the
total budget of the Aligarh Muslim Urriversity
has shown no significant variation over along

(b)

(c)

(d)
(e)

period. It was 3.02 per cent in '1961-62 and
3.3 per cent in 1986-87, which is almost half
of the norms recommended by the
University Education Commission. However,
the book budget has been shaving growth
every year and sometimes had big strides.
The rate of growth varied, e.g., inthe five year
the rate of
plan of 1966-67-1970-71,
growth was 304 per cent.
The expenditure on books and periodicals
per student in 1951-52was only Rr 10.63 but
after 35 years the expenditun on$iooks and
periodicals per student was Rs. 298.02.
Even with so much accelerated grant, the
annual intake of books does not exhibit the
corresponding increase. Number df books
acquired in 1951-52 by the university was
5622, whereas in 1983-84it acquired 20,534
books.
The increase in terms of money was 30 tifpes,
whereas the corresponding increase in
acquisition was less than 4 times.
The expenditure per student on books and
periodicals in 198384 in the three
universities i.e, Aligarh Muslim University,
Benaras Hindu University and Ddhi
Univenity was Rs. 285.94, Rs. 204.51 and Rs.
44.08, respectively.

.

3.2

Gujarat

A Ph.D. thesis by KS shukIa8 also contains a
chapter on University Library Finance in
Gujarat. According to this thesis, the average
expenditure per plan of each of the six
university libraries in Gujarat is Rs.13,62,975
from 1951-56 to 1989-90 (seven Five Year
plans) and the percentage of every plan to total
plan period expenditure ranges from 0.62 to
33.54. The average growth rate over starting
plan reveals that i t is erratic and varies from
university to university.. The highest is 40 times
of SP University Library and the lowest 6 t i m
of Surashtra and Bhavnagar University Libraries.
Total percentage of expenditure on
university libraries in Gujarat to their universitfs
total expenditure falls for the entire plan period
is 5.55 which is found 1 per cent less than Dr.
Ranganathan's recommendations of minimum
of 6.5 per cent. Gujarat university libraries spent
45.44 per cent on staff salaries. Reading
material, i.e., periodicals and b o o b are getting
DESIDOCBuRetinof Inf Technol, 1998,18(5)

almost the same percentage i.e., 24.27 per cent
for periodiils and 23.8 per cent on book.
Hamver, the percentage varies h r n university
w tmhesity.

Another Ph.D. dissertation titled Reswrte
Abcation in University Libraries, by G
0evarajan4 examines the state of financing in
university (ibmries in Kerala from kt plan period
to 7th plan period. findings of the study are:
(a) Externalx t u ~ e scontribute the major portion
of university rwenue in Kerah. Grants from
the state gavemment constitutes the major
portion of income of the universities. The
income from internalsources is nevertheless
on the increase from year to year. Hawever,
thew was uneven growth rate of income
amOn8 the ~t'tkGitie5.
(b)The funds allocated fKun university budget
and grants receivec(t from the UGC
constituted the major sources of income of
the uni%rsity libraries in krala. No
endowments were m5IaMe but gifts in the
form of bookswremceived by the university

libraries.
(c) There was a wick variation in respect of
revenue of the university libraries during the
plan periods. An year4se comparison of
university allocation and UGC grants to
libraie in Kwda showedihat the university
allocalion to libraries had shown a steady
increase over the plan periods whereas the
UGC grants had been of a varying nature.
Id) There was a high degree of positive
codatian between the total university
revenue and total library rwenue in the
univer&y libraries in Kerala during the plan
periods. fhe correlation coeQci'ent was
+0.999 in the Kerala University Libray,
Ml.997 in the Cdicut University library and
+0.9#4 in the Cochin University Library.
(e) The growth rate of expenditure during the
plan periods was 28 times, 9 times and 40
in the Universitiesof Kerala,Calicut and
&chin
University of Science and
*Technology, respectively.
(#)*A plan-wise expenditure patternshowed that
the rate of increase was not uniform from
@anto plan in the universities. The tend in
expenditure on recurring items confirmed
the fact that the expenditure in libraries was
DESlDOC Buffetin ofIdTechd, 1998,16(5)

(g)

(h)

(i)

(j)

primarily recurring. The growth rate of
recurring expenditure from plan to plan was
more or less uniform. The growth rate from
the 1st PIan to 7th Plan was 246 times, 13
times and 39 times in the Kerala, wcut and
Cochin University Libraries (from 4th to 7th
Plan), respectidy.
All the three university libraries under study
had spmt onfy a negligible pecentage on
binding.
The ratio of expenditure on .salaries, books
and periodicak and other jtems varied from
library to Iibrary. It was S:2:1 in the Kerala
University Library, and 19:9:1 and 1:2:2 in
the Calicut and Cochin University Libraries,
respectively.
The percentage of university library
expenditure in relation to university
expenditure in Kerala varied from 0.35 per
cent to 5.66 per cent during the plan perid.
The study revealedthat the yeawise estimate
d university library expenditure in rdation to
university expenditure varied from 0.28 per
cent Co 7.41 per cent.
The average per capita expenditure in the
Kerala, Calicut and Cochin University
Libraries was Rs. 11.38, 8.61 and 91.05,
respectively. The state average of per capita
expenditure in the university libraries was
only 13.58. By applying the norm suggested
by Or SR Rangmathan (Rs 100 per student)
tho Kerala, Calicut and Cochin University
Libmies fall short by Rs. 3193.1 lakh, Rs.
1528.98 fakh, and Rs. 1 &.8lakh,respectively,

Uoers' opinion was also sought by the
author. Results revealed that:
{a) The physical facilities and equipment *re
not avalable at the desired.level in Kerala
Univenity Libraries.
(b) The different types of reading mate+&
which were very essential to users for study,
teaching and rerearch programmeswere not
available in adequate number. This hadstood
in the way of the university libraries in
fulfilling the requirements of users effectively
for supporting the objectives of the
university.
(c) The manpower of the university libraries in
Kerala was competent and adequate in
number to provide services to the user
cummunity.

(d) The user community in the university libraries
in Kerah was not adequately aware of the
existing services provided by the libraries.
(e) Also the existing services were not suitably
organised for
fulfilling the actual
requirements of users. This was due to lack
of proper user education and user studies.

3.4

Madhya Pradesh

The first such attempt was by Late Dr
Tejomurthy3. His Ph.D. thesis titled University
Library ~inances in Madhya Pradesh gives
p i a u m of overall growth of expenditure of
university libraries in Madhya Pradesh from 1st
plan period to 1980. The author prepared
growth rate indices of each university. He
concluded that the expenditure is rising. He,
however, noted that the proportion of library
expenditure to total expenditure has gone
down to 5 per cent from 25 per cent during the
plan period, whereas the total enrolment in
post-graduate departments has increased ten
times from. an average of 300 students per
university to about 3000 students per
university.
His findings are as under:
(a) Other things being equat, more senior
university libraries, like Sagar University
library have spent higher percentage of their
total amount on recurring items, and junior
university libraries, like Bhopal University
Library have spent lower percentage of their
funds on recurring items.
(b) More senior university libraries have spent
lower percentage of their funds on nonrecurring items, and less senior university
librarieshavespent higher percentageof their
funds on non-recumng items.
(c) About 40-60 per cent of the total library
expenditure in different university libraries i s
being spent on the purchase of boob,
periodicals and other kindred materials.
(d) Staff salaries and wages form about 5 to 35
per cent of the total expenditure.
(e) Backward university libraries lik Awadesh
Pratap Singh University, Rewa spend higher
percentage of their expenditure on
miscellaneous iterns.

3.5

Punjab

University Library Finance: A Case Study of
Punjab by Saroj Balas has been a recent Ph.D.
thesis on the topic It has compared the
finances of three univwsiti of Punjab, i.e.,
Punjab University,
Chandigarh;
funjabi
University, Patiala; and GUN Nan* Dw
University, Amritsar. She states that over the
four decades (1952-53 b 1991-92), the
university revenue registered a growth rate of
4.33 per cent per annum and the expenditure
4.64 per cent per armurn.
Almost two-thirds (64.37 per cent) of the
annual average finance has been originated
from external sources.
Between the external and internal raising
revenues, the external revenue registered a
marked positive growth of 9.86 per cent per
annum during 1952-53 to 1991-92 and the
internal revenue a negative growth of 1.22 per
cent per annum.
Academic expenditure registered a 4.93 per
cent per annum growth for the three
universities taken together, it was 4.02 per cent
per annum in the case of academic support
component.
Of the three constituents of scale
formation--teaching and research, library and
improvement of education, the maximum per
annum growth rate is of teaching and research
(8.78 per cent) followed by expenditure on
library (5.75 per cent) and imprwement of
education (2.95 per cent). Administration
related expenditure registered a higher growth
rate of 5.50 per cent per annum and the
miscellaneous expenditure grew at relatively
low rate of 3.34 per cent per annum.
A temporal association of each of the subconstituents of expenditure with the overall
university expenditure reveals that a one per
cent change in university expenditure induces a
proportional change in each of its constituents
but for the two exceptions: (i)expenditure on
examination and (ii) expenditure on
improvement of education. In the former case,
there is no association and in the latter case it is
less than unit elastic. The behaqiour of different
components of expenditure of three
DESlDOC Bulletin dlnf Technd, 1998,18(5)

universities, over their life span, is similar to
overall behaviour of Punjab.

only two times in Pun@ University, five times

Weight of library expense in the academic
budget has, on an average annual basis, been at
the state level (Punjab) was 7.01 per cent
during 1952-53 to 1991-92. Across the three
universities, the average share was maximum in
Guru Nanak Dev University (14.06 per cent)
and minimum in Punjab University (5.38 per
cent).

Agricultural University and three times in Guru
Nanak Dev University.

The log-linear relation yields elasticity coefficient of more than unity, 1.410, i.e, a one
per cent increase in library budget. However, a
linear relation yidds a marginal coefficient of
less than unit value (0.03), i.e, a one rupee
increase in academic budget induces an
increase of 3 paise in library budget.
The relative weights of salaries, books,
periodicals, binding and miscellaneous in the
university library budget of Punjab is 39.1 1 per
cent, 12.82 per cent, 31.33 per cent, 1.09 per
cent and 15.65 per cent, respectively.
Interestingly, the expenditure allocated to the
constituents of library budget do not differ
among the three university tibraries in respect
of two subcategories, namely, salaries (F P
0.45) and books (F = 0.61) where F-values
yielded by ANOVA test are statistically not
significant.
Although university library fun& have, &en
expressed in terms of constant prices (1980- 81
~ 1 0 0 grown
)~
at the rate of around 5 per cent
per annum, in each of the three universities, the
growth in the number of volumes added to the
collection has been nominal.
Besides these three Ph.D. dissertations,
many Ph.D. candidates, who have investigated
growth and development of various university
libraries, haw also touched upon this topic
There is also a chapter on Financial
Management in Development and Growth of
University Libraries and Their Services in
Punjab-a thesis for Ph.D. degree by Trishanjit
Kaur.' Her findings are that library budgets wer
the pars have also increased along with
university budgets. However, there was no
corresponding gnmth in the library outlay in
the universities of Punjab. And in real terms,
after deflation, the growth of expenditure was
DESIDOC Bullclin of lnf Techd, 1998,18(5)

in Puj a b University, two times in the Punjab

3.6. Rajasthan
There is a chapter on Financial Management
in SP So~d's'~Ph.D. thesis on University
Libraries in Rajasthan: Their Development and
Management. This study reveals that out of the
seven university libraries whose data on finance
were available, none was getting the
percentage of amount as recommended by
various cmmittees/commissiom, i.e., 6.5 to 10
per cent during 1986-87 to 1990-91; the range
was between 0.9 per cent to 6.29 per cent. The
lowest 0.9 per cent was allotted by Rajasthan
University to its library in 1986-87 and the
highest 6.29 per cent was by Kota Open
University in 1988-89. The lowest expenditure
(25.52 per cent) was that of Kota Open
University and the highest is of Rajasthan
University, i.e., 61.5 per cent.

3.7

Uttar Pradesh

Dr. Sonal singh4in her doctorate dissertation
titled The Development of University Libraries
in Uttar Pradesh after Independence' has also
given a chapter on University Library Finance.
There were twenty universities in Uttar Pradesh
at that time, out of which she has provided
information for 12 universities. She has studied
the. amount allocated to libraries by their
universities out of the university budgets for the
years 1947, 1957, 1967, 1977 and 1987.
During 1983-84, out of nine university libraries,
six were receiving less than 6 per cent of
university budget. The lowest was 2.04 per cent
of Garhwal University. The highest was 5.99 per
cent received by-the University of Gorakhpur.
Interestingly three of the universities, i.e.,
Meerut University, University of Allahabad and
University of Lucknow, provided 9.8 per cent,
13.34 per cent and 22.8 per cent respectively
of their budget for libraries.
She concludes that old university libraries
like Agra, Allahabad, L u h w and Meerut were
generally allacated higher amounts as
compared to the newer ones like Bunddkhand,
Avadh and Gahwal.

The University Grants Commission provided
mainly three types of grants, viz., recurring, nor+
recurring and ad hoc The reaming grants were
mainly for the purchase of books and
periodicals. She found that there was persistent
and steep increase in the muning grant to the
university libraries of Uttar Pra&sh with some
exceptions here and there. The bigger libraries
like Agra, Allahabad, Meerut and Lucknow
received increasingly more money as compared
to the newer and smaller ones like 8undelkhand
and Avadh. Some of these universities also
received ad hoc grants and nonrecurring grants
for specific purposes such as construction of
library building and/or its extension, purchase
of furniture and equipment, modemisation of
libraries, etc.
She was of the view that the grants were not
sufficient and some of the reasons for these
were that libraries were mostly under honorary
librarian during initial stages of their
establishment who had hardly any vision of
requirements of these libraries. The highest is of
Rajasthan Uniiversities, 61.5 per cent. She also
laments that though the visiting teams of the
University Grants Commission do visit the
universities and assess their needs, yet the
absence of the library expert from the
quinquennial visiting committees certainly mars
its utility for libraries.

4.

FINANCES OF
ACRICU LWRAL LIBRARIES

RG rasher‘ in his study tided Managing
University Libraries has given a full chapter on
library finances. His findings are as follows:
(a) The percentage of expenditure on
agricultural university libraries is much below
what has been accepted by the lndian
Cwncil of Agricultwal Research. Except for
one university library, Bidhan Chandra Krishi
Vishwavidyalaya which spends 4.6 per cent,
the percentage of expenditure varied from
3.78 per cent to as low as 0.2 per cent.
(b) Budget of almost every agriculturaluniversity
library showed an increase during the
successive pars, but this increase had not
been in proportion to the increase in the
university budget itself. It was less.

(c) The increase in budget for each successive
year had also not been keepingpace with the
rising costs of reading material.
(d) Expenditure on the staff at Punjab Agriculture
University, lndian Agricultural Institute,
Govind Ballabh Pant Universityof Agriculture
and Technology, Haryana Agricultural
University, during 1975-76 was respectively
35.36 per cent, 26.3 1 per cent, 19.56 per
cent and 22.60per cent of their total budgets.
As also in that year, the libraries of University
of Agricultural Sciences, Punjabrao Krishi
Vidyapeeth, and Bidharl Chandra Krishi
Wshwavidyalayaspent 20.2 1 per cent, 27.93
percent, 16.14percentand 14.16 per cent
of their respective budgets on the staff salary.
5. Out of the total number of 20 agricultural
university libraries, 15 (75 per cent) spent
over 50 per cent of their budget on the
reading material, while four (20 per cent)
spent over 40 to SO per cent and only one
spent 30 to 40per cent on it.
6. The Punjab Agriculture Library in each
successive year procured less number of
books and periodicals in agrobiological
sciences since 1971-72. The rising cost of
books and periodicals in the world market,
the falling value of rupee, and almost static
funds, were responsible for this low
procurement and for leaving out some of
important publications.

5.

IIT LIBRARIES

Mrs SP Singh in her Ph.0. study titled Indian
Institute of Technology Libraries in India: An
Evaluative Study of their Growth, Development
and Services, among other things has studied
financial growth of all the five ltrs in India. Her
findings revealed that from 1961-62 to 199192, share of allocation out of budget of' their
respective institutes varied. Allocation in ItT
libraries at Delhi, Kanpur and Kharagpur varied
between 1.3 1 per cent and 4.22 per cent, 1.55
per cent and 4.92 per cent, 0.87 per cent and
4.42 per cent respectively, whereas at Madras
and Bombay, it varied between 1.30 per cent,
1.91 per cent, I .00per cent and 2.86 per cent,
respectively.
The per capita expenditure during the First
Plan varied between Rs. 11 in 1950-51 and
Rs. 9 in 1955-56 which further rose to about Rs.
15 in 195960 and Rs. 19 in 1962.63.
DESIDOC Burretin of I d Technd, 1998,lqS)

6.

UCC A N D UNIVERSITY
LIBRARIES

Pattern and development of university
libraries by V Venkata ~ a m a r dalso contains
chapters on UGC and University Libraries:
Financial Pattern of University Libraries and
Cost Effects on Libraries. It has studied finances
of eleven university libraries in Andhra Pradesh
for five year period, i.e, from 1985-86 to
1989-90.
The findings revealed that nonplan recurring
university library services for
the state government funded universities was
less than 3 per cent, while it was 13.19 per cent
on the university services out of the total
university expenditure in case of the University
of Hyderabad supported by UGC funds.
Further, the state government was not providing
funds uniformly or based on any formula The
funds were inadequate both for maintenance
and development. The growth in the student
enrolment has no relation to its funds. To
illustrate, Osmania and Andhra Universities
were serving equal population and had identical
number of faculties and departments but
Osmania Universtiy Library's expenditure was
half the expenditure of Andhra University
Library so was the case with Kakatiya and Sri
Krishnadevaraya University Libraries.

. expenditure on

The UGC has been giving much importance
to all the university library services, but there is
a decrease in allocations year after year for the
library services maintenance-while the student
enrolment showed steady increase, except in
case of the Andhra University which did not
face any decrease in the expenditure. On the
other hand, the study indicated that the
maintenance grant allocation to the Central
University of Hyderabad showed steady
increase year after year and did not suffer any
cuts in the five year span.
The wer increasing journal prices and the
escalation of foreign exchange conversion rates
had seriously effected the budgets and curtailed
the renewal of journals. Library staff salaries
were the most unavoidable item of expenditure
given due importance by the universities at the
cost of other essential libraries services.
DES/DOC Bulletin of lnf Techol, 1998,18(5)

Thus, so far out of 25 states in India, some
data about finances of university libraries of 7
states is available. There are not only gaps in
information but the forms and format of
collected data, period coverage, etc also
varied Some have taken only a five-year period
while some have collected information for quite
a long period. There is a need to study this very
important topic at all India level to draw
meaningful conclusions.

REFERENCES
1. Ansari, MM. Trends in educational
expenditure among the Central and the State
universities: An analysis of sources; methods
and patterns of resources allocation.
Association of Indian Universities, New
Delhi.
2. Ministry of Human Resources Development,
Government of India. National Policy on
Education, 1986. Department of Education,
New Delhi, 1986.
3. Tejomurthy, A. University library finances in
Madhya Pradesh. Ph.D. Thesis, Vikram
University, Ujjain, 1981.
4. Devarajan, G. Resource alloation in
university libraries. Ess Ess Publication, New
Delhi, 1993,
5. Saroj Bala University library finance: A case
study of Punjab. Ph.D. Thesis, Department of
Economics, Punjabi University, 1996.
6. Parasher, RG. Managing university libraries.
Today and Tomorrows Publications, New
Delhi, 1991.
7. Qureshi, lshrat Ali. The Maulana Azad
Library: A major library of the world
(1877-1988). Anwar Publishing House,
Aligarh, 1989.
8. Shukla, KH. University libraries in Gujarat.
Ph.D. Thesis, Vikrarn University, 1990.
9. Venkata Ramana, V. Pattern and
development of university libraries. EssEss
Publications, New Delhi, 1995.
10. Sood, SP. University libraries in Rajasthan:
The dwelopment and management. Ph.D.
Thesis, Rajasthan University, Rajasthan,
1993.
11. Sonal Singh. The dwelopment of university
librariesin Uttar Pradeshafter independence.
31

Ph.D. Thesis, S c k A of Studies in Library and
Information S c i i Vikram University,
Ujjain, 1992.
12. Singh, SP. Indian Institute of Technology
Librariesin India:An evafuative study of Mt'

-

growth, development and service. Ph.0.
Thesis, W h i University, Delhi, 1993.
13, Trishanjit Kaur. Devdopment and growth of
u n h a i t y librartes and their services in
Punjab. W D . TSmis, PunjaM Univmrity,
1994.

