DESIDOC Bulletin of information Technology, Voi. 18, No. 6, Nov 1998, pp. 5-23
0 1998, DESIDOC

Theoretical Aspects of Multimedia
Ewald M Jarz*
Abstract
This article considers multimedia from three view points. The first comes
from a science theory where the definition of the term and of the
environment associated with it is defined. The second point of view is
concerned with the knowledge acquisition through multimedia systems and
the educational and psychological aspects are considered. The third point
of view gives concrete instructions for designing multimedia systems.

1.

INTRODUCTION

The strong technical orientation of the
multimedia evolution shows a lack of
theoretical foundation. Both during the
evolution and application of multimedia
technology, well-founded theoretical concepts
are missing3'. Approaches for a new, yet
unreflected multimedia paradigm can already
be recognized in literature.
On one hand, the chance for a higher
quality of information representation is seen:'
on the other hand scenarios with dramatic
social effects of the multimedia technique are
made''59.The intention of this contribution is to
consider multimedia from three perspectives.
The first point of view comes from a science
theory, The definition of the term and of the
environment associated with it is marked out. A
classification of multimedia information and
interaction types is given also as an overview of
the problem fields of multimedia. The second
perspective moves the human being as users of
multimedia systems into the foreground. In this
case my assumption is that information is
transported by multimedia systems. The term
information is nonetheless ambiguous. It stands
for the process of information and it also stands
for information itself as an entity. The term
information system is normally used in the first
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf T i n o l , 1998,18(6)

sense. However, the function of information
always requires a human being as interpreter of
information. From this viewpoint, information is,
in the final analysis, knowledge which is stored
in some form in the human brain. Therefore the
second point of view is concerned with the
knowledge acquisition through multimedia
systems. The third point of view frees itself of
theoretical considerations and gives concrete
instructions for designing multimedia systems.

2.

WHAT I S MULTIMEDIA?

2.1

Multimedia in a broader sense

The term multimedia i s defined differently
by many authorsz8.Extensive consensus i s that
the processing of the medias must occur
completely in a integrated manner on a digital
electronic basis and independent from each
other.
Medium in the material sense designates an
'agent' between two or more communication
partnersz0.The sender of a message must use a
medium in order to send the message. A
medium is first an information carrier. A sender
produces a message by acting on a specific
medium. For example sound is a medium which
is formed by a speaker to be received by a
listener. Further medias are for instance light,
liquids, surfaces, solid matter bodies and so on.
5

Within the medias, one can distinguish between
concrete medias and abstract medias".

suitable as a valid multimedia definitions, since
the human being is implied only in them.

Concrete medias are carrier medias. For
instance light could be a carrier media. Abstract
medias use these carrier medias for
communication like a reflecting surface.
Abstract medias shape concrete medias in a
way that these concrete ones contain
information.

A division of the medias by the human
sense organs appears quite useful since the
human being occupies a central position here.
The stimulus arriving from the environment can
only be received through the sense organs and
processed
for
information
about
the
modifications of the environment. Figure 1
represents the communication form between
human and machine.

Abstract medias (e.g. graphics) can in turn
be a foundation for even more abstract medias
(e.g. writing), therefore also becoming a
concrete medium and so on. These connections
result in a hierarchy of using medias. After the
structuring of different medias with a sender,
receiver and medium, it becomes clear that
there can be as many medias as desired,
depending on the level of detail and the
intended purpose.
The question, when one can speak of
different medias as 'multi' media, leads to
infinitely many solutions after this division. As
an alternative, the distinction of tfie medias after
the human sense organs can be used.
If 'medium' is an information carrier for
communication--however information can only
be activated by a subject (the human being,
unlike the opinion in the information concept of
Shannon)-only the perception medias are

But this point of view is incomplete. The
information, which the machine supplies to the
human being, comes initially from a human
being too. Consequently, Figure 1 is actually
only
one
part of a human-rnachinehumancommunication.
If the Information supplied by the computer
is produced from itself and not from another
human as a sender then it is actually a
nature-machine-human-communication,
because the computer processes data of the
reality for the human in this way that it
represents
information
for
him
(e.g.
measurements, balance sheet analysis, statistical
evaluations and so forth). Figure t is incomplete
here too.
If the transmitting and receiving human is
the very same person (as for example, during
text processing) one can not speak of a pure

information

ceiver
Figure 1. Human-machinecommunication
6

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno!, 1998,18(6)

human-machinecommunication since
this
constellation is nothing other than a
human-machinehumancommunication, where
the sender and receiver is the same person.
However, the human-machine communication form can be used for theoretical
considerations. The most important feature i s
the action that initiates the machine to produce
information. This action is either a command,
that can also consist of a series of commands,
or a temporal event. Due to this command,
other command chains (programs) can be read
back, which makes the machine send
information. It is decisive that the action-or the
command has nothing to do with the
information itself. The command only causes
the representation of information. This
reciprocal action is described as interaction. For
example, the interaction that occurs with the
computer (keyboard, mouse, data glove, body
location and so on), can be called an
interaction type.
The representation of
information (such as text, image, movie, speech,
and movement in the flight simulator and so
forth) can be called an information type.
Multimedia in a broader sense is therefore
the completely digital,
integrated and
independent processing of different information
types, which can be controlled interactively by
the user through one or several interaction
types. This definition still approves a large
bandwidth of application areas.

2.2

Multimedia in a Narrower Sense

The support of perception medias by input
and output devices has been improved by
developments the field of virtual reality
(especially the development of datagloves with
tactile feedback and so on in the medicine and
flight simulators for pilot training). But mainly
lowcost and market-maturity systems are
available for the visual and auditory perception.
The restriction of multimedia in these two fields
is therefore a bimedia. However 'multi' is the
way of the codification of information. Text,
graphics, image, movie and animation are all
different codification's
within the same
perception media: the visual perception; only
the representation of information is different.
Therefore multimedia can be seen as a
combination
of
different
information
DESlDOCBulktin of lnf Technol, 1998,18(6)

representations-the
information
types.
Multimedia in a narrower sense refers only to
audiovisual information types and the standard
communication equipment like keyboard,
mouse and its derivatives.

2.2.1 Audiovisual Information Types
If the term information type, takes the way
of transmission between sender and receiver
into consideration, then the essential distinction
between continuous and discreet information
can be made. Continuous information is
timecritical or dependent from information
sections following. on each other; the message
is only valid and correct when time factor is
includeds8.
Discreet
information
is
non-timecritical. The user can determine
moment and duration of consideration.
Auditory information representations are
timecritical (continuous), image information is
non-timecritical (discreet). But if several images
follow each other (moving image), this result is
timecritical again. Consequently, moving image
is a separate information type.
In addition to human language, there is even
further (timecritical) auditory information, for
example, noise (engine noise, bird chirp and so
on) or music.
The corresponding information type could
be designated subsequently as a general term
for language, noises and music either
comprehensively as audio or there is a separate
information type for human language and a
further for noises and music. Since language is
very important for the human being and a lot of
study on the field of language input and output
has been done (in particular in the field of
artificial intelligence), it seems useful to see the
human language as a .separate type of
information. Accordingly, noise and qusic must
be taken as a further information' t b ) at least
together. The word 'soundf can seive as a
general term for it (The border betyveeh noice
and music is not very sharp anywai>spaciafly
with respect to different subjective, aesthatical
sensation). In the case of the discreet visual
information types, the alphanumeric text seems
to occupy a special position since it is the visual
expression
of
the
most
essential
communication form between people: the
language. Therefore, alphanumeric text can be
seen as its own information type. If text is the

discreet counterpart for language, the score can
be understood as a discreet counterpart to
music and/or noise (sound) and therefore a
separate information type. In this case, the note
values of a score are comparable with the
alphabetic characters of a text. The
representation form score does not appear
suitable to represent the information noise (or
better: all other auditory information except the
human language and music) at the first sight.
The existing possibility of MID\-and synthesizer
technique allows the codification o f several
noises as note values. Like text compared to
language causes a loss in the value of
information (keyword rhetoric/accentuation),
the loss of information of the score compared
to music and noise can be seen.
Any other discreet, visual information
representation can be described as an image
where one distinguishes often between graphics
pro zessing (and/or graphic data processing)
and image processing". This distinction refers
to the different processing technology: Vector
orientation in the case of graphics and point
orientation at images. Despite o f the already
strong mixing of both processing techniques at
corresponding graphic programs 'image' is
described as an arranged amount of picture
elements (pixels) and "graphics" as drawned,
schematic chart representation of information
even if with vector oriented graphic
photorealistic images can be made already. The
retention of the division image/graphics is
reasonable if a photorealistic representation is
meant by image and a schematic representation
is meant by graphics even if the image was
made vector oriented and the graphic point
oriented. Under this aspect, a visual, discreet
information is represented either as inforniation
type image in a (photo) realistic way or as
information type graphics in a schematic way.
The continuous counterpart for the discreet
information type image is the moving image.
Photorealistic moving images are in general
described as movies. The term for schematic
moving images is trick movie or animation.
Therefore,
in
continuous,
information,
representations can be distinguished between
the (photo)realistic information type movie and
the schematic information type animation even
if the movie is made vector oriented and the
admation point oriented.

The second essential distinction in the way
of information representation is-in addition to
the temporal dimension-the spatial dimension.
People receive audiovisual information also
spatially because of the two by two
arrangement of the sense organs eye and ear.
Traditional visual output devices like monitor
and paper support only two dimensions.
Perspective representations try to simulate the
third dimension.
However, real spatial visual representations
are only possible with stereoscopic output
devices2. The auditory information reception
can be seen as analog. The most auditory
output devices provide only a two-dimensional
representation. Stereo sound systems try to
simulate the third dimension but real spatial
hearing experience can be produced only by
sound systems beyond quadrophony which
support sound sources from lefvright, front/rear
and abo~e/below~~.
The third essential distinction in information
representation is the inclusion of the acting
human being. In the case of the information
types described up to now, representation of
information is independent o f the actions of the
user. On\y the viewing moment, duration and
time sequences can be determined by the user.
These information types can be designated as
passive. If the representation of information
changes depending on the actions of the
observer, one can speak of an active
information type. This form can be found in
multimedia applications above all at spatial
visual representations.
If a body (e.g. a die) is represented, three
faces are at the most simultaneously visible. If
the die can now be turned by the observer, the
already existing but hidden information of the
remaining three faces is available for the
observer. This information representation can
be designated as an object. In this case, the
viewpoint of the observer (perspective) is fixed
and the position of the object can be modified
in relation to it. This information type is to be
taken as discreet, because there is no time- or
order-critical continuum necessary for the
modification of the position. If the position of
the object during information representation
does not change but the viewpoint of the
observer changes, then this is a further
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1998,18(6)

information type. During the representation of
only one object, no essential difference to the
information type object-with the exception of
shadows-is
recognizable. Only if several
objects are represented simultaneously, the
change in the perspective of the observer
becomes important. The information can be
experienced only by a continuous change in the
perspective of the observer. This information
type can be designated as 'world' and is in
particular used on high performance systems in
architecture and in the game sector+3g.
The multimedia information types for
audiovisual information representations can be
listed as shows in Figure 2.
The (vertical) convertibility of an information
type to another one of the same perception
media can be seen as a criterion for the
selectivity of this division. If an information type
can be converted simply, this information type
is not unambiguous.
The textual description of an image, for
instance, is only very difficult to convert into an
image and vice versa. In all cases of the
classification in Figure 2-with the exception of
pure numeric values of the information type
text-is the convertibility within z perception
media hardly attainable. The conversion
between image and graphics seems to be the
most possible. But the pattern recognition
process necessary for it is quite complex here
too and the present work to this supply only
results at comparably simple examples (ref. 16;
ref. 8). The (horizontal) convertibility of
information types from discrete to continuous is
easier between different perception medias.
Text conversion into speech (speech
synthesis) is as available as speech recognition
(ref. 58, p. 39ff & p. 45ff). Score conversion into
music or noise is manageable through MIDI
engineering (ref. 58, p. 33ff) and also tone
recognition with automatic notation is available
for several instruments". However, continuous
information types also include information
which must get lost by the conversion.
Language reduced to
text
loses the
accentuation and rhetoric, sound reduced to
score loses the musical expression.
The representation of information mostly
occurs not only in just one information type. All
DESIDOC Bulletin of lnf Technol, 1998,18(6)

Time representation

Figure 2. Classification of audiovisual
information types
information representations can yet be traced
back to single informatioh types or their
combinations. The classification is built up
hierarchically from bottom to top. That means
that every information type can include the
information type lying under it and/or is built
up from them. Every information type yet offers
a representation of information, which contains
more than the sum of the information types
contained in it. In such a way, an image, for
example, can also contain graphics, score and
text or a movie also language and sound (e.g. a
musical).
The classification of the proposed systematic
of information types is selective and has the
advantage that during the design of multimedia
information systems it clearly shows which
basic (combination-) possibilities for the
representation of information exists. The
structure replaces the term 'medium' in
previous multimedia definitions by the term
'information type'. On this basis, a theoretical
multimedia paradigm can be developed, in
which statements about mutual reciprocal
actions of the single information types during
the audiovisual information reception of the
user are possible.

2.2.2

Interaction Type

caused (how for example pressing the escape
key can cause the termination of a movie) or
virtual symbol generators or pointing devices
can be addressed. The most frequent case is
clicking a-virtual--button with the mouse and
therefore the release of specific actions.

The techniques of the human-machine
interface developed maturity, where the results
o f the research in different approaches are
summarized in the first theoretical conceptsq.
Another classification is presented here, which
illuminates less technicai but more functional
aspects, shows a stronger degree of abstraction
and defaults a framework for the design of
multimedia applications,

A virtual button can also be pressed with the
keyboard as for instance by hitting the
return-key for confirming the request for saving
a file in a dialog box. However, other symbol
generators as for instance voice or &sture
controllers can also call this choice. Activating a
virtual pointing device such as a control dial
can also occur either through physical pointing
devices (setting with the mouse) or through
physical symbol generators (adjustment with
key combinations).

The type o f donator, the type of control and
the type of action possibility can determine the
possibilities of data entry of the user. The type
of donator can be either a pointing device,
which produces spatial references, or a symbol
generator which causes predefined planned
reactions. The type of control can be either
physical or virt"ai2" The type of action
designates those variants which the user has in
communication with the machine: either the
selecfion of predefined items and/or the calling
of predefined functions (static) or the varying of
already available objects and/or input of new
values (dynamic). Figure 3 shows the
connections.

The different interaction types can cause a
planned reaction. The planned reaction is
identical, however, it becomes amenable to the
user in different ways which are differently
suitable depending on the function of the
planned reaction.

The variants in the individual fields represent
the interaction possibilities. The communication
with the computer first occurs ''a a p h ~ i c a {
jnterface
That can be either a
8enerator-aS for instance the ke~b0ard4r a
pointing device as for example the mouse. In
this way, either an action can immediately be
'

In this case, two ways of experiences of the
user which are caused bv communication with
the computer can be distinguished (ref. 35; ref.
36, p. 1 12ff):
~ i ~ ~ t
wherethe
has
the feeling to release an action directly. A user
has for instance while activating a button on

Figure 3. interaction type
DESIDOC BuNetin of Inf Techno!, 1998,18(6)

Touch-Screen the feeling to press the button
directly and itself.

Second person experience: Where the user has
the feeling that by his action a planned reaction
i s releases indirectly. While activating a button
with a mouse, the user has the feeling that the
button was pressed via clicking the button on
the mouse.
In this way, it becomes clear that the
experiences, which a user has during the use of
different input devices, are different, although
the result of the action is identical. This
distinction aliows the division into direct
(possibility of the first person experience) and
indirect (possibility of the second person
experience) physical donators.
By interactions events arise which in turn
supply the corresponding results. Table 1 shows
the list from user-controlled events and its
result. Activated means that the corresponding
donator was released. A button is activated for
example if it is pressed. At pointing devkes
activated means 'that the position, which the
pointing device supplies, is marked. In such a
way, pressing the mouse button on a specific
place is the activation. Pointing devices can be
activated and/or in motion.
If a pointing device is activated and if it is
moved simultaneously then the interaction type
'adjust' or 'set' can be caused. In this case, a
drag-anddrop event is ako caused in some
systems. An object becomes marked, taken to
another place (drag) and put there (drop). This
went provides a field code within which the
movement occurred.

If a pointing device is not activated and only
moved it causes a movement event. This event
provides a movement code, which indicates
position, position modification rate and
direction. Not all pointing devices provide a
movement code. Touchscreen and illuminated
pointer cannot generate an enter-and leave
event since this is in their case always an
activated event. If the position indicator
achieves virtual objects (e.g. a button on the
screen), it causes an entry event. If it leaves the
object, a leave event i s caused.
If the pointing device is not moved but only
activated, so the interaction type click is
caused. The event down (activated) provides
the position code of the click. By combination
of down and up (down, up,'down+up = click,
doubleclick, triple click and so on) different
functions can be called at a position. If the
pointing device i s neither moved nor activated,
only a temporal event (timer) can occur, that
provides a time difference. If a symbol
generator becomes activated, it causes the
interaction type 'select' or 'input'. The event
down (=pressing of a key) provides the key- or
symbol code, depending on the type of the
y m b o l generator. Different functions can be
caused by combination of keys (e.g. shift key +
key a = A).
If the symbol generator is not activated, also
in turn only a temporal event (timer) can release
2 function and supply a time difference as a
result. With the classifications of Figure 3 and
Table 1, the interaction variants of the users and
their effects can be described completely. This
division represents the basis for
the
Not Activated

Activated
Event

Result

Event

Result

In m t i o n

Control
drag & drop
set

Area code

rnove
enter
leave

Motion code

Not in motion

Click Doubleclick
down

Position code

timer

Time
difference

Pointing
Device

UP

!

i

Symbol Generator

1 Down
I UP

Wahl
Eingabe

Key code,
Symbol code

Time
difference

Table 1: Interaction events and results
DESlDOC Bulktin of Inf Technol, 1 998,18(6)

11

development of multimedia applications.
Development-4and application environments
must support the interaction events and the
processing of its results.

3.

MULTIMEDIA THEORY

3.1

Educational Aspects

At the constuction of multimedia learning
systems and mass information systems-in case
of the technical-systemic point of view-the
transported information is in the center of
interest. In other paradigms (social, behavior
oriented, psychological, didactic ones and so
forth), this information is designated as
knowledge. Knowledge is here the way people
understood and stored informationa9.From the
learn-theoretical point of view, the disciplines
pedagogy, education and didactics observe the
multimedia evolution in part critical.
Knowledge psychology supplies concrete
action instructions from the cognitive point of
view."
is
for
media
science
and
media-psychology Multimedia the fusion of
computer, television and telephonez'.
The multimedia technique is meanwhile
available on low-cost personal computers and is
no longer a major problem. The width of the
abilities in order to make and edit all
information types, which are necessary, is much
more difficult. Table 2 shows a selection from
occupational groups into which competence
the variety of multimedia information types
plays a role. For a multimedia production,
additional
comprehensive
network-and
programming techniques, dramaturgical, media
didactic and learn-psychological knowledge are
required. Lopuck says to this: "A jack of all
trades is a master of none"".
Therefore, the evolution of a multimedia
application is, from the beginning condemned
for failing since billing is too little available for
professionalization either or on the other hand
forces the-authorized-question on it, whether
such massive resource effort has in fact a
corresponding benefit?
The answer of this question applies to
benefit and this is based again on the scope.
Above all, in two fields, multimedia technique is
forced: in the field of the mass information

medias (electronic newspaper, pay television,
kiosk systems, presentations, advertising and so
forth) and in the field of (virtual) learning. In the
first field a benefit can easily be found, but in
the field of learning systems this is much more
difficult. However, both fields have many
common characteristics. In both cases, the
objective
is
to
transport
information
(knowledge) to people and to prepare it in such
a way that acquisition and application of this
knowledge i s supported.
In the 17th century, Comenius thought
about the efficiency of the teachirig/learning
process. In his book Orbis Sensualium Pictus,
which appeared in 1658 in Nuremberg, he
argued that the subject should be provided via
as many senses as possible. His fundamental
book Magna Didactics influenced the design of
teaching machines over centuries. Skinner
developed the idea of 'programmed learning'
and formulated, in 1958, seven rules which
were the basis of computer-assisted teaching
machines developed in the sixties and
seventies. These didactic software became
known as CBT (computer-based training) and
were, in the beginning, not very user friendly
and required a connection to a mainframe. CBT
developed a new market, that was flooded with
monotonous and pedagogic useless programs.
Therefore, i t was not amazing that the initial
euphoria deviated fast to a reasonable.
skepticism and the approach failed to a large
extent.
With the evolution of high-powered
hardware at small prices, new technical
possibilities
seemed
to
balance
the
shortcomings. The multimedia technique
already comes close to the thought of
Comenius on using several medias. But
regardless of the way of information
representation didactic conception stuck to the
behavioristic approach. Many multimedia
programs are still teaching programs.

3.2

Psychological Aspects

The combination of different representation
possibilities in only one system inspired the
multimedia euphoria at the end of the Eighties.
Especially in the case of learning systems, the
expectations were particularly high. Figure 4
shows the naive expectations about the effect
DESIDOC Buktin of Inf Technol, 1998,18(6)

Occupational group
Discreet
Information type
* Setter
Text
* Printer
* Writer

* Composer
* Arranger

Score

Continuous
Information type
Speech

1 Occupational group
'I

: * Speaker

-

/ * Sor~ndengineer
Sound

* Sound Technician/rnixer
* Musician
1 * Singer
* Sound Effects
* Animator
* Modeller
* Computer animator
* Digital assistant

1

1
Layout man

Graphics

Movic

* Desktop publisher
'

Image

1

* Painter and draughtman
* Graphics designer
* Illustrator
* Photographer
* Retoucher
* Image editor

* Director

* Scriptwriter/dramatic adviser
* Cameraman
* Actor
* lllurninator
* Cutter
* Digital effects & assistant

i
Object
I

" Architect
* Modeller
" Computer illustrator

World

* Architect

* Computer graphics
Real-time specialist

I * VR Oesipner
Table 2: Competence of traditional occupational groups in the case of multimedia information
types

of sense modalities and learning activities on
memory performance. This representation is
very popular in many publications, however a
source founded scientifically has not been
found.
Such expectations are based on a
summation hypothesis. According to that the
memory performance of hearing and seeing is
the sum of the two channels (20% + 30% =
SO%), very according to the motto: "A lot hejps
a lot!" For this totalization hypothesis, two
theories are stated as an argumentation: the
dual coding theory of ~ a i v i o ~ ~ a
the
n dtheory of
hemisphere specialization. Both theories start
from the assumption that information
depending on codification is processed by
different -cognitive systems. However, the
summation hypothesis was not confirmed by
empirical works but falsified in so far that even
further factors like pre-knowledge, order,
content and so forth play a decisive role at
memory performance (see ref. 62, p.69ff).
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1998,18(6)

However, the different ways of information
representation advise the suspicion that they
are suitable for different purposes. For this
purpose, a serles of experiments were
undertaken, to classify them according to one
or several features and to assign them to
didactic functions. In this case, the information
representations were designated as medias. So
a number of media taxonomies have been
developed with different feature categories,
those were based on general pedagogic
knowledge about direct and indirect and/or
media mediated experience processes. Most of
the ideas represented today for the use of
multimedia information representations are
based on origins from the postwar years.
Dale in his work about audio-visual
education methods, which appeared for the
first time in 1946, proposed to divide the
process of knowledge acquisition according to
i t s concrete steps". As one of the first media
taxonomies the media-rating table of Gagne
13

Figure 4. Naive assumptions about the effect of sense modalities and learning activities on
memory performance {ref. 62, S.68)

from 1965 is known, where a selection of
medias has been rated concerning their
suitability for adoption of teaching functiondJ.
The Gagne model is tested empirically
comparably well, however, it already shows
strong
indefiniteness
within
individual
information types. This is an indication that not
only the information presentation is important
for remembering and the thesis of "A lot helps a
lot" is not tenable here too.

A lot of further media taxonomies have been
developed (for example see ref. 18, p.186)
however they have been proven theoretical as
well as practical as unsatisfactory at all. The
classifications were too general both with
respect to medias and to teaching functions and
learning aims in order to provide a
psychologicdidactical frame theory for the use
of medias (see ref. 24, p.536). They
concentrated on the didactic functions but
neglected the learning processes. Moreover
than
factors like costs,
organization, time requirement and so forth
have
been
their real influence.

in accordance with

The
Aptitude-Treatment-lnteractionapproach (see ref. 24, S.537f) (ATI) attempts to
include the learning processes and the personal
structure of the learner. The assumption here is,
that learning in general and learning effects in
particular are the result of reciprocal actions
14

between instructional measures (treatment),
including the use of medias, and individual
features
of
the
individual
learner
(aptitudes/traits). But the AT1 research only
brought little findings-concerning the media
aspect-which can clainl certain universality
(ref. 24, p. 537).
If the individual structure of the learner is
decisive for the memory performance it
appears only natural that each person
experiences the information representations
differently and therefore no universa\ statement
can be made. With that, the way of information
representation becomes secondary and the
instructional method gains importanceb2.The
basic setting of the application, the fixing of the
user role, of the tasks and of the situation is
primarily decisive. Only after these points are
determined, the information presentation i s
im~ortant.
How can the information representation be
correctly for the jnstructjon
if
different persons are to be assigned to very
different learning types? It would be the logical
consequence of this to represent every content
in all .information types 'and to let .the user
choose which representation form corresponds
best to him. However, this consequence i s more
a fear scenario for every producer and designer
of a multimedia application, because in this
way, neither a harmonized screen design can
DESIDOC Bullelin oilnf Technol, 1998.18(6)

be maintained nor a cost framework can be
kept. Only user classes can still be defined and
maybe some few sections can be presented in
accordance with the user classes. But the
expenditure is
enormous because the
production of multimedia applications is very
highcost.
If there is no unambiguous generalizeable
correlation between memory performance,
personality structure or pre-knowledge of the
learner and the information types, it can now
be presumed that it is just in reverse. The
individual information types themselves have
very specific strengths and weaknesses. If they
are combined reasonably, they can support
mutually themselves either or else destroy the
effect.
The strengths and weaknesses of the
information types then encounter the individual
strengths and weaknesses of the user ('learning
type') and can, depending on the constellation
(strength encounters weakness, or vice versa),
cause positive or negative effects. What can the
strengths of the individual information types be?
Kracauer supports an idea to this with his
concept of the 'aesthetically principle': the
performance within a certain medium is artistic
all the more satisfactory, the more it comes
from the specific qualities of this medium."
Accordingly, it is possible that there are specific
qualities for each information type, by means of
them its use in every case in every application
can always be decided again. In the following
list are particular qualities of the information
types pointed out.

3.2.7 Text
Specific quality of the information type text

is the individually settable studying rate. Every
reader has his own rhythm. He can read
sentences again, think the formulation over and
so forth. Text i s a redundant language. Through
this redundancy, it i s possible that the contents
can be understood flexibly. It is suitable as
hollow studying. In multimedia applications, a
longer reading of text is made more difficult by
the small screen resolution. Consequently, text
appertains better into printed formats, e.g. into
a book in which one can become immersed.
Text in multimedia applications has more
decorative and symbolic
character for
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1398,18(6)

statements or denotations in graphics.

3.2.2 Speech
Speech is continuous. Even if the spoken
sentence can become repeated, no thorough
studying is yet possible. Speech can introduce,
give surveys, stimulate, and tell. Since the
speech between people requires a dialog and
the computer is (still) not capable of a
natural-language dialog, it can only be used in
such systems as additional information;
particularly where the visual system would be
superloaded by additional text reading. Speech
is ideal as an explanation of animation if it is
synchronized with the events on the screen.
Speech as a voice melody (e.g. as a rhyme) can
cause strong memory effects.

3.2.3 Score
The score has its strength at the composing
or the analyzing from music and/or sound. It is
the text of the melody and is suitable for those
who reproduce or want to study i t in widest
sense for musicians. Ideal is the combination
with sound if in this case the sounds played
currently are emphasized or characterized
visually.

3.2.4 Sound
The sound, as music or noisei is able to
wake emotions. Music can stimulate moods or
cause relaxation of mind and body. Sound can
become the sign of recognition, the leitmotiv,
or through combination with interaction types
develop a 'feelingf for the corresponding
actions (e.g. audible button clicking). The
combination of sound with animation, movie,
object and world to produce realistic effects is
ideal.

3.2.5 Graphics
Strength of graphics is to represent a
context, if this can not be preserved in reality or
if it is too complex to recognize it. Graphics are
discreet. The user himself determines viewing
moment and duration. In this way, graphics are
very suitable for the individual studying and
analyzing of connections. The combination with
text is good since both are discreet
representations and if the text refers exactly to
the
graphics.
Graphics approve
more

interpretations than the image and can be used
better for the support of mental models.

effect of small flexibility: so how the movie
shows it, it is and not different.

3.2.6 Animation

3.2.9 Object

The animation has its strength in
representation of temporal dependences, that
in reality either can not be preserved or are too
complex to understand their connections.
Compared to graphics the advantage is at
connections where only movement explains the
function. In such a way, the functional
representation of a motor i s for instance very
suitable for an animation representation. The
combination with speech and/or sound is ideal.
Synchronous speech helps to understand the
representations and compared to addjtional text
there i s no change of the view of the user
necessary. A further strength of animation is the
decoration function. Through effects combined
with sound interest and attention can be
woken. Animation supports like graphics the
foimation of mental models.

The strength of the object lies in approvrng
of many possibilities, in trying out, in combining

3.2.7 Image
The image represents an integrated
connection. The image is very much related by
its photorealistic representation to the concrete
contents. Unlike text, the contents are
non-flexibly interpretable. It is the question that
how the image shows a thing. Image has the
strength in the good situation function. Because
of the reality proximity, recognition of the
contents represented in the image is slightly
possible. Moods can also be influenced by
images. In this case, the combination of image
with sound i s very effective. Images are just as
well suitab!e for the extensive considering and
the recognition of details as for joining of
associations.

3.2.8 Movie
The movie shows temporal dependencies in
realistic form. Its strength is the authenticity as
fact movie or the waking of emotions in the
feature film. Through the possibilities of fixing
technique, temporal and spatial distances are
deliverable without linguistic communication.
Ideal is the combination with speech and sound
to produce either more reality or stronger
emotions. The memory effect and the situation
function i s very high here too but also with the

elements. Complex units, wh~chcan only be
experienced by a person oneself, are
reasonable contents. The interactivity is high
here. In this way, constructivistic paradigms can
be put into action. All discreet information
types can be available with h e i r respective
strengths and their weaknesses as an object.
The combination with sound can still increase
the empirical values if actions are coded
auditory.

3.2.10 World
The strength o i the world lies in the spatial
visualization and the orientation. Strong
emotional and playful references can be built
up by tridimensional representations. Impressive
scenarios, which can lace the user emotionally,
can be made by combination with objects and
all other information types.
However, there is mostly no exclusive
information representation through nonlinear
techniques. Through hyperlinks, additional
information can be called as text, an animation
or graphics for an explanation. The effort and
the combination of information types are
dependent from many factors. Some are
pointed out, many'-ones still lie in the field of
the
future
research.
The
always-new
combination or performance of information
types always let new possibilities appear.
However, a specific mix can often become a
'trademark' of a producer and information
types can be used 'alien' by violation of the
aesthetic principte yet achieve reasonable
effects.

4.

DEVELOPMENT OF
MULTIMEDIA SYSTEMS

The characteristic feature o i multimedia
developments is its interdisciplinary nature. To
meet the bandwidth of ail fields a
comprehensive approach is necessary. A
purposeful planning can develop multimedia
systems, which also place the program in the
DESlDOCBulletin of Inf Technol, 1998,18(6)

entire environment. The environment in that
system should be used and the reference
framework must be considered too. The
conception is to be checked depending on
application and is to be created again.
However, heart of planning is the multimedia
Storyboard. Scenes and action possibilities of
the user are recorded in this document. The
development of the Storyboard is a process in
which a lot of creativity and media didactic
knowledge is necessary. The Storyboard is then
the basis for the programming and production
of the individual information types (movie,
sound, speech, image, text and so forth). At the
beginning of the work on the storyboard users
should be involved continuously and their
suggestions from the accompanied evaluations
on prototypes should be included. A
multimedia
director
coordinates
the
harmonization of the information types with the
didactic setting. Multimedia applications show
many similarities with film and television. In
such a way, editing guidelines are here also
necessary for the preparation and above all
maintenance and/or updating of the contents.
In
the
Storyboard
educational
and
psychological aspects of multimedia manifest itself.
Interaction types and information types are
combined together in an evolutionary, creative
process. In the Storyboard appear the
environment the frame story as well as the
individual information representations and its
triggers.
Basic principles can be used for the design
of the Storyboard. These basic principles
presented here are abstractions worked out by
me inductively both from own experiences
during the development of multimedia systems
and of different sources of literature which
more or less explicitly refer to these principles.
However, these basic principles are in the final
analysis heuristic theses. In Table 3, the basic
principles described in the next two sections
are summarized.
The basic design and technical principles are
comparable with necessary conditions, which
are important for acceptance of a multimedia
application. However, they are no sufficing
conditions for success of the application. In this
way, a comparison can be set up with the

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno!, 1 998,18(6)

two-factor-theory from Herzberg: the basic
principles are a kind of hygiene factor, which
influences only a dissatisfaction scale. If they
are sufficiently fulfilled,
only a small
dissatisfaction results, if they are disregarded,
dissatisfaction
increases.
Completely
independent of the dissatisfaction scale i s the
satisfaction scale, which can be seen as
motivation factor. The entire contents-related
and didactical setting influences the motivation
factor.

4.1

Basic Design Principles

The basic design principles (see ref. 40, p.
52) are already needed at the first Screen
design. They are to be understood in such a
way that there are exceptions to the basic
principle which can lead consciously to specific,
desired-even often very creative+ffects.

4.1.1 Multiple Codification
The simultaneous responding of several
input channels can increase the memory effect
of
information
representations. Essential
elements should be multiple coded. A multiple
codification can be achieved.

Within the information type: Different content
fields (information connections), which are
represented with the same information type,
are coded differently by varying of general
design parameters (e.g. color or element order).
So the colour of the background in an
information connection for instance can be red
and in another one green.
By different information types: In accordance
with the dual coding theory of Paivio (see ref.
50) and the learning model of Vesterq it is
reasonable to offer the identical information
contents by a combination of different
codification (information types). The choice of
the right combination of the information types
should occur in accordance with their strengths
and weaknesses.

4.1.2 Interaction Transparency
The
basic
principle
of
interaction
transparency is that the user can realize at any
time, both the interaction facilities which are
available in a scene and their effects after the
interaction. An example to this is pressing a
virtual button with the mouse. If the user

Basic technical principle
Basic design principles
User control
* Multiple codification
* Interaction transparency
* Acceptable quality of information representation
* Metaphor consistence
* System feedback at acceptable respons time
* Interaction consistence/functional coherence
* Expectation mapping
.* Active orientation support
* Fewer is more
* Transparency
* lnteraction minimization
Table 3: Overview of the basic principles of multimedia applications
announced for the user that an activatable
information chunk is available here. If the user
has pressed the button, he immediately sees the
effect of his interaction e.g. that the button i s
represented inverted, which looks like 'pressed'.

4.1.3 Metaphor Consistence
The basic principle of metaphor consistence
says that the stylistic devices, which are used in
the application, should match the cognitive
models from the everyday life environment of
the users. The literary terms, which emboss the
connotative importance of the metonymy and
of synekdoche, are fundamental for metaphor
formation. Metonymy is a turn of speech in
which an associated detail is used to represent
an idea or a notion. Therefore maybe the crown
is a sign for a kingship.
Synektoche is a turn of speech, where a part
stands for the whole and the whole stands for a
part (e.g. the car for the engine or the wheel for
the car4@).
Thus, if a virtual button is pressed in
an application,
a reasonable metaphor
consistence is a sound, which simulates the
clicking of a physical key. As a result, the
metaphor becomes consistent.
The user has the impression to have really
pressed a key. The visual codification is above
all essential for metaphor consistence. The
graphic symbols must be 'guessable'. However
it is different from cutture to culture what a
correct metaphor for users is.

4.1.4 Interaction Consistence/Functional
Coherence
Same functions should always be presented
within an application at the same place and in
the same information representation. Similarly,

same information representations (e.g. a
symbol) must also always make the same
function available. For example, if sound
elements are used for example in order to mark
those fields which are 'active' ones, (where
planned reactions occur), a non active place
should occur in the entire application, that is
not marked with a sound.
The
basic
principle
of
interaction
consistence/functional coherence can also be
applied to the consistence of function calls
between applications. For example, users of
graphic operating systems of the company
Microsoft used to get a helpfunction by
pressing the Fl-key. Accordingly, in multimedia
applications, which run on these operating
systems, pressing the Fl-key should also activate
the helpfunction. Applications, which run on
different platforms, should be considered so
that user groups of every operating system of
different manufacturers form an own culture
and expect different functions. Thus, an
application is closed in Windows- environment
with the key combination 'Alt-F4' in applications
of Apple operating system, this function is
achieved
by
the
key
combination
'CommandQf.

4.1.5 Expectation Mapping
The basic principle of expectation mapping
says that users have a certain notion or
expectation of an application. Expectation
mapping is then successful if the expectations
are met or outdone. The basic principle of
expectation mapping results in multimedia
applications achieving a higher and higher
standard. What the user expects, depends on
what he has already seen. In this way, the
evolution spiral and the lifecycle model also

are met or outdone. The basic principle of
expectation mapping results in multimedia
applications achieving a higher and higher
standard. What the user expects, depends on
what he has already seen. In this way, the
evolution spiral and the lifecycle model also
becomes clear here: lnformation types like 2
112 h b j e c t s and worlds, which are to be
found still rather rare, will soon raise to standard
and will be in the not too distant future almost a
necessity.

4.1.6 Active Orientafion Support
While navigating in complex systems
continuous information representations should
be provided, which indicate the user at any
time where he is and offer him simultaneously
the possibility to jump to neighboring or
preceded hierarchically elements.

4.2

Basic Technical Principles

The following basic technical principles can
be derived for the Storyboard as guidelines for
the development

4.2.7 User Control
The user must be able to attain control of
the system at any time. Particularly in the case
of continuous information types, the user must
be able to control and/or break off this linear
process.

4.2.2 Acceptable Quality of Information
Representations

The basic principle of 'fewer is more' means
the reduction of the functions to those important
elements, which a user needs in a scene at the
same time. Overcrowded and overloaded
screens confuse more than they are useful. This
basic principle is comparable with the concept
of the KISS (keep it simple and short).

The technical perfection of the information
types has an essential role to play in the case of
user
acceptance.
Especially
continuous
information types do not have that quality in
standard PC systems, that people are used to
from film and television. Quality depends here
strongly on the expectations of the users too. In
1990, an alldigital information representation
as movie on traditional PC-systems was a
sensation, even with acceptance of the
stamp-size format and the not very synchronous
sequence. Meanwhile the expectations of the
users increased, so not fluently movies are felt
as not up-todate.

4.1.8 Transparency

4.2.3 System Feedback at Acceptable
Response Times

Transparency means that a good interface
design remains unnoticed. If users must invest a
lot of time in order to find out the possibilities
of the interface, they are distracted from the
contents. Transparency means that the system
works to a large extent also i n a selfexplanatory
form and makes help functions actually
unnecessary.

The system must supply a feedback at
acceptable response time to the user to his
interactions. If the response times are
surpassed, the system response for the user is
no more clearly allocateable to his interaction
and an interference of the interaction process
occurs. The attention of the user is diverted and
the train of thought is disturbed.

4.1.7 Fewer is Mom

4.3
4.1.9 Interaction Minimization
Not more than three interactions (e.g.
mouse clicks) should be required for attaining
important, often required functions. (ref. 48, p.
5 2 ) Hierarchies interleaved too deep often
offend against this basic principle if they allow
no direct possibilities to jump from (e.g. layer 3
in part 2 to layer 4 in part 1). So five
communications would be necessary in this
example.

OESIrxlC 6ulIetinof Inf T d n d , 1998,18(6)

Cultural influences

The development of the Storyboard is
embossed by creative, personal elements. Every
developer has a particular cultural background,
which is embossed, both from the geographical
culture area and from the social background.
Supplementary influences still result from the
respective specific organization cultures.
It also depends whether or not the user has
the same complex cultural background as the
developer.
If the
cultures
correspond

themselves to a large extent in their state of
mind, their values, their norms, their rites and
voice habits, problems of acceptance of a
multimedia application will be minimized. If the
cultural background of developer (team) and
user are only low congruent, a lack of
communication occurs. The possibilities of
these difficulties are represented plastically in
Watzlawick's concept of the trisection of
confusiondisinformation- communicationb'.
During the development of multimedia
applications, i t is important to pay attention to
this cultural difference. The analysis of the user
role and of the reference framework in the
process of the Storyboarding is used for this
purpose. The gained insights into cultural
special features of the user role have effects in
the following essential fields:

4.3.1 Screen Layout and Screen Design
Both elements are dependent essentially on
the writing and reading habits.

4.3.2 Effect of Colours
Colours have very particular meanings in
many culture areas, which must in the final
analysis be synchronized semantically with the
contents.

4.3.3 Effect of Language
Every culture area has a particular language
with particular idiomatic expression (dialect)
that identifies speakers of other culture areas as
'foreigners' and therefore the corresponding
defense attitudes or total communication
barriers can be cause.

4.3.4 Effect of Graphics

can lead to forming a front very fast, because
they are mostly engaged emotionally. Since
many symbols (e.g. Icons), are used in
multimedia applications
the at'tention to
differences at the symbol display become
important.

4.3.5 Metaphor Consistence
Users have specific schemes according with
their cultural area. The essential metaphors of
an application must be adapted to these
schemes in order to maintain the basic principle
of metaphor consistence.

4.3.6 lnferaction Consistence/Functiond
Coherence
Accustomed interaction peculiarities exist
not only within a geographical but also within
an operation system-specific culture area. Users,
who swear on 'their' operating system, also
expect accustomed functions with usual
control.
Consequently, the development of an
application is not simply translatable from one
culture area into another one. A check should
always at least occur, whether and which
cultural differences exist. The effort to a larger
market and therefore the export into other
cultural areas is to be taken as a legitimate
objective of efficiency since the development
of multimedia systems is at highcost. Under this
diction a cultural adaptation i s mostly
renounced. However, this shortcoming is
relocated through the possibilities and the
effects from international mass media.

4.3.5 Recognition of Symbols

The advertisements, which have to consider
cultural peculiarities, are therefore no more
developed country-specific (with the exception
of language), but more according to customer
segments which don't differ from each other
independent of the country5'. The user
becomes a cosmopolite, culture does not grow
in a country but almost always becomes
defaulted by a company's philosophies.

Symbols are very specific cultural. Even
traffic signs differ from country to country.
Symbols are deeply linked to a culture and
therefore, their correct interpretation is
significantly dependent on the cultural
background. Symbols with different meaning

The market strategy of Coca Cola is the best
example for it. However, cultural influences can
not yet be negated and are to be considered in
the design or adaptation stage of a good
multimedia learning or mass information
system.

The composition of graphics for decorative
functions is embossed essentially by the
peculiarity of the cultural background. In
particular setup and style of a picture let
inferences to the cultural origin.

DESlDOC Bulletin of lnf Techol, 1998,18(6)

5.

FURTHER PERSPECTIVES

The development of multimedia applications
requires a very broad and highly qualified
knowledge. However, systems, which really
guarantee a more efficient knowledge transfer
process, can be developed in this waq7.
Technology is the main problem no more. The
contents-related design is the challenge in order
to offer support for the information transfer that
must be used reasonably in a framework of
action so that the personal information
requirement can hold step with the increase of
knowledge in the society. For this purpose, the
concepts described in this paper can show the
variants of the representation and interaction.
forms and allow its reasonable combination in a
storyboard according to the basic technical and
design principles.

Ambron, S & Hooper, K. Learning with
interactive multimedia: Developing and
using multimedia tools in education.
Microsoft Press, Redmond, WA, 1990.
Aukstakalnis, S & Blatner, D. Cyberspace:
Die Entdeckung kunstlicher Welten. Vgs,
Koln, 1994.
Babu, GP; Mehtr, BM & Kankanhalli, MS.
Color indexing for efficient image retrieval.
Multimedia Tools and Applications, 1995,
1(4).
Bauer, W & Riedel, 0. VR in space-and
Building-planning. In Virtual Reality. F
Brody & RF Morawetz. Wien, Vienna,
1993. S. 34f.
Blattner, MM & Dannenberg, RB.
Multimedia
interface
design.
Addison-Wesley, Wokingham U.A., 1992.

C. Multimedia.

Brauner, J & Bickrnann, R. Die multimediale
Gesellschaft. Campus, Frankfurt am Main,
1994.
Cakmakov, D & Davcev, D. Information
retrieval and filtering of multimedia mineral
data. Multimedia Tools and Applications,
1995, 1(4).
Card, SK; Mackinlay, JD & Robertson, G.
The design space of input devices. in
Multimedia Interface Design. MM Blattner
-

-

10. Charwat,
HI.
Lexikon
der
Mensch-Maschine-Kommunikation, 2.
Auflage. Oldenbourg, Munchen, Wien,
1994.
11. Dale, E. Audiovisual methods in teaching.
Holt, Rinehart & Winston, New York, 1946.
12. Forster, HP & Zwernernann, M.
Multimedia-Die
Evolution der Sinne!.
Luchterhand, Berlin, 1993.

13. Frater, H; Ruliben, D. Das gro-e Buch zu
multimedia. Data Becker, Dusseldorf,
1994.
14. Gagni; RM. The conditions of learning.
Holt, Rinehart & Winston, New York, 1965.
15. GagnC, RM. Instructional technology:
Foundations. Erlbaurn, Hillsdale, NJ,1987.
16. Gertler, N. Multimedia lllustriert. Markt und
Technik, Haar bei Munchen, 1995.

REFERENCES

Borner, W 8r Schnellhardt,
te-wi Verl, Munchen, 1992.

& RE3 Dannenberg, Addison-Wesley,
Wokingham U.A, 1992. p.224f.

-

DESlDOCBulletinof lnf Technof, 1998,18(6)

17. Haak, G & Issing, L. Multimedia-Didaktik state of the art. In Multimedia, und
.Computeranwendungen in der Lehre; Das
Computer-lnvestitions-Prograrmm (CIP) in
der Nutzanwendung. K Dette; D Haupt &
C Polze. Mikrocomputer-Forum fur. Bildung
und Wissenschaft 5. Springer, Heidelberg,
1992
18. Hasebrook, J. Multimedia-Psychoiogie: Eine
neue
perspektive
menschlicher
Komrnuni-kation. Spektrum, Heidelberg,
1995.
19. Heinrich, LJ; Lehner, F & Roithmayr, F.
Informations-und Komrnunikationstechnik
fur
Betriebswirte
und
Wirtschafts-informatiker, 4. Auflage.
Oldenbourg, Munch en, 1994. p. 216.
20. Heinrich,
LJ &
Roithmayr,
F.
Wirtschaftsinformatik-Lexikon, 3. Auflage,
Miinchen Wien, 1995. p. 341.
21. Hickethier,
K & Zielsinski,
S.
Medien/Kultur. Schnittstellen zwischen
Medien-wissenschaft, Medienpraxis und
gesellschaftlicher Komrnunikation.
Wissenschaftsverlag Volker Spiess Berlin,
Berlin,l991.
22. Hoogeveen, M. Towards a new multimedia
paradigm: Is multimedia assisted instruction
really effective?. In Educational Multimedia
and Hypermedia. H Maurer. Graz, 1995. p.
351f.

23. ISO/IEC JTCl/SC29/WG12. Information
technology: Coded representation of
multimedia and hypermedia objects
(MHEG). I S 0 Commitee Draft, 1993.
ISO/IEC CD 13522-1.
24. Issing, LJ. Wissensvermittlung rnit medien.
In Wissenspsychologie. H Mandi & H
Munchen,
Spada. Psychologie-Verl,
Weinheim, 1988.
25. Issing, LJ. lnstruktionsdesign fur
Multimedia. In lnforrnation und Lernen mit
Multimedia. LJ lssing & P Klimsa.
Psychologie-Verl., Weinheim, 1995.
26. Issing, LJ & Klimsa, P. lnforrnation und
Lernen mit multimedia. Psychologie-Verl,
Weinheim, 1995.
27. Jarz, EM; Kainz, GA Rr Walpoth, G.
Multimedia-based case studies i n
education: Design, development, and
evaluation of multimedia-based case
studies.
28 Jarz, EM. Entwicklung multimedialer
Systeme. Gabler, Wiebaden, 1997. p. 12ff
29. Jarz, E;, Kainz, GA & Walpoth, G. The
design
and
development
of
multimedia-based case studies. I n
Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia,
H Maurer. Graz, 1995.
30. Jarz, E; Kainz, GA & Walpoth, C.
Multimedia based case studies in
education. Proceedings of the ED-Media,
1996, Boston.
31. Kerres, M. Entwicklung und einsatz
computergestiitzter lernmedien; Aspekte
des Software-Engineerings multimedialer
Teachware), In Wirtschaftsinformatik, 32.
Jahrgang, Heft 1, Februar f 990. p. 71 f
32. Klimsa, P. Multimedia aus psychologischer
und didaktischer Sicht. In lnforrnation und
Lemen mit Multimedia, Lj lssing Rc P Klimsa
Psychologie-Ver\, Weinheim, 1995.
33. Klingberg, KD. ABC der MultimediaTechnologie. Multikom-Verl.,
Bergheim,
1993.
34. Kracauer, S. Theorie des Films: Die
Errettung der auperen Wirklichkeit.
Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main, 1985.

35. Laurel, B. Interface as mimesis. In User
Centered System Design:
New
Perspectives o n Human-Computer
Interaction, DA Norman & S Draper.
Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NI, 1986.

36. Laurel, B. Computers as theatre.
Addison-Wesley, New York U.A, 1993.
37. Laurel, B. New directions. In The art of
humancomputer interface design. B.
Laurel, Addison-Wesley, Mountford, 1994.
38. Laurel, B. The art of humancomputer
interface
design,
8.
printing.
Addison-Wesley, Mountford, 1994.
39. Coeffier, CE. Virtual polis. In Virtual Reality,
F Brody & RF Morawetz. Wien, Vienna
1993, S. 6 f.
40. Lopuck, L. Designing multimedia. Peachpit
Press, Berkeley, CA, 1996.
41. Marmolin, H. Multimedia from the
perspectives of psychology. In Multimedia:
Systems, Interaction and Applications, L
Kjelldahl. Springer, Stockholm, 1992.
42. Maschke,
T.
Faszination
der
Schwarzweip-Fotografie; 4. Auflage.
Augustus, Augsburg, 1995.
43. Mathis, T. Evahierung van multimediaanwendungen. Diplomarbeit, Innsbruck,
1994.
44. Maurer, H. Educational multimedia and
hypermedia. Proceedings of ED-Media
95-World
Conference on Educational
Murtimedia and Hypermedia. AACE, Graz,
1995.
45. Messina, C. Was ist multimedia? Eine
allgemeinverstandliche Einfuhrung. Wien,
Miinchen, 1993.
46. Meyer-Wegener K. Multirnedia-Datenbanken. Teubner, Stuttgart, 1991. p. 20f
47. Mikunda, C. Kino spiiren. Filmland Presse,
Munchen, 1986.
48. Monaco, J. Film verstehen, 2. Auflage.
rororo, Hamburg, 1980. p. 143.

49. Muller-Merbach, H. Perspektiven einer
inforrnationsorientierten betriebswirtschaftslehre. In C Conegen-Grenier & W
Schlaffke. Praxisbezug und soziale
Kompetenz, Kolner Texte & Thesen, S. 375
ff.
50. Paivio, A. Imagery and verbal processes.
New York, 1971.
5 1. Phillips, RL. Opportunities for multimedia
in education. In Interactive Learning
Through Visualization: The Impact of
Computer Graphics in Education.
Heidelberg, Berlin, 1992.

52. Postman, N. Wir amusieren uns zu Tode:
U r t e i l s b i l d u n g i m Zeitalter d e r
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1 998,18(6)

Unterhaltungsindustrie.
Frankfurt am Main, 1988.

Fischer

TB,

53. Preece, J, et a/. Human-computer
interaction.
Addison-Wesley,
Loughborough, 1994.
54. Schweiger, G & Schrattenecker, C.
Werbung: Eine Einfuhrung; 3. Auflage.
Fischer, Stuttgart, 1992. p. 174ff
55. Shannon, C & Weaver, W. The
mathematical theories of communication.
University of Illinois Press, Illinois, 1949.
56. Shneiderman, B. Designing the user
interface: Strategies for effective
human-computer interaction, Ed. 2.
Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1992.
57. Skinner, BF. Science and human behavior.
Free Press, New York, 1953.
58. Steinrnetz, R. Multimedia-Technologic.
Heidelberg, Berlin, 1993.
59. Titze, H. Das philosophische Gesamtwerk;
Band 4: Theorie der Information. Berlin,
1993. p. 15
60. Vester, F. Denken, Lernen, Vergessen, 5.
Auflage. DTV, Munchen, 1980.

61. Watzlawick, P. Wie wirklich ist die
Wirklichkeit? Wahn, Tauschung, Verstehen;
20. Auflage. Piper, Munchen, 1995.
62. Weidenmann, B. Multicodierung und
Multimodalitat im Lernprozess. In
I~~formation
und Lernen mit Multimedia. LJ
lssing & P Klimsa. Psychologie-Ver1.-Union,
Weinheim, 1995.
63. Weizenbaum, J. Die Macht der Computer
und die Ohnmacht der Vernunft, 8.
Auflage. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main,
1990. p. 268ff
64. Wenzel, EM. Three-Dimensional virtual
acoustic displays. In Multimedia Interface
Design. M M Blattner & RB Dannenberg.
Addison-Wesley, Wokingham u.a, 1992.
65. Wodaski, R. Multimedia fur insider. Markt
und Technik, Haar bei Munchen, 1995.
66. Wratil, P & Schwampe, D. Multimedia fur
Videa u n d PC: Techniken u n d
Einsatzmoglichkeiten. Markt & Technik,
Haar bei Munchen, 1992.
67. Yazdani, M & Pollard, 0. Multilingual
aspects of a multimedia database of
learning materials. In MultilingualMultimedia. M Yazdani. Cromwell Press,
Wiltshire, 1993.

*Dr. Ewafd J u z , born on 15 August 1965, educated at School for Engineering, Master of business
administration at the University of Innsbruck, Ph. D. 1996. Presently Assistant Professor at the Department

of Information Systems, University of ~nnsbruck.
Special research area: Multimedia and Software Design.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1998,18(6)

23

