DESIDOC Bulletin o i Informatron Technology, Vol. 18, N o 6 , Nov 1998, pp. 25-40

0 1998, DESIDOC

Multimedia Systems in Libraries and their Applications
D r CK Rarnaiah*
Abstract
Multimedia is a combination of text, graphics, animation, audio and video,
converted from different formats into a uniformat digital media and
hypertext is non-sequential writing or reading. Multimedia prepared in
hypertext environment i s called Hypermedia. This paper describes
multimedia, its applications and limitations in general. The need for
multimedia in libraries and its use for various applications in US and Europe
such as multimedia library information kiosks, walk-through programmes,
training, digital libraries, multimedia databases, multimedia catalogues,
multimedia library collections, geographical information systems, electronic
publishing, etc are also discusied.

1.

-

INTRODUCTION

The primary functions of a library are to
collect,
organise, preserve and deliver
information to the users. With the passage of
time, several techniques and technologies have
emerged for handling the information more
speedily and effectively. Invention of printing in
the second half of the 15th century started a
revolution
in
spreading
thought
and
scholarship. Later, still pictures (microfilm, 1839;
negative film, 1841), moving pictures (cine film,
1870; video tape and W , 1908)' sound
recordings discs, (1877); sound tapes, ( 1 899),
microcomputers and view data (1045) and
optical storage systems (1985) were introduced
in the commercial market which had an
everlasting impact on publishing. Slowly all
these recording media, used for storing
information, were introduced in the libraries. All
these forms were acquired and stored
separately because the information retrieval
methods used were different for each form of
combining informat'On
the media. As a
from different forms became difficult.

DESIDOC Bullelrn of Inf Jechnol, 1998,18(6)

In '940s, efforts were made by Dr Vannevar
Bush to integrate all these forms and he
designed a mechanical device, called em ex',
for
storing,
organisirig
and
retrieving
information received in various forms. Those
days librarians used to collect non-book
material and call them as multimedia
collection.
However, there was no single
platform on which all the forms of information
could be stored and retrieved. During the late
1980s, computer specialists succeeded in
integrating the text, graphics, animation, audio,
and video information on a computer after
converting
them
into
digital
media
(homogeneous media) called multimedia for
publicity purposes. This is a major achievement
in the field of publishing, which directly
influenced both librarians and users.

2.

WHAT I S MULTIMEDIA/
HYPERMEDIA?

Multimedia is a combination of some or all
forms such as text, data, images, photographs,
animation, audio and video, which are
converted from different formats into a

un~format digital media and is delivered by
computers. Unl~ke the analogue media (N
programmes) the digital media which allows
users to manipulate according to the needs, use
at thelr pace, and interact at any point of the
program. When a multimedia program is
developed in a hypertext environment, the
resulting product is called hypermedia. So
multimedia would then be a part of the
hypermedia. All hypermedia products are
multimedia products but not vice versa. The
basic difference between hypermedia and
multimedia is in the organisation and linkages
of the information fragments. The information
chunkslfragments in multimedia are organised
linearly whereas in hypermedia, these are
organised non-linearly with links to each other.
The main elements of the multimedia are :
(a) Text: information about an object/ event, etc;
notes, captions, subtitles, contents, indexes,
dictionaries, and help facilities.
(b) Data: tables, charts, graphs, spreadsheets,
statistics, and raw data.

.

Basically, a multimedia system wit1 have a
powerful PC with high-end graphics processor,
a sound card (to play and record sound), CD
drive, and multimedia extensions and drivers for
playing digital audio and video. Now a days,
major systems that are used for desktop
multimedia design include IBM's PS/2, Apple's
PowerMac, Commodore's Amiga, NeXT's
Nextstation Colour, and Silicon Graphics IRIS
Indigo. There are a wide variety of application
software comme~cially available for all
computer platforms. The most popular and
inexpensive among all these (low-end software)
are the Hypercard on Mac, and ToolBook on
PC compatibles. On the other hand, there are a
number of authoring packages for high-end
multimedia design. The popular ones include
Macromedia's Director for both Mac and PC
platforms and Icon Author for PC. Hypercard is
a pbpular Hypermedia toolkit for Mac and is
being used extensively in libraries for designing
various applications during post 1980s and
early 1990s.

APPLICATIONS OF
MULTIMEDIA

(c) Graphics: both traditional and computer
,
generated (vector form) such as drawings,
prir;ts, maps, etc.

3.

(dl Photographic images : (raster form):
negatives, slides, prints (both from digital still
&video cameras and scanned photographs).

Multimedia systems are being used for
many purposes by different people in different
organisations/offkes/environment. The main
functions include media integration, storing,
organisation and dissemination at diffe!ent
places in different ways. This paper attempted
in reviewing the use of multimedia for library
and information services (ref. 20, 22, 24, 34, 36,
41, 42, 56) in various countries from the
published literature. Some of the general
applications of multimedia are given below :

(e) Animation:
including
generated, video, etc.

both

computer

(f) Audio: including speech and music digitised
from cassettes, tapes, CDs, etc.
(g) Video (digital): either converted from
analogue film or entirely created within a
computer.
A multimedia system records, processes,
stores and delivers all types of information in
binary code the same way as a computer does.
This is quite different from the traditional
analogue technology of radio, TV, A-V tapes,
gramophone records, or the combination of
digital audio and analogue video i'n interactive
video discs. The main advantage of a digital
is
theflexibility
in
combining,
format
transmitting, manipulating and customising the
elements of the multimedia according to the
needs of the user.
26

13 Instruction/training

and

technical

presentations
I3 Multimedia

communications
such
as
multimedia e-mail, personal conferencing,
video phones, video conferencing, etc.

13 Public information points/kiosks for libraries,
mirseums,
hospitals,
monuments, etc.

tourists

sites,

13 Medical information systems
Multimedia
databases,
information banks

multimedia

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inl Jechnol, 1998,18(6)

Multimedia newsletters, multimedia books,
other information resources
Re'ference tools,
directories, etc.

e.g.

encyclopaedias,

Archival systems

0 ' ~ e o ~ r a ~ h iinformation
cal
systems
,

public and librariesz7'O. Glasgow Online is dne
of the best tourist information systems designed
by the University of Strathclyde during 1989
using Hypercard softwarezh.Afterwards several
commercial multimedia information products
were introduced in the market.

4.

Electronic publishing & bookselling
Point-of-sale displays,
Product information catalogues
Technical
documentation,
including
engineering drawings, specifications, etc.
Architectural information
displays
for
example walk-through programmes for the
new buildings or constructions/already
constructed buildings/moni~ments

M U L T I M E D I A APPLICATIONS
IN LIBRARIES

Hypermedia, not only helps the users in
providing information from different media
(print, microforms, audio and video) on one
platform (integrated) but also saves on space,
money,
maintenance,
operational
inconveniences, etc.

Entertainment, leisure, home

The other advantages of multimedia in
libraries dre:

Exhibitions such as conferences, trade
shows, new product, facilities, museums,
libraries, etc.

(a) It can help satisfying different information
needs such as reference, enrichment,
entertainment, leisure, etc.

fl Interactive displays in museums, hospitals,
libraries, eIc
Tourism is one of the industries that has
exploited the full strength of multimedia for
developing tourist information systems for

Text

(b) It can help meeting various types of
information prefeiences of the users,such as
scholarly, scientific, vocational, ' artistic,
recreational, etc.

Books

Displayboard

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1998,18(6)

27

(c) Being in digital format, information can also
be accessed by remote users on a network. It
also helps in over coming the barriers of
boundaries, proximity and physical rapacity
of a library to accommodate users.
(d) It is interesting and easy to use over the
existing form such as print, microforms,
online, etc.
(e) Its control and interactivity helps the users
and provides the benefits o f books
( i n f o r m a t i o n ) and human beings
(interactivity).
Electronic information, and multirnedia in
general, is about to become a vital part of our
cultural heritage. Libraries have throughout the
history ensured a democratic, independent and
free access to the knowledge and intellectual
value represented by conventional books. It is
evident that this principle is also valid for
ele,:tronic information and multimedia. The
availability of multimedia information through
,data networks may also open completely new
ways for the libraries to obtain information for
the common users.

4.1

American and European
Libraries

Many big libraries including the Library of
Congress (LC), British Library, OCLC, etc. are
building their collections in multimedia form.
Apart from multimedia collection development
in 1990, LC began the American Memory

28

Project, aided by Annenberg Fund; the David
and Lucile Packard Foundation; and others, for
preparing multimedia CDs. This covered several
kinds of information including country's
historical books, pamphlets, photographs, folk
songs, movies, genealogical works, etc.
LC brought out the first part of this project
America at the start of a New Century
1880-1920, as a CD. Similarly, Elmer E
Rasmussen Library and 'University of Alaska
started a Project Jukebox-a Hypercard-based
Multimedia Archival System5'. Project jukebox
is used for archiving as.well as providing access
to recordings of oral history archives.
For the past five years, many libraries in the
developed countries started various projects
such as archiving different forms of information,
multimedia databases, multimedia catalogues,
walk-through
programmes,
Instructional
packages, electronic books, and digital libraries.
There are a few surveys in the literature that are
focused on the usage of multimedia technology
in public libraries, academic libraries and
special libraries (ref. 33; ref. 40). These studies
primarily cover the use of multimedia
CD-ROMs in libraries and also the use of world
wide web and Internet.

4.2

Indian Scenario

Now a days many librarians fekls that the
multirnedia should be integrated into the
regular services by the libraries. Even in

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1998,18(6)

advanced countries, libraries do not have a
separate department or personnel responsible
the
for multimedia products or services. F Q ~
past 2-3 years, use of electronic reso'urces,
particularly multimedia,
in libraries has
improved considerably. However, budget for
multimedia products still seems to be less, but it
is growing for bigger libraries situated in
metropolitan cities.
Generally,
for
selecting
multimedia
products, libraries depend on retail stores
displays,
publisher's
catalogues,
reviews,
advertisements, trade shows, demos, computer
magazines and catalogues. The main type of
multimedia products being sought in libraries
are reference and educational. Other related
categories
include
databases
(both
bibliographic and full text), electronic books,
software
and
their
training
packages,
entertainment, leisure, etc.
Most of th'e libraries are using multimedia
resources for reference service and instructional
purpose. In this connection, a survey was
undertaken by the author on the use of
multimedia in Delhi libraries to have a clear
picture of usage in Indian libraries particularly in
Delhi. So far published results are not available
in the literature. Overall, inspite of cost
reduction in the multimedia hardware and
software, use of the multimedia resources is
limited to some of the national level institutions
or organisations.
However, the majority of the libraries are
nDW setting up such facilities for their users.
After the availability of internet in a very large
scale in the offices, libraries, and houses,
multimedia has become more popular, with the
result most of the decision makers/financial
authorities are realising the importance of
multimedia in the daily life and particularly in
libraries. American Centre Library, British
Council Libraries and a few other libraries in
Delhi are having good number of multimedia
PCs (MPCs) for using Internet and multimedia
resources to their users.

DESlDOC Bulletin ollnf Jechnol, 1998,18(6)

5.

TYPES OF M U L T I M E D I A
SYSTEMS

5.1

Multimedia Library lnformation
Kiosks/Walk-Through
Programmes

Improving accessibility to both collections
and services has always been a concern of
libraries. Several libraries made attempts to
create plans and guides to help users. In this
connection, multimedia is one of the best tools
for creating electronic library guides or web
library guides or electronic tours (ref. 1, 5, 6,
11, 16, 17, 23, 28, 38, 45, 59, 5 1 ) for their
users. Many libraries in the US and Europe have
started using hypermedia for designing library
walk-through
programs
(a
walk-through
programme is an interactive multimedia
database on a topic/ subject/office, etc. which
virtually takes the viewer around either through
interaction or automatically to provide quick
reference) for their users.
Reference service is one of the most visible
services
that can be provided by these
systems. 1.1 one study,5Sit was found that 44 per
cent of reference questions were directional, 18
per cent were instructional, 32 per cent actual
reference and 6 per cent were extended
reference. In another study," it was found that
34 per cent of the queries are actual reference
and 66 per cent are directional. So, Librarians
designed Hypermedia Library lnformation
Kiosks for their users to provide quick reference
and redeployed the reference staff in other
library activities. Andruss Library Hypercard
tour is one such hypermedia walk-through
programme designed for library users to
provide ready made reference. This programme
does not tell the users where to find books on a
specific topic, one has to still use the online or
card catalogues which are briefly explained in
this system, and also it is not an ir,dex to
periodical or newspaper articles. However,
these are described and their locations are
given in this tour program.
The Andruss Library ha3 two catalogues for
library material : a card catalogue for books,
phone records, tapes, maps, and music scores;
and a computerised catalogue called PALS. This

tour program helps the users by giving all the
basic informatio~that the lrbrary users requtre
to use PALS. Sweet Brrar College Library's
Hvpermedra walk-through programme is
another of this krnd designed for the staff and
students to provide information about the
collectron, catalogue, archrves, services, and
locations of varrous collect~onsand responsible
persons of various lrbrary services showing on
the floor layout.
Some other important examples of
multimedia library guide web library guides/
electronic tours are :
(a) Electronic Library Guide in the University of
Birmingham's main iibrary, created 'using
ToolBook
(b) Guide to South Bank University's Centenary
Library, developed with HyperCard
(c) Guide to the Dickens House Museum
Library, designed using Guide

(g) Multimedia Database of Tourist lnformation
developed using HyperCard by the Public
Library of Gateshead Libraries and Arts
Service
(e), Guide to the Edinburgh University Computer
Services, designed using Guide
(f) hultimedia Library Tour of the Wayne State
lllniversiiy Library (US), designed using
HyperCard
(g)' Mult~mediaLibrary Tour of the Sweet Briar
College Library (US), designed using
HyperCard
(h) Drexel Disk is a hypermedia walk-through
program to the Drexel University (US)
students, desighed using Hypercard
(i) Multimedia Library Kiosk of the Defence
Science Library, DESIDOC, designed using
Hypercard.

The role of multimedia in instruction has
been well documented in several research
experiments done in various discipline^^^,^'. So,
librarians have started using ciultimedia as a
tool to train their staff in the new library
technologies/applications and also to the users
to provide training about using library resources
(ref. 19, 21, 35, 47, 49 ). The main advantage of
usinn multimedia for training is its interactivitv.
30

hence, it is being used by several schools,
colleges, and universities for designing
individualised library instructional packages for
providing training to their users and also to
provide in-depth subject training to their staff.
The Paul Leonard Library at San Francisco
State University desrgned a multimedia-based
instructional programme on library skills to
teach their users. This package is intended to
serve as a prototype For subject tutorials using
computing technology. This was integrated in
the library skills modules being developed by
the HyperCard Library Instructional Project.
University of Tennessee, Knoxville libraries have
made
another
hypermedia-based
computer-based training (CBT) package for
their new staff3. To make this training more
interesting, they have used pictures, animation,
sound and graphics and iniplemented on Mac
platform. The training programme covers library
services, online catalogue, orientation to the
libraries, circulation policy, access to journals
literature, preservation of library materials,
introduction to reference work, using e-mail,
technical services, integrated online systems for
libraries, and acquisition and processing library
material's.
A few multimedia-based CAI
packages designed using HyperCard used for
library staff training/instruction are:
0 illuminate-a Multimedia-based CAI project
about the University of Minnesota Library's
OPACs

Tour of the Internet-a quick tour about the
Internet

0 lnformation Access-a library research skills t*
torial for the university students 0 Hypercard-basedAACR2-a self teaching CAI
package for preparing catalogue cards
0 Hypercard-based University of Hawaii OPAC
tutorial
0 CatSkills-an interactive Multimedia package
to teach AACR2. It is a good professionaltrain
ing tool for students, beginners in cataloguing
and working librarians. This multimedia CD is
available in both Mac and Windows platforms.
The Library Association, London is marketing
this tool for f495
0 UGE 100 Library Skills-designed by the
Wayne State University Library
/

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1998,18(6)

Q Teaching Mini Medline-a training tool for It

brary users
Q STAR (Student Tutorial Access & Resources)-

CAI package designed for OSU Libraries
Q

Hypermedia-based CBT package for training

' 'the new staff of University of Tennessee, Knoxville libraries

5.3

Self Learning Tools

For people who need practical education in
areas such as home ownership, vehicles
repairing, etc, the multimedia CD-ROMs are a
good medium for presenting the nuts-and-bolts
tasks required to keep the house/machine
functioning. For example, the House Repair
Encyclopaedia
provides
thorough
compendium
of
well-illustrated
repair
guidelines, covering essential tasks such as
stopping water leak, performing electrical
wiring, pouring concrkte, fixing a roof and
patching the damaged walls and ceilings.
Individual tasks are' depicted in animation,
sound, video and ' providing far better
information thar! the static pages of a book.
The lnternet Resource Guide is an online
book about lnternet that describes the various
services available on it. Similarly many more
commercial multimedia self learning tools are
available in the market. Some of the important
traini~gapplicatims available in libraries are
National Geographic's Animal Samplings, ABC
Golf, Music Data City, Cartoon Jukebox (an
interactive colouring book for children) and
Magic Flute, etc. These are self learning tools
that any library can purchase and provide free
education/instruction to their library users.
The linking capabilities of hypertext with
multimedia provides an ideal learning
environment for foreign languages. Addition of
graphics, photographs, music, speech and video
play a lot of impact on the learner's interest,
speed of learning and retaining of information
in their brain. Several popular multimedia
packages were' designed for learning most of
the European languages by foreigners, such as
Think & Talk French/Spanish/German and
Introduction to Russian and Chinese, etc.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1998,18(6)

5.4

Digitaf/Electronic Libraries

Digital libraries are basically decentralised
and easily extensible, able to support
inieroperability
between different
tools,
applications
and
systems;
support
heterogeneity both in terms/forms of data and
systems/tools supported; able to support a rich
information seeking environment; and scaleable
in terms of the size of the system (users, tools,
information) (9, 15, 3 1, 58). Digital information
may include digital books, scanned images,
graphics, data, digitised A-V clips, etc. The first
Digital Libraries (DL) project initiative was
started, in 1995 in the followir,g Universities in
USA: University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign,
Carnegie-Mellon University, Stanford University,
University of. California at Berkeley, University
of California at Santa Barbara and University of
Michigan.
Later
on
several
organisations/universities/libraries in different
countries started such pr&jects.
In the UK, an important DL prajects were
started by British Library is ELINOR - Electronic
Library Project of De Montfort University,
University of East Anglia, University of Bath,
University College London, University of Wales,
University of Ulster and University of Surrey.
Some Digital Library related projects are
listed below:
IBM
Digital
Library
provides
a
hardwa:e/software solution for the libraries to
develop their own multimedia digital libraries or
multimed~aarchival systems. It is an integrated
system for capturing, indexing, storage and
retrieval of tabular, textual, audio, still images,
and video data at compressed and full
resolutions. A search engine that can combine
parametric queries, free text searches, and
Query by Image Content (QBIC). Workflow
processing to manage approvals and routing of
data is also provided. !t has an integrated rights
management
including
electronic
watermarking,
encryption,
licensing,
accounting, metering, and authentication. It is
scaleable storage and network management
system that allows libraries to grow without
sacrificing the convenience of anytime,
anywhere access. It also provides a hierarchical
storage system to protect the assets from loss

and ensure fast access to most frequently used
media. A world-wide Web client that facilitates
the multisearch capability and delivers ranked
results. This system has an integrated
frame-accurate VTR control of continuous
media. IBM Digital Library provides a way for
libraries and users of content to store and
retrieve multimedia information along with
textual informarion that describes it. Regardless
of who the end user is, IBM Digital Library
allows the users to capture information and
images quickly, find them when needed, and
build them into new products quickly, whether
it is today's broadcast, a new multimedia
CD-ROM, magazine, or Internet product.
Some other important Digital Library
Initiative projects and their site information
1

(g) Project Bartleby (Columbia University)-a
public library on the Internet.
(h) Digital Libraries (Xerox)-a collection papers
discussing digital libraries and their research
efforts.
(i) The Visible Human Project (NLM)-a
complete,
anatomically
detailed,
threedimensiohal representations of the
male and female human body.
l
(Library of Congress)
(j) National ~ i b i t aLibrary
the American 'Memory project, Special
American Collections at the LC and Country
Studies.
(k) Digital Library Programme at Tilburg
University is to provide staff and students
with excellent support facilities for teaching,
learning and research. -

(a) The Networked Computer Science Technical

Reports
Library
(Cornell
University,
Department of Computer Scienceka
collection of computer science technical
reports from CS departments and industrial
and government research laboratories.
'

(b) The Networked Digital Library of Theses and
Dissertations-a project which aims to
increase the availability of theses and
dissertations by placing them online with the
'
content in an accessible form. The works may
be accessed through the Electronic Thesis
and Dissertation Library.
(c) Library Without Walls (The Los Alamos
National Laboratory)-a broad based digital
library project to make information available
to researchers on their desktops on a network
environment.
(d) Thesaurus Linguarum Hiberni (Royal Irish
Academy & University College Cork)-an
interactive on-line searcheable database
archive of literary and historical materials in
the various languages of early, mediaeval and
modern Ireland.
(e) The Perseus Project (Tufts University)-a
collection on ancient Greek and Roman
world. Perseus contains texts in Greek and its
translation.

(f) The RYHINER (University Library of Berne) consists of more than 15,000 maps, charts,
plans and views from the 16th to the 18th
century, covering the whole globe.

National Library of Canada Electronic
Collection

http://www.nlc-bnc.ca/eppp/e-coICe.h.
International Institute for Electronic Library
Research

http://ford.mk.dmu.ac.uk.
~ l i tProject
i
http://cosimo.ing.unifi.it/research/elitinfo.html.
Carnegie Mellon University - ~u1ko"tentsearch
and retrieval of video
http://fuzine.mt.cs.cmu.edu/im/imformedia.ht
Stanford University - lnteroperation
mechanisms among heterogeneous services

http://Warrus.Stanford.EDU/diglib/
University of California at Berkeley Workcentered digital information services

http://elib.cs.berkeley.edu
University of California at Santa Barbara Spatially-referencedmap information

http://alexandria.sdc.ucsb.edu/
University of llllinois at Urbana-ChampaignFederating repositories of scientific literature
http://wwvv.grainer.uiuc.edu/dli
University of Michigan Intelligent agents for
information location

http://http2.sils.umich.edu/UMDL/HomePa~~html

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/, 1998,18(6)

5.5

Multimedia Databases

Now-adays a large number of photographs,
artifacts, audio recordings and textual $material
in various collectior~sare available in libraries.
Multimedia is helping the librarians in
integrating all the information from various
forms/sources
subject-wise and
making
meaningful multimedia databases both for
day-to-day use and.archiving.
Mendocino County Library, Ukiah has
developed a multimedia database of historical
and cultural information that is relevant to the
Californian Indians in that area. In addition to
the historical photographs, this database is also
having parts of oral histories from the state and
local archives. Ultimately this library is trying to
bring out a CD-ROM on 'Gathering together a
Native American History'.
Ancient Biblical ~anuscript Centre in
Claremont; California has ancient texts,
photographs, negatives, related to the Bible.
This centre has undertaken an ambitious
programme 'Dead Sea Scroll Imaging Project'
(Zuckman, 1993), which involves digitising and
reformatting photographic negatives for the
past four years. The Centre has converted this
collection into a comprehensive digital library
and it has sophisticated search/sort inquiries on
Dead Sea Scrolls.

5.6

Multimedia Information
Retrieval System

Hypermedia Information Retrieval System
(HIRS) is a hypertext version of a large and
comprehensive annotated bibliography of
hypertext/hypermedia information. Compiled
from a variety of sources including periodicals,
academic journals and online informational
databases, it is intended for educational and
training purposes only and no warranty is
made as to the suitability of anything included
in this stack for any specific purpose. HIRS was
created in association with Project Rivendell, at
the University of Toledo (Ohio).
Rivendell
focuses
on
the
application
of
hypertext/hypermedia research to address
traihing and educational needs.
It is an
interdisciplinary centre for applied hypermedia
research serving as the focal point for the
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1998,18(6)

collection,
synthesis,
evaluation,
and
dissemination of the most current research
available for using hypermedia to solve
instructional problems in a variety of learning
settings. HyperKRS is another commercial
package
being
used
for
developing
hypermedia-based
information
retrieval
systems.

5.7

Multimedia Catalogues

Interactive multimedia Catalogues are
electronic forms of catalogues distributed in the
mail-order catalogue market. Printed catalogues
are one of the important information sources
particularly in technical libraries. These
catalogues consume large percentage of postal
carrier bags. Today, the interactive multimedia
catalogues offer a high volume of information
on a small disk. Several international publishing
companies are also bringing out their
catalogues in interactive multimedia CD-ROMs.
For example, CD-ROM Catalogue Shopping,
SW . Catalogues, Macromedia Showcase,
Silverplatter Directory of Electronic Resources,
etc.
Under the Colorado Alliance of ~ e s e a r ~ h
Libraries (CARL) System, Denver Public Library
has designed a Kid's Catalogue is for children.
The Kid's Catalogue designed to capture the
imagination and the natural curiosity of children
and connect them with intellectual and
emotional delights of information. This
catalogue was designed in graphical user
interface (GUI) using Hypercard software. It
was found that this catalogue made a
considerable impact on the children's usage of
the library collection.
The Hans Helgesen Elementary School
Library, British Columbia, Canada have also
developed a Hypercard-based school card
catalogue
for
the
school
children.
Hypercataloguer
is
a
Hypercard-based
cataloguing tool. It can take text, graphics,
animation, audio and video information for
preparing multimedia-based digital catalogues.
Several libraries are
using multimedia
cataloguesR*' and OPACS' in their libraries for
various purposes.

5.8

Multimedia lnformation
Resources

The
kinds
of
multimedia
systems/
information resorces available in libraries and
information centres include: i) CD-ROMs; ii)
video discs (VD); iii) laser discs (LD); iv) audio 8
video cassettes; v) web; vi) databases on
servers; and vii) digital video.
Many big publishers have now converted
thelr
reference
books
including,
encyclopaedias, dictionaries, ha~dbooks, etc
from the traditional print form to multimedia
formatla. Thus libraries have a choice of
selecting
either
print
or
multimedia
publications. Some of
the
multimedia
publications are listed below :
Encyclopaedias: Crompton's
lnteractive
Encyclopaedia, 1998; Pritannica CD 98 and
Britannica Video CD; Encyclopaedia Americana
98; Grolier Multimedia Encyclopaedia, 1998;
World
Book
Multimedia
Encyclopaedia;
Microsoft ~ncarta98, etc.
Dictionaries and Directories: Oxford
English Dictionary; Webster English Dictionary;
The '~ictionary of Living World; National
Geograpic's Mammals; British Birds; Microsoft
Dinosatlrs, etc.
Reference Manuals: MIT Movie Manual;
lnteractive Graphics Documents; The Manual
of Medical Therapeutics, etc.
Year Books: The Guiness Disk of Records
Reference Books: Earth Quest; World
Climate Disc; lnteractive Periodic Table, etc.
Electronic Books: Manual of Medical
Therapeutics; The Electronic Whole Earth
Catalogue; Microsoft Musical Instruments;
Introduction to Classical Music; The Oxford
Textbook of Medicine on CD-ROM, etc.
Newspapers/Journals:
The
Electronic
Times/ Sunday Times/The Guardian (21 Indian
newspapers arc available on Internet); Times,
Newsweek (37 Indian popular magazines are
available on Internet); Multimedia Tech for
Electronic Newspapers; Integrated Multimedia
Environment; Music & Multimedia Publishing;
ST & Medical Publishing for Electronic Delivery,
etc.

Multimedia Fiction: Nowadays several
books/packages
are
Multimedia
fiction
available for all levels of people. For example,
The Manhole, a children fiction takes the kids to
a fantasy world with talking animals and
dragons where magic bean stalks grow into the
sky.

5.9

Geographical Information
Systems(G1S)
,

Additional multimedia information, visuals,
audio and video can be associated along with
landmarks and other points of interest in a
For
Geographical Information system?.
example, GIs multimedia application in The
National Capital Planning Commission (NCPC),
Washington, DC, uses online video clips and
images of buildings along with their maps. In
India, Bangalore Online, is a multimedia GIs
applications designed with Maplnfo software.
Similarly Escorts, India developed multimedia
GIS for several cities in India. Number of
commercial GIs reference tools are available in
the market for libraries for their ready
reierence. These
tools include:
Quick
Reference Atlas (Rand McNally New Media; PC
Globe Maps'n' Facts; 3 0 Atlas; and World Atlas
MPC.

5.1 0 Electronic Publishing
The
emergence of
CD-writers and
recordable CDs hassolved some of the
problems af the libraries in storing/arcniving
their less used materials. Multimedia tools along
with CD-writers made possible in publishing
information from different sources in a most
easy to use and acceptable form to the library
users. Now several big libraries started
publishing their special collections, image
OPACs,
etc on multimedia
databases,
CD-ROMs. It is one of the most viable
dternatives to paper-based publishing.

5.1 1 Multimedia Archival System
Multimedia Archival System are mostly
developed by the national museums, publishing
houses, movie production companies, etP. The
Design Museum located in Butler's Wharf in
London has stored information regarding 250
artifacts, 40 designers, 25 manufactures and 11
DESIDOC Bulletin of In: Technol, 1 998,18(6)

'monuments on Mac using Hypercard. The
museum of London has over 3 million
archaeological files on 7 gigabite storage space.
Similarly ABC News has a very large size
Mac-based video archival library for developing
hypermedia applications. Project Jukebox is
another Hypercard-based multimedia archival
system (Elmer E. Rasmussen Library, University
of Alaska, Fairbanks) for archiving multimedia
information resources in the library.

5.12 Multimedia Use in Museum
Libraries
Multimedia systems allow images, sounds
and text to be combined in imaginative new
ways to be transmitted in digitised formats and
to be stored and reproduced or networked for
wide public access and use. To accelerate the
m~ltir~iediadigitalisation of collections, to
ensure their accessibility to the public and to
stress its value as a learning resource for
schools and universities. Global co-operation
will help museums and galleries to increase
public interest in their collections and to exploit
their resources for the benefit of further
enrichment. The target users will be students,
teachers, researchers, general public as well as
curators and the end-users of the multimedia
services provided by museums and galleries.
Many American, European and Jndian libraries
are already using Multimedia in their libraries
for providing information services to their
uSerSIO.
30. 41. 42
and interactive museums displays29.

floors. This programme helps the users in
locating the information and also the physical
locations of the books in different floors
showing the pictures of those floors, stacks, etc.

6.

LIMITATIONS OF
MULTIMEDIA

Even though Multimedia systems have many
advantages introducing such systems into
offices, schools, colleges, universities, and
homes is not easy task. The problems or
limitations of multimedia technology are in two
areas :

6.1

Technology

(a) The requisite hardwarelsoftware to setup a
multimedia content creating facility is still
very
expensive and requires large
investments.
(b) A wide range of multimedia software is not
available to integrate, control, coordinate,
manage and adapt different media for the
latest human computer interfaces.
(c) There is a lack of support software facilitating
the authoring, composition and production
of multimedia content.
'

(d) Poor support technology in the area of
,
multimedia data and document storage and
manipulation.
(e) Lack of proper search and pattern
recognition
capability
for
locating
information from multimedia databases.

4s

(f) Lack of software support technology for
Examples of Indian multimedia museum
guides are :

0 an interactive Multimedia guide of the
National Museum o f Natural History
designed using Director

o

an interactive Multimedia guide of the
National Rail Museum designed using
ToolBook.

5.1 3 Call Number Directories
A Call Number Directory program was
designed using Macintosh's Hypercard at the
Science and Engineering Library. The Science
and Engineering Library houses materials
pertaining to the life and physical sciences,
computing, mathematics, and nursing on seven
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1 998,18(6)

group decision making and cooperative
work, especially in application of multimedia
technology to cooperative decision making
and work.
(g) Converting all the multimedia resources into
digital multimedia and storing is difficult
(storage technology limitations).
(h) Time being, there is no full-fledged
established hardwarelsoftware multimedia
technology solution for design and
development of a large size realtime
multimedia digital library.
(i) Existing distributed networks do not support
real time multimedia services.

35

6.2

Skilled Manpower

(i) Lack of trained manpower for
development
and
management
multimedia databases

the
of

( i ~ )Vast amount of work (i.e., 100 to 800 person
hours) required to create an hour interactive
multimedia content
(iii) Good multimedia content creation requires
multi-disciplinary disciplinary knowledge,
multi-technological skills and experience.
The maln barrier to the widespread use of
multimedia technology is the absence of
standardisation among the various platforms
and between hardware and software. For the
time being there is no full-strength application
of the multimedia inf~rmationsystem, however,
several universities are working in exploiting the
full strengths of multimedia, such as natural
language processing, realtime A-V content
retrieval along with text and date, and
implementing such a system in a network
environment.
The market is dominated by multimedia
CD-ROMs, multimedia databases, reference
tools, etc. The effectivehess of these systems
will depend on various factors such as well
developed software programs, information
content and development of new information
hand!;lig skills. The requirements of the effective
management are the support of the senior
manager,
the
professional qualifications,
knowledge about IT technology, interpersonal
skills and learning models and frameworks and
how to use these new resources and to be
effective in the information needs of an
organisation.

7.

MULTIMEDIA TRENDS IN
LIBRARY & INFORMATION
SERVICES

After the introduction of e-mail and lnternet
in libraries, use of information in digital form
has increased manyfolds. There is a
considerable change in - libraries in their
acquisition of library collection, organisation
and providing services to users. The prospects
for the development of a multimedia market
have been transformed in the past two years by

the explostve emergence of the lnternet and
the digital revolut~on in the converging, IT,
telecoms and entertainment sectors. There will
be major changes in distribution networks and
the implications of multimedia on the economy
will be profound. The Internet has shown that
there is a huge market for multimedia
applications.
The most exciting developments will come
from
what
is
k?own
as
networked
multimedia-the distribution of information
using both telecommunication and broadcast
technologies. It is currently multimedia
packages/products such as CD-ROMs and
hand-held videogames-which are the favoured
methods of distributing multimedia, mainly
because communications networks cannot
deliver the same level of functionality. However
networks are rapidly being upgraded to
distribute graphics, sound and video and should
soon take over from packaged multimedia.
Products which can be transmitted digitally
such as CDs and books are already facing
major challenges. Paper publishing may never
be completely
replaced by electronic
distribution but the cost savings for content
produci?rs may be too large to ignore. Value in
the multimedia market will move away from
infrastructure provision, where the network
operators are strong, towards service provision
and packaging which require innovation and
new skills for libraries and information services"
37. 50

Consequently, new types of companies are
poised to wrench control of the multimedia
market from the network operators who will
have to act quickly to gain the skills necessary
to compete in the higher value areas of the
market. Their alternative is to be left with high
volume, but low profitability infrastructure
provision.

8.

CONCLUSION

Now
many
inexpensive
hypermedia
software are available in the market for Macs
and PCs. The cost of both the hardware and
sofhvare are also going down considerably.
However, in India, introduction of computers
and latest technologies such as multimedia,
CD-ROMs, etc. is limited to the big and
DESIDOC Bulletin o fInf Technol, 1998,18(6)

.

affluent libraries in the metropolitan cities only.
It may be due to the unawareness of these
technologies, insufficient funds, lack of skilled
manpower, etc. Unless all the lndian Library
Schools introduce the latest ,technologies in
their: syllabi and the teachers get trained, it will
not be possible to change the present scenario
of the libraries.
Multimedia is a boon to the libraries, it is up
to the Indian librarians how they use it in their
libraries to improve the services. DESIDOC has
designed a Multimedia Library lnformation
Kiosk for its user. Similarly others can also start
designing for their libraries. Since it is proven
technology, it is up to lndian librarians/libraries
to implement these technologies in their
libraries and make optimum use to improve the
user services as early as possible.
In this information technology society, the
future users require to access a variety of
multimedia information sources i n a manner
that is simple, easy, and independent of time,
place and subject discipline, for the purpose
ranging from augmenting and refreshing
memory, to learning, decision-makiqg, and
creating or uncovering new knowledge. The
time is not too far in this cyberworld and all
these dreams will be realities in the coming 21st
century.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

Amthor-G. 'La Caixa' touch-screen teller:
Major European bank rolls out hundreds of
colourful multimedia kiosks-cashing in on
ticketing and other electronic services.
Multimedia Today, 1995, 3(4), 92-94.
Bateman, J. Making the past available for
the future: A system for graphical indexing
photographs collections. I n Apple Library
of Tomorrow Projects, edited by Steve
Ciesler. Apple Library, Cupertino, 1993.
pp. 41-47.
Bayne, PS & Radar, jC. Computer-based
training for library staff: A demonstration
project using hypercard. Tennessee
University, Knoxville, 1991.
Bazuzi, J & Wust, R. Integrating images into
the OPAC: Issues in distributed multimedia
libraries. I n Proceedings of the 16th
International Essen Symposium: Resource

DESIDOC Bulletin of lni Jechnol, 1998,18(6)

Sharing: New Technologies as a Must for
Universal Availability of Information, 18-21
October 1993, edited by Ahmed H Helal &
Joachim W Weiss. Universitatsbibliothek
Essen, Germany, 1994. pp. 263-76.
Biddiscome, R & Watson, M. Developing a
hypertext guide to an academic library:
Problems and progress. Program, 1994,
28(1), 29-41.
Biddiscome, R; Knowles, Kelvin; Uptron,
Ian & Wilson, Karen. Developing a web
library guide for an academic library:
Problems, solutions and future possibilities.
Program, 1997, 3 1(1), 59-73.
Bush, V. As we may think. The Atlantic
Monthly, 1945, 176(1), 101-8.
Carrara, P; Ventura, A-D & Gagliardi, I.
Designing hypermedia information retrieval
systeps for multimedia art catalogues. New
Review o f Hypermedia and Multimedia,
1996, 2, 175-95.
Catenazzi, Nadia & ~okenzoSommarbga.
A n e l e c t r o n i c l i b r a r y based o n
hyper-books: The hyper-lib project. Online
& CD-ROM Review, 1995, 19, 127-35.
Chen, CC. CD-ROM and multimedia:
Multimedia technologies and digital
applications. Inspel, 1994, 28(3), 307-13.
Cox, A. Hypermedia library guides for
academic libraries on the world wide web.
Program, 1996, 30(1), 39-50.
Creanor, Linda & Helen Durndell. Teaching
information handling skills with hypertext.
Program, 1994, 28(1O), 349-65.
Dimitroff, Alexandra & Dietmar Wolfram.
Searcher response in a hypertext-based
bibliographic information retrieval system.
journal o f the American Society for
Information Science, 1995, 46, 22-29.

S & Angelides,
MC.
Dustdar,
Organizational impacts of multimedia
information systems. journal o f Information
Technology, 1997, 12(1), 33-43.
Egan, DE, et al. Hypertext for the electron~c
library CORE sample results. In Third ACM
Conference on Hypertext, New York,
1991. pp. 299-3 12.

16. Ertel, M & Eros, J. Tour of the stackshypercard for libraries. Online, 1989, 13(1),
45-53.
17. Fairman, R. Experimental hypertext library
guide at South Bank University. Vine, 1993,
9(1), 12-15.
18. Fecko, MB. Electronic resources: Access
and issues. Bowker-Sour, London, 1997,
pp. 1-148.
19. Feinman, Valerie Jackson. Hypertext and
library instruction. Computers in Libraries,
19'93, 13, 49-5 1.
20. Feldman, T. Multimedia. Audiovisual
Librarian, 1994, 20(2), 148-49.
21. Franklin, M & Fries, J. AVENUE: A
multimedia development project at
Dartmouth College. IATUL Proceedings,
1992, 1, 156-63.
22. Furner Hines, Jonathan. The use of
hypertext in libraries in the United
Kingdom: Report to the British Library
Research' & Development Department on
Project RDD/G/234 for the Period
,
April-September 1994. British Library,
,
London, 1994.
23. Furner, Jonathan & Willett, Peter. A survey
'
of hypertext-based public-access point-ofinformation systems in UK Libraries. Journal
of lnformation Science, 1995, 21(4),
243-55.
24. Gluck, Myke. Hypercard, hypertext, and
hypermedia for libraries and media centers.
Libraries Unlimited, Englewood, CO, 1989.
25. Gudi, A. Hypertext based information
retrieval system. IETE Technical Review,
1995, 12, 261-67.
26. Hardman, L. Evaluating the usability of the
Galsgow online hypertext. Hypermedia,
1989, 1(1), 34-63.
27. Hatzopoulos, M; Vaxirgianni, M & Rizos, I.
HADT L hypermedia application document
tool for tourist applications. European
Journal of lnformation Systems, 1993, 2(1),
91-101
28. Hauck, FJ. Supporting hierarchical guided
tours in the world wide web. Computer
Networks and ISDN Systems, 1996,
28(7-1I), 1233-42.

29. Hoffos, S. Multimedia and the interactive
display in museums, exhibitions and
libraries. British Library & lnformation
Research Report 87. British Library,
London, 1 9 9 2 . 9 2 ~ .
30. Hunter, I. Multimedia applications in public.
libraries and arts services. In Multimedia
Information: Proceedings of the Second
International lnformation Research
Conference held, at Churchill College,
Cambridge, UK, 15-18 July 1991, edited by
M Feeney & S Day. Bowker-Saur, London,
1991. ~ ~ 1 5 5 - 6 3 .
31. Landoni, Monica, et al. Hyper-books and
visual-books in an electronic library. The
Electronic Library, 1993, 11, 175-86
32. Larson, RR.
Geographic information
retrieval and spatial browsing.
In
Geographic lnformation Systems and
Libraries: Patrons, Maps and
Spatial
Information: Proceedings of the 1995
Clinic on Library Applications of Data
Processing, Graduate School of Library and
lnformation Science, Illinois University at
Urbana-Champaign, 10-12 April 1995,
edited by Linda C Smith & Myke Gluck,
Graduate School o f Library and
lnformation Science, Illinois, University at
Urbana Champaign, 1996. pp 81-123.
33. Lifer, ES. Catching on the 'new' medium:
LJ's multimedia/technology survey. Library
Journal, 1995, 120(2), 44-45.
34. Lowry, A-K. Electronic texts and multimedia
in the academic library: A view from the
front line. In Literary Texts in an Electronic
Age: Scholarly Implications and Library
Services: Proceedings of the 1994 Clinic
on Library Applications of Data Processing,
10-12 April 1994, edited by Brett Sutton,
Illinois University at Urbana-Champaign,
Graduate School o f Library and
lnformation Science, 1994, pp. 57-66
35, Melick, Marjorie. Changing to a
hypertext-based library instruction program
using inexpensive software for IBM
compatibles. Computers in Libraries, 1994,
14, 35-38.
36. Messing, j. Multimedia, hypermedia and
the internet: Educational technologies for
'

DESIDOC Bulletin oflnf Technol, 1998,18(6)

the twenty first century. Australian Library
Review, 1996, 13(1), 11-17.
37. Milne, Hypertext and its implications for
Library services. Library and lnformation
Research News, 1994, 18, 24-29.
38. Morrissey, Frances. Using computer-based
library reference guides: A comparison of
hypertext programs with expert systems.
Library Hi Tech, 1992, 10(1/2), 61-64.
39. Moss, WW. Disposable archives in the
interactive global village of hypermedia.
American Archivist, 1990,53(1), 6-10.
40. Peterson, Norman K & Wilhelm, Laurn.
Multimedia in a traditional library setting.
Computers i n Libraries, 1994, 14(6), 23-26.
41. Oberhauser, O t t o - C .
lntkractive
multimedia in library and information
services. Audiovisual Librarian, 199 1, 17(1),
, 17-25.
42. O'Connor, Mary-Ann. The integration of
multimedia applications into automation
planning. DoCument image Automation,
1991, 11(6), 324-26.
43. Oliver, Ron & Helen Oliver. lnformation
access and retrieval with hypermedia
information systems. British journal o f
Educational Technology, 1996, 27(1),
33-44.
44. Ottaviani, Jim & Alloway, James E.
Macintoshes libraries 5, edited by B
Vaccaro & EJ Valauskas. ALUG, Cupertino,
1992.
45. Phelan, CA. The Dickens House Museum
Library: A Hypermedia Prototype. Aslib
Proceedings, 1992, 44, 309-18.
46. Phillips, CB. Formats used in the library
multimedia union catalog. lnglewood
Public Library, CA, 1979, 63p.
47. Pitte,. Mary I & Smith, Nathan M.
Hypermedia and library instruction: The
challenge of design. RSR: Reference
Services Review, 199 1, 19(4), 13-20.
Liwen. Analytical searching vs
48. Qiu,
browsing in hypertext information retrieval
systems. Canadian journal o f Information
and Library Science, 1993, 18, 1-13.
49. Ramaiah, CK & Meadows, Aj. A study of
hypertext teaching to undergraduate
DESIDOCBulletin of Inl Technol, 1998,18(6)

students in library and information studies.
lnformation Processing & Management,
1993, 29(2), 257-62.
50. Ramarapu, N. The impact of hypertext
versus sequential information presentation
o n decision making: A conceptual model.
International lournal o f lnformation
Management, 1996,16, 183-93.
Multimedia kiosks: A new
51. Rowley, I.
m e d i u m o f information provision.
Audiovisual Librarian, 1995, 21(1 ), 40-42.
52. Schank, RC. Learning via multimedia
computers. Communications o f the ACM,
36(5), 1993, 54-56.
53. Schank, RC. Active learning through
multimedia. IEEE Multimedia, 1994, 1(1),
69-78.
54. Smith, S & Grahak, D. Project Jukebox. In
Apple Library of Tomorrow Projects, edited
b y Steve Giesler. Apple Library, Cupertino,
1993. pp. 7-1 1.
55. St Clair, J & Aluri, R. Staffing thk reference
desk: Professionals or non-professionals?
lournal o f Academic Librarianship, 1977,3,
149-53.
56. Stubley, P. Authoring multimedia: A staff
training package for librarians and
information workers. ULIS, 1993, 12(1),
111-24.
57. Tudhope, D. et al. Navigation via similarity
in hypermedia and information retrieval. In
Hypertext
Information
Retrieval
Multimedia: Proceedings of H I M '95,
edited by R Kuhlen & M Rittberger,
Universitatsverlag Konstanz, Konstanz,
Germany, 1995. pp. 203-18.
58. Thomas, PJ; Meech, JF & Williams, J.
Multimedia information using mobile
computers: Accessing the digital campus
and the digital library. New Review of
Hypermedia and Multimedia, 1996, 2(1),
17-23.
59. Vranch, A; Willsteed, 1; Banwell, R &
Westcott, D. Creating an effective
multimedia electronic tour. In Proceedings
of the Second Electronic Library and Visual
lnformation Research Conference, ELVIRA
2 , May 1995, De Montfort University,
39

Milton Keynes, UK. Astb, Londsn, 1895,

pp. 107-16.
60. Ziegfeld, Richard. Interactive fiction: A new
literary genre? New Literary History, 1989,
20, 341-72.

61. Euckrnan, 0. Dead Sea Scrdt I m @ g

Prejetzt. In Appk Libary of Tmpcrow
Projects, edited by Steve CiesJef. Apple
Library, Cupertino, 1993. pp. 12-13.

*Dr C& Ramdab is working as a Wrn~ltist'CY a d Head of Udtinecfia Lab in DESIIXX. He was selected for
Commonwealth Scholarship to & doesearch in the field of Information Science in UK in the year 1989. He
received his Doctoral degree frbm University of Technology, L o u ~ o u g h Ertglamt
,
in July 1993 on
'Hypertext and training the Library tnformation Saence Students'. He obtained his BSc from SV Uniwrsity,
Tirupati, MSc in Chemistry, fl'om Meerut University and Bachelor & Masters degrees in Library & Information
Science from University of Delhi, Mi.

