DESlDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 18, No. 6, Nov 1998, pp. 47-50
0 1998, DESlDOC

Digital Media and the Future of Academic Publishing in the
United Kingdom
john Davies*

Abstrad
\

This paper describes the role of academic publishers in producing
information on digital media and seeks to address the broad principles on
which any enduring system for electronic information must be based. The
author emphasises that a partnership between publishers, authors,
booksellers and librarians is needed for electronic delivery of information to
users effectively and efficiently.

1.

INTRODUCTION

One of the most abiding definitions of
publishers was produced by that old-time guru
of our industry, Sir Stanley Unwin, .writing in The
Truth about Publishing over 70 years ago:
"Publishers are neither philanthropists nor
rogues. Nor are they usually lordly magnates
or cringeing beggars. As a general rule,
regard them as ordinary people trying to
follow an unusually difficult occupation. It i s
easy to become a publisher but difficult to
remain one".
Digital media were unheard of when Sir
Stanley wrote this passage. He would not have
recognised the phrase and it would have
seemed to him to be the alien language of
another planet, as in a sense it is. Nonetheless,
the basics of his definition remain as true and
relevant today as they were then. In the digital
world, it is extremely easy to become a
publisher and even more difficult to remain one
in the meaningful sense.
In meeting the challenges and opportunities
presented by the new technologies, the Council
of Academic and Professional Publishers brings
together those most skilled and experienced in
the art of successful publishing, most of the
DESIDOCBulletin d l n f T d n d , 1998,18(6)

major schola;ly publishers based in the United
Kingdom. This representative Council has
developed its own fund of knowledge on the
most pertinent issues in the area of digital
publishing such as copyright management,.
trading practice, collective licensing, marketing
and systems of content organisations. Specialist
groups have been developed over various
disciplines and areas of activity like law,
medical, college and journal publishing. The
Council is the obvious interface for those within
universities who wish to use published material
in electronic form.
Much has been written and spoken on the
technical detail of electronic systems for
operation-perhaps too much, as one modus
operandi follows another and few become
established. This paper seeks tu address the
broad principles on which any enduring system
for electronic information must be based.
It is very important from the outset that
academic
institutions regard commercial
publishers as contributing partners to higher
education and not as adversaries. Without such
a sense of partnership, no system is likely to
succeed. This is emphasised in the recent report
produced by Sir Ron Dearing's Committee for

47

the British Government on Higher Education in
the Learning Society.

13
They raise awareness of the rnaterial and

Traditional academic and professional
publishing of books and journals in the United
Kingdom amount to £458 million each year,
with a very creditable export turnover of £236
million (over half of product). Western Europe is
the largest purchaser, followed by the United
States. Total sales of academic and professional
journals are 5326 million of which f 228 million
(over two thirds of product) are exported.
47,000 book titles and 3,000 journal tides are
printed each year. The academic market in the
United Kingdom with purchases of f231 million
i s a significant element.

0 Above all, they provide that substantial,

2.

ROLE OF PUBLISHERS

It is clear from the above that the publishers
know the markets and the markets know the
publishers. Given such a firm and we!ldeveloped home and export base for print
publications, there would seem to be no reason
why a bright future should not lie ahead for the
parallel publication of similar material in
electronic form.
A fair observation is, however, made by
Electrorlic Publishing Services in their statement
in 'The Changing Structure of the lnformation
Market Place':

"Many publishers in this sector are well aware
of the fact that they must clearly demonstrate
the value they add to the process if they wish
to remain a part o f the process."
The value that publishers aim to add to the
published product may be summarised as
follows:

0 They provide quality control, through
selection of the best and most suitable
material.

0 They co-ordinate the inputs of material.
0 They design and prepare the text and

provide bibliographic controls.
ongoing financial investment that enables the
product to be published and disseminated.
These elements of high investment and
quality
control provided by academic
publishers are clearly seen as of considerable
importance by the Universities' Funding
Councils. This i s evidenced by the statement in
their Annual Report where they say of their
electronic libraries programme that "the
involvement of publishers is critical to success."
They add that they are pleased with the positive
response from publishers to this programme, a
sentiment echoed in Sir Ron Dearing' s report.
The major part of the material required for
such electronic systems currently resides in
traditional publications and has commensurate
status. The publishers will continue to handle
this material.

3.

It must be underlined, however, that
putilishers would wish to respond positively to
all digital and electronic developments in
universities, including the creation of electronic
journals,
document
delivery
services,
customised publishing, on demand publishing,
subject databases, site licences.
For this reason, the Publishers Association
Ltd., UK participated in a series of Working
Parties with the Universities' Joint lnformation
Systems Committee to investigate the key issues
concerned
with
electronic
and digital
developments and to try to offer practical
solutions. The main issues established in the
first instance were:
Q creation of framework licensing agreements

illustrations and bring editing skills to the text.

0 They create navigational tools for the use of

for use of material in electronic form;

P development of co-ordinated clearance and

the publication.

0 They research and develop the market.
0 They promote and sell the publication.
0 They disseminate, distribute it and make i t
available.

ISSUES CONCERNED WITH
ELECTRONIC AND DIGITAL
DEVELOPMENTS

charging mechanisms;

o

interpretation of 'fair dealing' in the electronic
context;

o

d e f i n i t i o n o f a public/private sector
partnership on networking and access;

OESlDoC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1998,18(6)

arrangements for archiving and retention of
electronically stored material.
Consensus has been reached on these
matters. Consultation documents have been
issued both to the universities and to the
publishing industry after a series of meetings
and seminars. The Publishers Association has
also been a leading contributor to the
monitoring exercise on the pilot site licence
initiative in universities.

4.

COPYRIGHT MANAGEMENT

Copyright management is a theme which
underpins much of these discussions. The
protection and enhancement of copyright is
clearly essential to the well-being of all types of
publishing and the importance of the copyright
industries to Gross Domestic Product is firmly
recognised by governments. There must be
adequate control and proper remuneration for
use of copyright material. The Standing
Conference of National and University Libraries
recognised this in its submission to Sir Ron
Dearing's National Committee of Inquiry into
Higher Education. Publishers would, however,
wish the universities to have the opportunity to
use their material in the easiest and most
appropriate way and will continue to pursue
this through vehicles such as the Copyright
Licensing Agency.

5.

ELECTRONIC DELIVERY AND
FUNDS

Electronic systems have proved much easier
to develop in the professional and commercial
sector than in universities. In front line areas like
law and medicine, where the value of the
enhanced currency of information given by
electronic delivery is obvious, the value of the
service is clearly seen and funds are made
available to pay for it.
Funding is, however, clearly a major problem
in universities. Students currently obtain only
half of the material essential to their courses.
Library book and materials provision for per
student has been cut by 50 per cent in the last
15 years. The Committee of Vice Chancellors
and Principals has said that new electronic
systems will require huge investment. The
proposals of Sir Ron Dearing's Committee
DESlDOC Bulletin o fInf Technol, 1998,18(6)

about funding, as interpreted by the British
Government, may put some additional money
into universities but whether this will be
adequate or properly directed remains to be
seen.
A vaild point is made by the university
libraries that electronic provision should not
necessarily be seen as a cheaper alternative to
print. This remains valuable quality information
that requires investment, time and effort for its
production, and it will continue to have a
significant cost. The Funding Councils add the
important rider that electronic systems should
always be scrutinised for cost-effectiveness as
against print.

6.

SUGGESTIONS

It has been suggested that academic authors
might retain their copyrights and that these
should be transferred to the universities who
would themselves operate the electronic
systems. Copyright resides by law in the author
and can only be transferred by consent and in
contract to another party. Such transfers are
made to publishers in return for the investment
and support publishers can bring to authors'
work, but it remains the author's option.
Where a work is clearly produced directly in
the course of employment, a university may
rightly be able to claim the copyright but this is
not to say that the author's every thought on
the universe, God, Shakespeare or the quantum
reactions in atoms belong to the employer. It is
unlikely that Umberto Eco or Iris Murdoch
would be prepared to concede that their noted
works belonged to the institutions of higher
education where they worked. I testified in a
case where an author contested such an
assertion and the university withdrew. Sir Ron
Dearing's report touches on the issue of
university copyright but does not advance it.
Many notable publishing enterprises have
had their origins in the world of academe, like
the university presses and the learned societies.
Those that have succeeded have recognised
that they have to work to the same standards
and financial benchmarks as commercial
publishers. They are recognised as such, and
many of them are important members of the
Publishers Association.

A noted academic publisher of modern
times, Cordon Graham, writes in What
Publishers Do:

"Publishers can never function alone. It
works only in partnership with authors,
printers, bookseks, librarians, all of whom
ate just as subject to the disturbing pressures

of our information-glutted, technoiogy-led
phase of history."
It is very much to be hoped h a t this
partnership, which has made the United
Kingdom one of the great academic publishing
centres of the world, will continue into the era
of digital technology and into the new
Miilennium.

*john Davies, born in 1941, educated at universities of Oxford and Sheffidd 1860a3 and 1964-65, Graduate
academic library trainee at the Bodleiw Library, Oxford 1963-64, Chaired regional library associations and
served on national library committees, Director, Educational Pubfirhen Cound and Council of AcaBrnic
and Professional Publishers 1977 to date (the Publishers Association, No. 1, Kingsway, London WC28 6XF,
UK.), Director, Cop @-Licensing Agency and Publishers Licensing Socie&y 1984 to date, Trustee,
Cadmean Trust for #e ~dvrncementof Reading 1982 to date, Director/Board Member of Bmk House
Training Centre and Book Trade Benevolent Society 1994 to date

50

DfiIDOC 8uIletk of Inf Ted,mI, 1998,18(6)

