D E S I D O C Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 1 8, No. 6, Nov 1 998, pp.5 1 -54
0 1998, DESIDOC

Multimedia lnformation and Library & lnformation Staff
Jack Meadows*
Abstract
Multimedia information is rapidly growing both in importance and in
diversity. The question is not simply how such information should be
handled by library and information staff, but also whether their role might
be bypassed by direct end-user access. This possibility is examined here in
the context of an indepth study carried out recently in the UK. It is
concluded that the problems presented by the handling of multimedia
information will require a change in role of library and information staff, but
will not eliminate the need for their input.

THE BACKGROUND
Many definitions of what is meant by
'multimedia information' are in circulation. The
problem is that the concept, itself, is blurred.
Attempts at definition are likely to be too
broad, or to miss important elements. For
example, a common definition would be of the
type: 'Multimedia information results from the
integration of data, text, images and sound
within
a single electronic
information
environment'.' O n the one hand, this is often
too broad a definition. For example, the
commonest form of multimedia information at
present consists simply of text and (stationary)
graphics. O n the other hand, the definition
leaves out an important element-the level of
interaction between the user and the system.
This question of interaction is of
considerable significance to library and
information staff in their role as intermediaries
between the information available and its users.
Such staff are currently learning to handle
multimedia information: but so, too, are their
customers. In terms of handling multimedia
information, where will the balance between
librarian and customer lie in the future? For
example, consider the following description of
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno!, 1 998,18(6)

the FastDoc systems currently being tested in
Western ~ u r o p e to handle text-plus-graphics
documents.

'A document is ordered using our Windows
software, simply by tagging the entry in a
catalogue. The user's PC automatically places
the order via a dial-up link to the library's
computer, which automatically processes it. The
first page reached his fax machine within five
minutes together with an invoice, also generated
a~tomatically'.~
In this process, the only active involvement
of the librarian is likely to be in the payment of
the invoice.
One thing that is quite clear is that demand
for multimedia information will grow rapidly. In
specific areas of science and technology,
production and consumption of multimedia
information has been commonplace for years
past. An obvious example is the acquisition of
data from satellites in Earth's orbit. The interest
in such information is now expanding to a wider
audience. One important reason for this is that
the technological infrastructure now availableWebbased
approach
to
handling
the
information
and
the
Internet for
its
dissemination-encourages
the
use
of
51

multimedia sources. For example, a recent
European initiative has launched MIDASNET
(the Multimedia Information Demonstration
and Support Network) with the intention of
helping commercial and industrial firms in the
European Union explore the potential of
multimedia for their activities.' As part of the
launch, a survey of top firms in Ireland found
that some two-thirds wanted to know more
about the Internet. Nearly all of these firms
were particularly interested in its use for
handling multimedia information.
The European Commission has proposed
that one of its main R&D programmes for the
next few years should be aimed at creating a
user-friendly
information
society.
The
programme for this emphasises the importance
of developing multimedia information. Similar
initiatives are appearing world-wide, not least in
the United States. The situation is, however,
less straightforward than the proliferation of
these programmes might suggest. In assessing
what contribution they can make to multimedia
information handling, librarians and information
staff need to consider the problems as well as
advantages of providing such information.

2.

THE PROBLEMS

One obvious problem is the cost of
technological infrastructure required to handle
multimedia information. In terms of their
capabilities, the cost of computers continues to
drop dramatically. However, demands on the
sophistication of
computers continually
increase, with the result that the actual cost of
new equipment drops less rapidly. Moreover,
the rate of change is such that new equipment
has to be bought at frequent intervals-a costly
requirement.
This is especially true of multimedia
technology at present. Consider, for example,
computer graphics, a basic element of
multimedia handling. From the graphics
viewpoint, the computer screen suffers from
the same defect as the printed page. It often
faces the need to represent a three-dimensional
in two-dimensional space. Considerable effort
i s now going into the development of a
three-dimensional
computer
environment
(mostly under the heading of 'virtual reality').
No doubt appropriate technology will be

developed, but it can be expected to undergo
rapid change and to be relatively costly. In
addition, there is no guarantee that it will be
downwardly
compatible
with
existing
equipment. If librarians are struggling to provide
adequate access to twodimensional images,
how will they cope with a requirement for
three-dimensional images?
Cost obviously affects access. All studies
show that the extensive use of computers for
information purposes requires the equipment to
be immediately available, preferably on the
user's desktop. If the library or information
centre is to fit into this scenario, it needs to act
as a switching centre providing multimedia
information to its users via a network. Though
this kind of provision is growing, it is still far from
universal. However, the fundamental problem
goes deeper: it refers to the network, itself,
rather than to the equipment that it links
together. Multimedia requires much more
bandwidth for transmission than pure text.
The current increasing sophistication .of
multimedia is paralleled by its growing demands
on bandwidth. It only needs one low-bandwidth
link in the network for a bottle-neck to occur in
the flow of multimedia i,nformation. For many
users, handling multimedia activities can be
tedious occupation.
One final problem relates to the extent to
which multimedia handling is oriented to user
needs. A typical document in science and
technology, as noted previously, is a mixture of
text and graphics. One study of what readers
require when handling such a mixture is
tabulated on the next page (its findings are
similar to those of other studies).'
The most striking point is the great demand
for the electronic information to be available in
print. The reason becomes evident when other
items in the list are examined.
For example, though electronic data are
easier to search, printed versions are usually
easier to browse. Equally, a networked computer
is not, as yet, a very portable object. Indeed,
most requirements in the list are better fulfilled
currently by print than by electronic means.
Multimedia is in demand for the positive things
it can offer-volume of information, level of

DESlDOC Bullein of Inf Technol, 1998,18(6)

interaction, and so on-but it still has some way
to go in terms of user-friendliness.
The Importance of various electronic
document characteristics to readers
Electronic document
characteristics
Creation of a print survey

Percentage saying
very im~ortant
80

Ability to browse graphics

73

Ability to browse text

66

Portability of the text

53

Flipping pages and
scanning

45

Ability to underline and
annotate

41

Physical comfort

37

3.

A CASE EXAMPLE

There is a factor of considerable importance
for library and information staff. User's adverse
opinions of multimedia are more often
triggered by low-level problems than by
high-level difficulties. A recent study at
Loughborough University can be cited as an
example.' This has looked at the problems
academic readers encounter when using
electronic journals (nearly all of which consist
of a mix of text and graphics). The university
library at Loughborough now offers access to
several hundred electronic journals via its Web
pages. It is therefore relatively easy for readers
to identify what is available. The question is
how readily they can extract the information
they need from the journals.
One major difficulty was encountered
immediately by many readers we studied-that
is gaining access to the journal. This often
involved lengthy delays (up to 50 minutes, the
maximum time permitted) before the desired
journal article appeared on the screen. The
delay was primarily due to the amount of
electronic traffic. Even mirror sites did not
always solve the problem. For example, one
reader was told to log into the US site of the
e-journal because there were too many
connections to the UK site. To make matters
worse, the exact form of the interface varied
from publisher to publisher, and was often far
from self-explanatory. Even gaining access to
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1998,18(6)

the article was not the end of the process. Most
readers expected to be able to download and
print out the articles that interested them. This
again often proved to be time-consuming.
Additional difficulties appeared once access
had been gained. Several readers found
navigation tricky, especially when browsing. In a
number of cases, the help facilities proved to be
sufficiently well-concealed that the readers failed
to find them. It was also found that details of
typography and graphics were less easy to see
on-screen than on paper. The more complex the
journal, the greater the potential problems. For
example, one engineering journal required
additional software in order to view animated
sequences. The version available on the campus
was the wrong one, and it was not worth
acquiring the correct version purely for reading
one journal of restricted interest.
After they had acquired some experience of
handling electronic journals, users were asked
for their reactions. Two-thirds thought that, in
principle, such journals offered easier access.
They meant by this that all the journals could be
accessed from their own rooms: there was no
need to waste time visiting library (and perhaps
finding that the journal issue required was
already in use). However, when asked which
type of journal-the electronic or the print-they
found it easier to use, much the same
proportion preferred the printed journal. This
reflected the deficiencies in handling the
electronic version that have been remarked on
above.

4.

CONCLUSIONS

The Loughborough study ( a ~ d
others) point
to some general conclusions. Three immediately
relevant conclusions are :
Low-level problems, especially delays in
accessing and navigational difficulties, are a
major demotivating factor in handling
multimedia information.

0 Lengthy on-screen reading remains unpopular.
At the same time, downloading and printing
out leaves much to be desired, especially in
terms of delays.

O Users of multimedia information require both
training and advice. Since the nature and
presentation of such information continues to

change rapidly, such training and advice is
not a one-off activity, but has to be repeated.
Some of these problems relate to the
product. For example, some of the difficulties
with navigation arise from the fact that
publishers are still learning how to present
multimedia effectively. .It might be expected
that these problems will be alleviated as
providers
gain
experience.
Other
problems-especially
the
delays-are
infrastructural, and may prove more difficult to
resolve. However, the basic problem lies in the
rapidity of change. It is here that library and
information staff can be particularly effective.
Users of multimed~ainformation will need both
initial training and continuing advice on how to
handle it. In the Loughborough study, most
users felt they would have had problems,
certainly in their initial attempts at using
electronic journals, had guidance not been
provided. They also noted the need for
updafing. An example of this actually occurred
during the course of the study. One publisher
changed the way its journals were accessed
without warning, and the readers immediately
required assistance to make the changeover.
Looking at these results, it is clear that at
least two library skills are required in the
handling of multimedia information on an
institutional basis. The first is the organisation
of the information, so that readers cap readily
identify relevant material. The Loughborough
study, for example, was preceded by a library
exercise that organised the incoming electronic
journals into an acceptable and easily usable

file. The second is the provision of the training
and advice needed to handle the information.
Again, the Loughborough study suggests that
library and information staff should take the
lead, though staff from the computer centre, or
from departments, may also have a role to play.
It will be noted that the end-users at
Loughborough actually did the information
retrieval. Yet this did not remove the need for
intervention on the part of information experts.
The question was raised at the beginning of this
paper-where will the balance between librarian
and customer lie in the future? The answer for
some time to come is likely to be that the
growth of multimedia information will change
the role of library and information staff, but will
not eliminate the need for their input.

REFERENCES
1.

Gibbins, P. The challenge of multimedia.
Ltd, Calne Wilts, UK. 1992.

' Infonortics

2.

Ecker, R. Libraries get wired. Innovation and
Technology Transfer, 1997, 3, 2 1.

3.

http://www.echo.lu/info2000/midas/home.
html

4.

Stewart, L. User acceptance of electronic
journals. College and Research Libraries,
1996, 57, 339-49.

5.

Woodward, H, et al. Cafe Jus: Commercial
and free electronic journals user study.
BLRlC Report No. 55. British Library,
London, 1997.

M r Jack Meadows* is presently associated with Department of Information and Library Studies,
Loughborough University, UK.

54

DESIDOC hllein of Inf Technd, 1998,18(6)

