DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 19, No. 1, January 1999, pp. 5-14
0 1999, DESIDOC

Community lnformation Concepts
V Vishwa Mohan* & AAN Raju**
Abstract
This article discusses the definitions and concepts of CI (CI) and ClSs
(CISs), given by several authors. It traces the history and details the
components of CI and CISs.

1.

INTRODUCTION

lnformation has been described by subject
experts as the fifth need of man ranking after
air, water, food and shelter'. In fact, in view of
the vital role played by information in daily life,
it should be considered as the first need in
terms of survival. This is because it is
information about the availability of food, which
food to be eaten, how to build a shelter,
protection of territory, ensuring security and
success, etc., which are primarily of organic
importance. Without this information, it is
difficult to go through the challenging process
of life. As a matter of fact, every organisation
knows or needs to know about its surroundings,
availability of food and probable potential
dangers for its life. lnformation is so basic that it
is a part and parcel of nature. This is evident
from the fact that every organism is endowed
with certain amount of knowledge or
knowledge-base by nature itself (for example,
migration and imitation of natural groups) and it
tries to add to its knowledge-base through
sensory perception or experience. Without
information, survival would be impossible.
All human beings have information needs,
both individual and collective. And it is
information transfer and information revolution
which are the key factors for the cultural
revolution and societal development of
mankind. O f course, the strength of any nation
depends on its economic condition and/or
DESIDOC Bulletrn olln( Technol, 1999,19(1)

economic development. "Development is the
most important challenge facing the human
race. Despite vast opportunities created by the
technological revolution of the twentieth
century, more than one billion people, one-fifth
of the world's population, live on less than one
dollar a day-a standard of living that Western
Europe and the United States attained two
hundred years ago"'. This indicates that the
poor nations of the world are poorer and more
backward as they are about 50-200 years
behind the advanced countries simply because
their information resources are inadequate.
Therefore, development is a greater challenge
to the third world or developing countries and
this challenge is much more serious in view of
the constraints on their information resources.
That is, the economic development of a country
depends on soundness of the information
system of its economy. Mountjoy states: "In this
group (i.e., the third world countries) are the
poorest nations in the world, technologically
backward but capable of great advances and
possessing in their territories a great wealth of
mineral, vegetable and energy resources'." This
clearly means that the weakness of the third
world in its information resources has a direct
bearing on its economic development.
The
intensity
and
extension
of
underdevelopment or poverty is much more
profound in the rural areas of the third world in
general and those of India in particular.
-

5

Describing the state of poverty, Justice
Bhagavathi4 states: "no amount of politics will
be of any avail, until the masses in lndia share
the fruits of freedom and development. Today,
they are the outcasts of society. They are living
lives of misery and suffering, want and
destitution. When, as the Chief Justice of
Gujarat, I toured the rural areas, I found poverty
for myself-stark and naked poverty, people
w ~ t hsunken eyes, empty starved stomachs, with
hardly any clothes to wear, with scarcely a roof
over the head."

it is in this context that Rao (ref. 5, pp. 4) gates,
"the creation of the knowledge-base within the
poverty-stricken cultures is assuming great
importance. The processes of acculturation and
bringing about change in human behaviour are
complex and time-consuming. They require
changes in perceptions and attitudes of people
facilitating change, as well as people receiving
the advantage of change." He further states,
"the immediate need to comprehend first is that
there is widespread information hunger in rural
areas".

This form and proportion of poverty is not
limited to Gujarat alone, it pervades the entire
rural lndia to a larger extent and we find a heart
rend~ngpicture of poverty sr~de:iploitation. of
the poor in the rural India. There prevails a
vtcious circle of poverty. It is hard to
breakthrough because of various reasons. This
situation finally supports the theory that poverty
breeds poverty. As the saying goes, the rich
grow richer and the poor grow poorer in a
democracy like ours. This is due to the high rate
of exploitation and denial of all needs of the
downtrouden by the feudal system that there is
an induction of the culture of poverty.

But, then there is a crucial question of
determining priorities like which is more
important-physical/physiotogical
hunger or
information poverty? Discussing developments
and spread global communication and
information revolution, BC Vergheseb observes:
"yet ours is a very different world where large
sections of people will struggle for existence or
for simple basic rights. To .talk of their
communication needs might appear like
offering them cake when they are desperately
searching for a morsel of bread. Yet, at another
level, communication would be an important
element in transforming their lives."

Describing the nature of the vicious circle of
poverty, RaoS states: "The people in rural and
tribal areas of our country are greatly
handicapped because of the culture of poverty.
The cultural constraint works in a plethora of
ways to keep the poor people poor."

Delivering the Sardar Patel Memorial lecture
on Communication and Nation Building,
organised by the All lndia Radio, in 1985, PC
josh;,' the noted Indian economist, who headed
the Committee on Software Planning for
Doordarshan, observed: "the poor classes who
have to struggle for survival in a new system,
whose rules of game are unknown to them, the
right to information becomes fundamental as
right to food, to shelter and to employment... .
The poor themselves were becoming aware
that removal of their information poverty had
become a precondition for the alleviation of
their material poverty. Elite domination of the
information system has meant denial of basic
information to the masses." All this shows that
in the wake of emerging information society,
information is very basic to peace and human
development,

In order to achieve a breakthrough, the poor
may have to raise their awareness levels. At
present, they are ignorant of the ways to
overcome and combat the consequent evils
and pain of poverty. They lack the power to
discriminate between good and bad and they
do not know how to act collectively. They do
not have a clear perspective of themselves and
their life. The awareness levels of the poor are
so deplorable that their condition makes them
to be more downtrodden and underprivileged.
As quoted by Rao (ref. 5, pp. 4) Oscar Lewis
observe "people with a culture of poverty know
only their own troubles, their local conditions,
their own neighbourhood...usually they do not
have the knowledge, the vision or the ideology
to see the similarities between their problems
and those of their counterparts elsewhere". And

The
communication
of
survival/
developmental information is much more
crucial for the alleviation of the downtrodden,
particularly in the developing countries like
India. As a matter of fact information is so basic
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1 999,19(1)

(ii) Citizen actior~ information, needed for
effective participation as individual or as
member of a group in the social, political,
legal, economic process.
But, Donohue does not make any specific
reference to the community part of CI.
tiilary B Thomas" feels that "those
definitions are so broad that they could
encompass almost any information need,
irrespective of the attributes of the enquirer or
the purpose for which the information is
required...".
Allan Bunch (ref. 8, pp. 4), regarded as one
who had first attempted to synthesise
definitions of CI, states that C1 has two aspects:
"one is concerned with the nature of the
information provided, that is, information in the
community to help people with daily problem
solving or in raising the quality of their lives; the
other is concerned with the nature of the
clientele served, namely, those who belong to
the lo~*ier socio-econonric groups or are
disadvantaged ttlrough an inability to obtain,
understand, or act on information that affects
their lives."
This definition also may not he totally
satisfactory, a fact acknowledged by Bunch
himself. But he justifies it as a sort of consensus
among the U K ancl US practices.
Conimentmg on this definition of Bunch,
Durrance" feels that they move the f~eldto a
common understznriing, but both fall short of
providing a coniprehensive definition of CI.

I

Not merely thc definition given by Bunch,
but some of the above definitions resort to
certain extremities, S L ! C ~ as the one given by
Library Association's Working Party on (31,
which describes ClSs as "a positive decision to
concentrate on enabling people .... to act either
individually or collectively on their problems in
the fields of housing, en~plnyment,family and
personal matters...". tizre the questionable
aspect is whether CI service, as an
instituiionalised service, can deal with personal
and family matters? Probably, this niight be
objectionable . to certain individuals--both LIS
professionals as we!l as the clientele. Also it is
not clear whether it is advisable to rerrder such
a service by the CI providers.
f>fSIDOC Bulletin of In1 Techol, 1999,19(1)

In a review of ClSs by Thomas", it is stated,
"these definitions are so broad that they could
encompass almost any information need. Thus,
the scope of the CI concepts mentioned above
is also problem in itself."
But being broad at the conceptual level is
not a defect in itself. Hence there should not be
any restrictions on the scope of a broad
concept, such as 'CI', o n the basis of social
fragmentations,
such
as
minorities,
disadvantaged, etc. Some of the definitions
emphasise the orientation of CI to be biased
towards minorities, disadvantaged groups in the
community. This is not fair. It is rearonable that
the service should not be restricted to only a
section of the community.
The information needs. of the affluent rnay
also be very much crucial and intensive, and
they too might find it very difficult to locate the
required information easily at the time of need,
as the inforniation i s not perfectly controlled
and organised. Right information provided at
t h e right time of need might save lives and
transform the living conditions and standards.
Therefore CI i s described as survival information
and the concept needs to be clarified further.
Durrance (ref. 20, pp. 102) is of thc opinion
that the concept of CI finds its premise in the
concept of reference service. t i e states, "there
are striking similarities between the current
state of ClSs and Rothstein's clescription of the
innovative first two decades of reference
prac ticc."
Further, he fee!s, "the difficulty which the
field has encountered in establishing adequate
terminology relating to ClSs is due to several
factors:
(a) lack of agreement by leadership on the
specific words to describe CISs,

(1)) irrconsistency in the use of the terminology
\*/hich is selected, and
(c) inadequate indexing.
E;ich of these factors can ultirnateiy be
trdct'd back to the fact that the field is in the
relatively early stages of the development of a
complex innovation which in its purest form
deviates substantially from the norm and it1 its

official sources and has necessity to avoid too
close an association with political or pressure
groups." Wilson's preference to use the safer
term public information in view of his above
arguement is reasonable but in practice the
alternative terminology suggested by him leads
to further confusion for the simple reason that
'public' is much wider in connotation than
'community'. For example 'public' can be an
antonym for 'private', and 'public' can also
mean 'open'. Between the terms 'public' and
'comnlunity' the later is preferable for two
reasons: firstly it is less ambiguous than 'public'
and secondly it is a widely used term by CI
practitioners.
In view of this problem of terminology a
helpful distinction between the three terms
'Public information work', 'Local information
service' and 'CI service' has been provided by
the Library Association's Working Party on Cll3.
They describe public information work as "a
general information service which makes 'no
discrimination in favour of specific groups';
Local information service as 'information
service cjn purely local matters..., (which) will
involve building up detailed local information
files and publishing directories and generally
acting as a signposting agency to other local
services'; and service as 'a positive decision
which concentrates on enabling people,
particularly those in lower socio-economic
groups, to act either individually or collectively
on their problems in the fields of housing,
employment, family and personal matters,
consumer
affairs,
household finance,
education, welfare rights and civil rights".
Elaine Kempson" narrates the role of CI in
self-reliance and self-determination; thus she
describes Cl .as "information for self-reliance
and self-determination". Dorothy ~ u r i c k " in her
report titled CI Service in Libraries describes CI
as "the alphabetically organised resource file
or published directory of current information
descriptive of agencies".
'~
"CI is considered to
Michael ~ d w a r d ssays:
be that information required by members of the
public (or those acting on their behalf) to make
effective use of the resources potentially
available to them in the communities in which
they live. Such information may be needed to
-8

help solve problems in the fields of housing,
disability,
household
finance,
marriage,
employment, and so on." Thus, he opines that
CI is information in the community for the
community.
A distinctive feature of David Smith's"
definition of CI is that he explains each term
independently: "A community is made up of
persons who bring to the common life a variety
of resources both material and of knowledge
and skill. Each member of the community has
needs and each has resources. In the most
profound sense we are functions of one
another and it is the interpenetration and
co-ordination of these resources which creates
the community. We define information in terms
of an experience whereby people are linked
with one another in mutually useful ways.
information is created, shared and used by two
or more persons acting together. Information
does not exist in books, data banks, and files,
but is the experience whereby, the symbols in
the books on files are translated into action
between two or more persons. The need of the
questioner is matched with the resources
available in the process of this interaction." With
this backdrop, he describes CI as the binding
element which binds the disparate elements
together to form a community.
A critical analysis of the components of the
above definitions of CI reveals that most of
them have focussed attention either on the
nature of information or on clientele or on
both. There is a high degree of agreement
among the CI experts that it i s concerned with
that information which enables people both
individually and collectively to face crises in
their day-today life.
Joseph ~onohue", considered to be one of
the earliest creators of CI, too centres his
definition around the above idea. According to
him, it is information needed to cope with
crises in the lives of individuals and
communities. Explaining this definition, he has
identified two types of information provided
under CI service:
(i) Survival information such as that related to
health, housing, income, legal protection,
economic opportunity, political rights, etc.,
and
DESlDOC Bulletin of Ini Technol, 1 999,19(1)

more conservative incarnations closer to the
practice of reference (ref. 20, pp. 103):
Summing up various definitions, Durrance
(ref. 20, pp. 108)
opines that the most
serviceable definition of CI was developed by
one of the earliest creators of CI service,
Donohue, who identified two types of
information to be provided by such a service
"survival information such as that related to
health, housing, income, legal protection,
economic opportunity, political rights, etc., and
citizen action information, needed for effective
participation as individual or as member of a
group in the social, paiitical, legai, economic
process."
Durrance calls the former 'information and
referral' and the latter 'public
policy
information'. He adds to these tterns a third
component called 'local information' which
according to him is information appropriate
and useful to the community, inciuding a
calendar of local events, courses and other
educational
opportunities,
and
basic
information concerning government agencies,
local organisations, fraternal groups, and clubs.
These three components for Durrance will
constitute a basis for the understanding of
presently practised and emerging CISs. Thus
ClSs will be an umbrella term that encompasses
these three components,
according to
Durrance.
However, the above conclusion by Durrance
also suffers from implicit and intrinsic
overlapping of the constituent components at
the conceptual plane. As stated by him,
'information and referral' (I&R) component
refers to surviyal information. But, in reality I&R
is again an umbrella concept because it can
include the other two components, namely,
public policy information and local information.
Another important and implied dimension is
the neighbourhood information or trans-local
information which has not been dealt clearly by
him nor was clearly spelt out and discussed by
anyone else. For example, information about a
medical specialist in the neighbourhood
(locality) may be of great value in case of
emergencies; employment opportunities do not
always emerge from the local community itself.

Therefore, information about such opportunities
elsewhere would also be of a great value.
Therefore, survival information does not and
should not have any geographical boundaries
or limitations.
Further, the boundaries of neighbourhood
are also relative. In view of this, the scope of CI
goes beyond the local boundaries, social
groups and so on. As such, at the conceptual
level, there need not be any restrictions on the
scope or meaning of an umbrella concept such
as the CI, because it means all things to all men.
Particularly, in a changing society, where the
concept of global village and Vasudaika
Kutumbam are turning out to be realities, by
shrinking
distances
through
speedy
transportation and communication, high rate of
migration from rural areas to urban areas and
between
and
among
countries,
and
interdependence of regions and nations
delimiting the concept and its functional validity
to certain sections of society would be
unreasonable. In the context of these social
change5, the ClSs need to be much more
comprehensive and dynamic. Nevertheless, the
nature, scope and success of the service would
fully depend on the capabilities, facilities and
resources of individual information centre and
also on the clientele needs.

3.

COMPONENTS OF CI

For better understanding, the term 'CI' could
be meant as survival information linking needs
with resources for better living. And it is
basically the community I&R with emphasis on
the referral component.
The community I&R services could further
be detailed as in the following figure.
These components may further be detailed
as given in Fig. 1.
O n the other hand, the 'Referral'
component involves directing the needy to the
sources of information at the following two
levels:

I.

Local level; and

li. Trans-local level.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1999,19(1)

COMMUNITY INFORMATION SERVICES

I

i

~Lcal

Trans-Local

I

I

Information

Referral

Public Policy

0 her general

I

in ormation

I

-

Local (level)

~ r a n r ~ A c (level)
a1

Figurel: Schematic representation of components of community information services (CISs)

Local Information

Defined as information appropriate and useful to the community,
including a calendar of local events, courses and other educational and
employment opportunities, and basic information such as those
concerning government agencies local organisations, fraternal groups and
clubs6.

Trans-Local lnformation

Defined as information appropriate and useful to the community
pertaining to the localities beyond the local area or community
concerned (i.e., local information of neighbourhood localities and/or
trans-local areas).

Public Policy lnformation Defined as information about the Government, and its operation,
programmes, plans, schemes, activities, agencies, etc.
General information (i.e.,
conventional disciplineoriented information)

Defined as awareness generating information on important subject areas,
such as health and hygiene, environment, conservation of energy and
resources, agriculture, animal husbandry, useful arts and fine arts (i.e.,
vocational information) technology as well as political, and
socio-economic awareness, etc.

It can be seen that an attempt has been
made to include in the above definition the
various components of CI already identified by
earlier researchers.

4.

HISTORY O F Cl

Since the dawn of human civilisation and
formation of larger societies, the human beings
have been faced with CI needs. And the CI
flowed to the needy through various channels,
unmediated by librarians through informal
networks.
History speaks out that the importance of
dissemination of CI was felt in ancient days
itself. For instance, the Edicts of Ashoka amply
illustrate the method of dissemination of public
policy information in ancient India. lnformatiori
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techol, 1999,19(1)

about the local events, penal sanctions,
taxation, grants, local activities and public/royal
policies, etc., used to reach the people through
the medium of Dandora (Tom! Tom!). Through
Dandora publicity of the necessary information
was carried out by an officially engaged team,
who would beat drums to attract the attention
of the public and then announce the message
loudly. This system is still a very popular means
of communication in rural India.
lnformation was also recorded on various
types of Inscriptions, such as the donors'
inscriptions, etc. Messages of ethics and code
of conduct used to be conveyed through
several people-oriented cultural programmes
like Burrakathas, Harikathas, Veedhi Natakams,
and by proclamations, preaching of the
religious heads. O f course, these were meant
11

for the propagation of religious and epic
themes. These cultural events not only
motivated and entertained the masses but also
enforced ethics, discipline and the accepted
code of conduct among them. The Curukulas,
i-e., the ancient residential centres of education
and learning were also centres of information
and communicaiion.
In the rural setup, the Rachchabanda (Grama
Sabha Venue or meeting place of the
elderslleaders of the village) where the
summing up of the local events, planning of the
activities, and other activ~ties take place, are
the CI centres and the centres of social, legal
and of various other acthitics c f the viifage(s).
The wells in the rural areas air0 serve as centres
of information for the rural women folk.
With the advent and advances of
communication and information technology the
rnass media, such as radio, te!evisicn, and
newspapers have undertaken the respon5ibillty
of disseminating the CI in their own limited way
but more efficiently and with a wider coverage.
O f all the channels enumerated abcve, the
channel of individuals, that is interper~onal
communication plays a vital role in the flow of
CI, both formally and informally. Though C1
existed since times immemorial, the concept rdf
CI is very recent and still in the initial stage.

As mentioned earlier, dissemination of CI
has been taking place since times immemorial.
But, the formal/institutionalised flow of CI,
particularly in India could be traced back to the
inception of Dandora and edicts of Ashoka as
far back as third century BC.
Unlike in the case of India, as Bunch (ref. 8, pp.
4) states, "the roots of CISs, both in Britain and

the United States, have been traced back to the
end of the nineteenth century. But the most
significant developments arose during the crisis
period of the Second World War, when the
Britain Citizens' Advice Bureaux (CABX) were
set up at the outbreak of hostilities to cope with
wartime problems such as emergency
regulations, missing relatives, evacuation, and
separation of families."

Gradually, CABX increasingly took on family
and personal problems not directly associated
with the war. Interestingly,. many municipal
libraries were also called on to set up
information offices during the war, and thus
libraries performed a function similar to that of
CABX. But, afterwards, even where they
remained under the control of the library
service, these centres never developed a wider
role but generally limited themselves to the
sign-posting of local authority services, leisure
activities and later to tourism.
Linked up with the Second World War in the
United States, Veteran's lnforrnation Centres,
modelled on the Citizens' Advice Bureaux,
were set up by the Department of Labor, to
deal with the crises presented by men returning
from the front to their communities and in need
of advice on such matters as rehabilitation and
retraining. Over 3,000 such centres were set up,
but most of them were closed by 1949 (ref. 8,
pa. 4).
Further,
Bunch states: "'The
present
phenomenal growth in ClSs stems from the late
sixties and seventies and, although it is not
possible to point to a crisis as catastrophic as a
world war to accnunt for this growth, there are
a number of factors prevalent in mainly
urbanized ~ o c i e t y which together have
produced a situation of crisis proportions."
According to ~ong", "the roots of CI in the
United States have been traced back to the
charity organisation movement of the 1870s
out of which grow the Social Service
Exchange." But, as Kahn states, the period of
more significance, however, was the formation
post-second world war of Veterans Information
Centres.
Colemanz2 traces the origins in a different
way. According to him, "the term 'CI' stems
from the American War on Poverty Program of
the 1960s which was a concerted but largely
unsuccessful attempt by the US Government".
According to Durrance (ref. 20, pp. 10446)
the term has been in vogue since early 1970s.
His inference is based on an analysis of titles of

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technd, 1999,19(1)

periodical
articles
programmes/themes.

and

conference

Perhaps, in view of the above, Bunch (ref. 8,
pp. 5) has stated, "the present phenomenal
growth in ClSs stems from the late sixties and
seventies.' But, a majority of the authors seem
to have not taken the process of informal
dissemination of CI in the human society since
times immemorial and in the ancient
civilizations. However, a full-fledged research on
this issue might bring forth startling findings.

REFERENCES
1.

Kemp, DA. The nature of knowledge: An
introduction for librarians. Clive Birigley,
London, 1976.

2.

World development report. Oxford
University Press, New York, 1991.

3.

Mountjoy, Allan 0. The third world in
perspective. In The Problems and
Prospective, edited by Allen B Mountjoy.
Macmillan, London, 1980.

4.

5.

6.

Bhagavathi, PN. We shall be able to raise
India: Convocation Speech, April 25th
1993 at Bhagavathipuram. Development
Education Dept., AWARE, Hyderabad,
1993.
Rao, - BSS. lnformation hunger: Culture of
poverty. Papers of NlRDPress Institute of
India Collaborative Workshop o n
Reporting on Rural Development, 12-16
February 1990. National lnstitute of Rural
Development, Hyderabad, 1990. p. 1-10.
Verghese, BG. Commencing a new
dialogue: Communications at the
grassroots and above. Indian journal of
Communication, 1988,3(1), 1-15.

7. Joshi, PC. Mass media cater to elite. Indian
Express, 30 October 1985,4.
8.

9.

Bunch, Allan. Community information
services: The origin scope and
development. Clive Bingley, London, 1982.
Allen, Frances. Community information in
the 1980's Papers of the seminar held at
the Mitchell Library, Glassgow. Scottish
Association of Citizens' Advice Bureaux,
1980.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Jechol, 1999,19(1)

10. Usherwood, Bob. The neighbourhood
information network. Dept of Librarianship,
Liverpool Pokflechnic, Liverpool, 1977.
(Liverpool Polytechnic Dept of
Librarianship Occasional Paper 9).
11. McGarry, KJ. The changing context of
information: An introductory analysis. Clive
Bingley, London, 1981.
12. Wilson, Alaxander. Public information
service and the public. Public Libraries
Group, Library Association, London, 1979.
13. Library Association Working Party on
Community Information. Co'mmunity
information: What libraries can do. The
Library Association, London, 1980.
14. Kempson, Elaine. lnformation for
self-reliance and self deterrhination: The
role of community information services.
IFLA lournal, 1986, 12(3), 182-91.
15. Turick, Dorothy. Community information
services in libraries. Library journal: Special
Report 5, 1978.
16. Edwards, Michael. Cooperation in
community information provision: Practice
and potential. British Library Research and
Development Department. (Mimeograph),
1977.
17. Smith, David. A community information
service and the public library. Ontario
Library Review, 1978, 62(2), 113-18.
18. Donohue, Joseph C. Community
information services-a
proposed
definition'. In Proceedings of 39th ASlS
Annual Meeting, Community lnformation
Politics edited by Martin Stock. American
Society for lnformation Science,
Washington, 1976.
19. Thomas, Hilary B. A review of community
information services and directories of
these services. s . . Communications
Studies and Planning Ltd, 1978.
20. Durrance, Joan C. Community information
services: An innovation at the beginning of
its second decade. Advances in
librarianship. (Vol 13). Edited by Wesley
Simonton. Academic Press Inc., Orlando,
1986, 99-128.

-

2 1. Long, Nicholas. Information and referral
service: A short history and some
recommendations. In Information for the
Community, edited by Manfred Kochen, &
Joseph C Donohue. American Library
Association, Chicago, 1976.

22. Coleman, Pat. Community information
policy and provision. ASLIB Proceedings,

1986, 38(9),305-16 .

Dr Vishwa Mohan is Reader, Dept of Library & Information Science, Osrnania University, Hyderabad -

500 007.

" Prof AAN Raju is Retired Professor of Dept of Library & lnformation Science, Osrnania University
Hvderabad - 500 007.

14

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1 999,19(1)

