DEsIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 19, No. 1, January 1999,
O 1999, DESIDOC

&.

15-33

Community lnformation Services: A View of the
Theoretical Foundations
Christine Stilwell*
Abstract
This paper traces the emergence of Community lnformat~onServices and
describes their theoretical foundations. Terms and concepts are defined.
Various types of alternative service and their distinguishing chata~t~ristics
and functions are described and a case is made for promoting this type of
service at the present time.

1.

INTRODUCTION

In the late 1980s Community Information
Services (CISs) were a wellestablished feature
in Britain, the United States, Canada, Australia
and New Zealand'. These services emerged
strongly in the 1960s and 1970s. Much of the
literature documenting their principles and
practice is drawn from the 1970s and 1980s.
-The late 1980s, however, marked a decline in
the fortunes of community information centres
particularly in Britain. This article traces their
theoretical foundations concentrating on the
literature from Britain and the United States. An
update is provided with literature from the
1990s mainly from Britain in which, for
instance, Usherwood' notes that once again
there is growing interest in con~munity
information.

2.

DEFlNlTlONS OF TERMS
A N D THEIR FlJNCTlONS

2.1

Community

Comniunity is a diff~cultconcept to define.
~ e s a i ' .suggests thdt the two basic
terms
'cornrnur~ity' and 'participation' are useless, and
indeed disabling, for clear thought. They are
both
vague
and
cornplex
and
are

A
booby-trapped with begged questions.
possible meaning in the context of librananship
is a group of people with shared meanings 3 r d
shared communication. Giggey' states: 'a
community is a group of people who h,we
something in common.. This can be their age,
education,
religion,
interests, politicdl
affiliation,
activities, work, problenls, or a
combination of two or more of these.'
Thornton and Ramphele' suggest th,~t:
communities do exist, but they cannot be
assumed. Claiming them in order to legitimate a
political programme or to support a plan of
action does not create them.' Cohen" sees
community as relating to culture which includes
maps of meaning which makes life intelligible to
its members. These maps are not simply carried
around in peoples heads, they are inscribed in
the patterns o f social organisation and
relationships through which people becdme
social individuals. These patterns tend to involve
three elements-the extended kinship network,
the ecological setting of the neighbourhood
and the structure of the local economy.

2.2

Information

Childers7 defines information ds the raw
material that is used in knowing, making

decisions, taking action, thinking, and learning.
It is a discrete piece of meaningful data. He
limits information to that which can be
communicated either orally or in written form.
This includes information that could be heard or
seen. These latter aspects of the definition are
very important in community librarianship in
Africa, South Africa and in the South generally.
Defining information, ~ e i d ' puts forward the
concept of information as a process rather than
as material. Data only becomes information by
the act of imparting it. He reasons that:
"If we wish to provide information services,
we have to understand first of all that while the
collection and ordering of data-at which
librarians are adept-is a prime requisite, it does
not in itself provide information. Information is
primarily a process, a process which goes on in
many different ways... most importantly
between people."
This definition includes information in
response to a need which may be unexpressed
or inarticulate, and questions for which no
printed or organised answers exist (ref 8, pp.
35). Everybody -has information needs but all
people are not equally capable of satisfying
these needs9. A good reason for setting up an
info~:-nationservice would be to facilitate access
by ir~dividualsand groups to information that
could be of benefit to them.
Donohue (In ref. 10, pp. viii) identifies two
kinds of information provided by a CIS: firstly
survival information such as that related to
health, housing, income, legal protection,
economic opportunity and political rights and
secondly citizen action information needed for
effective padicipation as individual or as
members of a group in the social, political, legal
and economic processes.
Amongst the areas needing urgent attention
identified in 1984 by Bunch (ref. 9, pp. 10) are
inner cities where multiple deprivation exists
(for instance,
bad housing and high
unemployment); housing estates lacking basic
social and other amenities (meeting places,
transport and protection from vandalism); rural
areas (where facilities were in fact on the
decrease in Britain in the 1980s); and groups
with special needs (low income families,

disabled people and community and social
workers).
Common areas of activity for ClSs in the
1990s are indicated in the Community Services
Group of the Library Associations' Informing
Communities". These areas are: information for
people with disabilities; equal opportunities;
women's rights; environmental issues; health
information; community arts; and fiction
services. The focus on the latter seems to be
more characteristic of the late 1990s literature
although earlier literature did not rule out such
provision.

2.3

Community Information Services
and Community Libraries

Alternative information services are referred
to as community resource centres, community
(CICs),
ClSs
and
information
centres
community libraries. In the United States the
term ClCs tends to be used, while the term
'community library' is used more in Britain.
While both terms are used in this article, ClSs
are referred to mostly.
In defining the concept 'library', it is useful
to
draw
on
Rubakin,
the
Russian
bibliopsychologist and adult educator". "It is
not just a shop where books are to be had; it is
an adviser, a guide, a friend. It must go out to
the reader, bring him in rather than wait for him
to come of his own accord."
A community library is usually a branch
library (although it may be a central or mobile
service) intended to provide an advice centre
function and local information for the whole
community, rather than only offering book
stock to readers1'. Barughl' commenting on the
Community Libraries.Project i n the British town
of Sunderland, identified its starting point as
planning of library and information services for
actual communities rather than some traditional
or imagined audience. In this case community
library provision was establishing relevant
priorities at the local library and genuinely
trying to respond to the problems of the people
in the area.
The generally accepted definition today is:
"CISs are those which assist individual and
groups with daily problem-solving and with
DESIDOC~ulietinof Inf Technol, 1999,19(1)

1

participation in the democratic process. The
services concentrate on the needs of those who
do not have ready access to other sources of
assistance and on the most important problems
that people have to face, problems to do with
their homes, their jobs aad their rights"."
A 1997 formulation is provided by KendallI6:
"Community information is defined as being
information for the problems and crises
encountered by
individuals and their
independents at different stages in their lives.
Also information for groups of people with
common experiences seeking improvement in
their circumstances, information enabling all to
participate in local and national democracy, and
information about local groups and societies
providing for a range of recreational interests."
A notable addition, as stated abdve with
reference to fiction provision, is the recognition
of the need to provide for recreational interests.
Green" usefully suggests that key concepts are
information; access-physical and attitudinal;
people, including staff and those in the
community; citizen action; communication;
co-operation; joint working and community
liaison. No library, advice, or counselling service
is effective if attention is not paid to these key
concepts. In this context Usherwood (ref. 2, pp.
19) usefully refers to Bunch's definition
"Community information is more a state of
mind than a system."
The literature documenting these services is
considerable and a fuller treatment of the
documentation from the perspective of the
South and South Africa in particular, can be
found in Stilwell". This article provides a
summary of the discussion of some of the
central concepts.

3.

THE EMERGENCE OF
ALTERNATIVE INFORMATION
CENTRES

Alternative information centres can be
traced back to tlae Settlement tiouse
Movement in the 1890s in Britain which
recognised the need for skilled information
services in extremely deprived neighbourhoods.
Later, others promoted the idea of gen&di
.advice and inforrnation services but there was

little development until 1939 when the first
Citizen's Advice Bureaux (CABX)were set up to
help people cope with the problems of
war-time Britain. By 1943, there were 1060
such information outlets (ref. 2, pp. 20).
Although some librarians have always played
an important part in their communities, it was
not until the late 1960s and early 1970s that
the library profession started to take its social
responsibilities seriously. As part of the general
social order of the times, librarians began to
consider the library's social commitment. It can
therefore be argued that further impetus was
given to the social respoqsibilities movement in
the 1960s when in Western capitalist countries
a wide range of movements and institutions
were engaged in a struggle for increased
self-determination. Similarly there was rapid
change in many countries of the South, recently
independent, or in the throes of national
liberation struggle^'^. An integral part of such
developments was the work of the theorists
Ivan lllichm and Paulo Freire". The contribution
of lllich and Freire in turn was influenced
strongly by the intellectual climate of the 1960s
which
was
anti-bureaucratic
and
anti-theoretical. Both were radical humanists.
Radical humanism advocates learning by doing.
It emphasises critical thinking which is to be
promoted through an analysis of daily
experiences and argues that all people are
potential leaders and therefore should be
involved in all aspects of activity. This is
important as it has led, in some instances, to an
antiexpert tendency in which the importance
of theory has been minimised (ref. 19, pp. 285).
Much of the discourse of CISs, while based on
identifiable principles, is in essence rooted in
practical concerns.
In the 1970s, in the United States, an
increasing number of information-related
centres lent strpport to the socio-political
movements of the day. People both within and
outside librarianshtp became interested in the
use of information for social improvement and
for citizen participation in government. These
centres became known as alternative
information centres because they performed
the information tasks left undone by
establishment or traditional librariesz2.
-

DESlDOC Bulletin of Inl Ter'h~~ol,
1999,19(1)

17

relatively greater ignorance of where to turn for
help in problem-solving.
-

Three strategic information functions for the
public library-reducing barriers to access to
already existing information, collecting much
needed information which does not now exist;
and effecting the widespread dissemination of
crucial information not now being distributed
(Bundy In ref. 2, pp. 2 1).

3.1

3.1.3 United States Study Access to
Public Libraries, 1963
.
In 1963, a study entitled Access to public
libraries examined closely the factors limiting
free and equal access to libraries (ref. 23, pp.
152). Specific attention was given to restrictions
on usage affecting students, black people and
non-English speakers. The findings of this study
coupled with increasing political pressure from
groups that had experienced discrimination
influenced the development of community
library services in the mid-1960s. Weibel (In ref.
23, pp. 152) suggests that the change at this.
time was not philosophical, but concerned the
techniques involved in extending services to the
community.

Specific Events that Influenced
the Emergence of Alternative
Centres

Certain events in the United States and
Britain are regarded as central to the
development of CICs. These are described
below:

3.1.1 United States Public Library
Enquiry, 1949
The United States Public Library Enquiry
conducted in 194g2' presented evidence that
only a minority of the population actually used
public libraries. Users tended to be from a
relatively advantaged, educationallyelite group.
A 1962 study of economically depressed
Cleveland and Baltimore revealed that
spec~ficallyadapted services could increase use
by traditional non-users. The libraries' middle
class orientation rather than the inadequacies o i
non-users began to be questioned'.

3.1.4 Home Office Research, 1960s
Public library surveys in Britain during the
1960s and 1970s revealed that only 10-15per
cent 'of the population used 'the' library on a
regular basis2'. In addition, during the 1960s,
research sponsored by the Home Office
revealed that many of the problems faced by
people required more than access to
information. In response, advice agencies
supplying advocacy, community action and
education were set up in the 1970s. These were
known as ClSs (ref. 25, pp. 3). The term CIS was
first advocated by Durrancelg who called it an
umbrella term encompassing all the aspects of
this type of service. It included the provision of
survival information, public policy information,
that is information for everyday participation in
the democratic process, and local information
of the type usually supplied by a well-stocked
branch library.

3.1.2 United States War on Poverty
Program, Early 1960s
In the United States, the War on Poverty
Program of the early 1960s aimed at improving
the lot of the urban poor. Some libraries set up
information and referral (I&R) services. These
were neighbourhood-based2' and aimed to
assist the enquirer in the two main
areas-suivival information and citizen action
information (ref. 1, pp. 3). The services sought
to link the enquirer with an appropriate source
of help, preferably within the communityZ6~
". It
was considered important that the assisting
agency should not be the one that caused the
in the first place (ref. 26, pp. 118).
Furthermore, the information had to be readily
available in a form accessible to the user. Oral
and other non-book sources were therefore
appropriate. Childers (ref. 7, pp. 40) suggested
that the strong non-print orientation of
disadvantaged
- adults is a primary cause of their
18

3.1.5 British Ljbrary Association Working
Party on Community Information,
1978-79

-

A significant initiative was the setting up of
the ~ i b r a rAssociation
~
Working 'Group on
Community Information which worked from
1978 to 1979 and produced an excellent
publication, Community information: what
libraries can 'do3'.
art in" regards this
document as highly significant: "There can be
little doubt about the influence of this
I

D S l D O C Bulletin of lnf Technol, 1999,19(1)

document as a force for the spread of the
improvement of CIS in British public libraries."
olem man]' referred to it as "The definitive work
on community information in public libraries."

3.1.6 British Library and lnformation
Services Council Paper, 1986
The importance of community librarianship
was officially recognised in Britain by the
Library and lnformation Services Council (LISC)
in its 1986 paper entitled 'Library and
Information Work in a Changing Environment
(ref. 31, pp. 23).' The Community Services
Group of the Library Association became
responsible for implementing the objectives of
ClSs in Britain (ref. 31, pp. 6) and still plays this
role today, although as this article will suggest,
in a seemingly closer relationship with public
libraries.

3.1.7 Other Significant Issues from
Britain, United States & Australia
Public library services in Britain in the early
1980s showed
interest
in community
information1'. Ritchie attributed this to a variety
of developments
both within and outside
librarianship on both sides of the Atlantic. The
publication of the Kahn Report in 1966 is
regarded by many sources as most significant.
In their study of the British CABx, Kahn and his
colleagues first coined the term community
information. Having analysed the structure and
activities of the CABx, Kahn noted that there
was nothing similar in the United States and
proposed that a service be set up there.
Ironically, Kahn did not mention libraries as
possible sites for the provision of such services.
Ritchie saw this omission plus the lukewarm
reception of the report by social workers, as
likely to have stimulated certain North
American librarians into discussing and
experimenting with library-based CISs. Since
then ClSs (often referred to as I&R services in
the United States) have flourished, to the extent
that they are generally regarded as the models
British libraries should emulate (ref. 33, pp. 58).
ow en" argues that librarians in Britain were
strongly influenced by the information and
referral services introduced in the United States.
The British Community
Development
Project, established in 1969, had a positive
DESIDOC Bulletin'of Inf Technol, 1 999,19( 1 )

impact on the development of advice centres in
Britain. It sought to stimulate self-help and
innovative solutions
to the problems of
neighbourhoods with multiple social problems
(ref 31, pp. 65). A phenomenal growth in the
number of informal community-based centres
known as Neighbourhood Advice Centres
followed. They aimed to address the needs of
the information poor in the inner cities. These
centres were usually openly partisan, frequently
providing a focal point for the community. They
fulfilled a valuable social function as places
where people could meet informally without
prior arrangement (ref 33, pp. 58). The need for
such services seemed to be cbnsiderable".
Possibly the best and most complete of the
examples of CIS from the United States is a
neighbourhood centre project called The
lnformation Place (TIP) in Detroit. Launched in
1973, TIP was taken up as a model by other
cities. Martin (ref. 31, pp. 97) saw TIP as: "a
shining example of the kind of widespread
public acceptance that can be achieved by
libraries, given the necessary commitment,
effort and imagination."
jackamanl%as commented on the fact that
in 1973 British libraries were largely confined to
their traditional passive reference service
function, but were increasingly facing pressure
to develop an active information service. Ritchie
(ref. 33, pp. 53) points out that in Britain in the
1980s many official forms and leaflets
pertaining to people's rights as consumers,
employees and tenants were unreadable and
unintelligible to the average citizen.
The Library Association document (ref. 1.5,
pp. 12), defined community information as:
"Services which assist individuals and groups
with
daily
problem-solving and
with
participation in the democratic process. The
service concentrates on the needs of those who
do not have ready access to other sources of
assistance, and on the most important problems
that people have to do with their homes, their
jobs and their rights."
A setback for ClSs came in the form of a
British government green paper of 1988
(Financing our public libraries: four subjects for
debate, ref. 34, pp. 30) which made the

situation more difficult for the proponents of
community information in libraries. It indicated
that a basic library service was restricted to
books with a strong emphasis on response to
known demand. As Bowen suggested at the
time this point of view had to be challenged.
Amongst librarians, however, since 1975
ClSs have been supported increasingly, and the
findings of a series of reports on local
inforrnaticn provision stress its importance in
improving the quality of peoples lives. As stated
above in 1992, Usherwood (ref. 2, pp. 23),
despite the setbacks of the Thatcher era in
Britain,
identifies growing interest in
community information. 1 fe aigues :hat the
need for information has become greater as
society has become more camplicated, both in
terms of coping with the everyday business of
living and at the level of copsidering and
deciding about great national and international
issues especially in the British welfare state or
what remains of it. In spite of this support
Usherwood describes a situation in Britain in
which restraints on local authority budgets,
together with the abolition of the Greater
London Council and the Metropolitan Counties
has had an adverse effect on many comnlunity
information agencies. t i e adds: 'In public
libraries pressure to charge and/or to generate
income could mean that profitable or cost
recovery activities such as business information
may be resourced at the expense of socially
useful CIS.'
The case for information as a basic'need in
Australia has been argued by Reid. The right to
be informed was viewed as a prime constituent
of human freedom by Gough Whitlam (then
Prime Minister) in his address to the 1975
Conference
of
the
Australian
Library
Association (In ref. 8, pp. 33):
'Libraries that are free, open, and accessible
are just as much bastions of freedom as
universities or parliaments. Freedom of speech
is a precious freedom but it has a much higher
value, a much richer significance when freedom
of information goes with it.'
In Australia, community resource centres
were developed to meet the challenges
neglected by the public libraries. Reid (ref. 8,
pp.. 33) identified in Australia a group whom he
20

described as the true alternatives to the public
library:
'Shunning the lure of government aid, highly
suspicious of established power structures,
knowledgeable and informed in their aims of
deinstitutionalising society, often achieving
prodigies of work on shoestring budgets. Here
we find the groups that have produced
catalogues and directories to lead their readers
to resources and to resource people, the
people who have produced, for the joy of it, the
very effective Yellow Pages an? the Whole earth
catalogue and numbers of directories limited to
a particular area or region. These groups set up
places to facilitate the exchange of information
between people; they provided telephone
information and referral services, specialist
information centres for particular social groups
such as single parents and rape victims. They
based their efforts on the self-help principle;
attempted highly destructured decision-making,
and above all, performed their prodigies
because they enjoyed their work (ref. 8, pp.

33).'
Community information centres base their
service. upon the perception of a fourth right of
citizenship, following civil, political and social
rights (ref. 1, pp. 5). Childers (ref. 7, pp. 71)
argues that it has been acknowledged widely in
the United States that the general population
has only limited access to and control of
information about local, state, and federal
government and law enforcement. There was
widespread ignorance of actions pending and
tdken, of the processes of legislation and
adjudication, and of the distribution of power
locally and nationally. It was not generally
known where one should go to find out about
such things. In support of a fourth right of
citizenship (ref. 15, pp. 7) argued that:
'People will not be able to get their due as
citizens of present day society unless they have
continuous access to the information which will
guide them through it, and where necessary the
advice to help them translate that information
into effective action; and unless they get their
due they are unlikely to recognize the
reciprocal obligation that all citizens have to
society.'

DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technd, 1999,19(1)

preventing people from playing their full part in
society. The report of the Library Advisory
Council (England)
The Libraries' Choice
published in 1978 describes disadvantage in
purely library terms. The disadvantaged are
those who are debarred from the normal use of
library services, physically or psychologically,
because they need materials or equipment
which the library does not traditionally provide.
They might need help or encouragement to use
the library.

ward" adds to this recognition of reciprocal
obligation when he states:
'Being well informed is what makes
democracy -work. Without information about
the rights and obligations of citizens, without
advice on how to exercise those rights and to
discharge their obligations people are unable to
participate fully and equally in a democratic
society. Too many people are denied the rights
or fail to perform the duties that society has
decided are legitimately theirs because they
have not got access to the necessary advice
and information. Clearly, giving rights to and
imposing obligations on citizens without
providing adequate access to advice and
information about them is irresponsible. It
invites frustration and widens the gap between
the privileged and the deprived.'

4.

KEY CONCEPTS IN
COMMUNITY INFORMATION
SERVICES

4.1

Concept of the Disadvantaged

A clear definition of disadvantage is given by
Coleman (ref. 39, pp. 11-13). She points out
that society discriminates against individuals
who have particular characteristics. In this sense
the characteristics can be viewed as factors that
are responsible for a particular individual
becoming disadvantaged. The factors relate to
physical or mental condition, social and
economic position, and level of educational
achievement. These factors interact to a great
extent with the strongest link, in Britain, being
socio-economic. For example, there is a
convincing relationship between poverty and
physical disability, old age, ethnic background
and single parent status. A significant feature of
disadvantage in the rural areas is the degree of
physical isolation from services and facilities.

The groups requiring special attention are
referred to in the literature as the
disadvantaged. The problem with the term is
that it is frequently associated with negative
value judgements about the social role of the
groups described. This approach ignores the
view that these problems are not necessarily of
the individuals or the groups own making and'
could well be a consequence of aspects of the
society in which the disadvantage occurs. The
disadvantaged people might not be in a
position to start helping themselves. lordanM
argues that class is a factor in disadvantage: 'To
be born into a middle class family opens wide
many educational and occupational doors
which are scarcely ajar to others.'

The study entitled, Knowledge/information
needs of the disadvantaged, commenced in
1972 with funds from the Bureau of Libraries
and Learning Resources, United States Office of
Education, was a review of the existing literature
and aimed to consolidate what had been
written about the knowledge and information
needs of adults suffering from disadvantage of
many kinds (ref. 7, pp. 7). In the final report of
the study, Childers (ref. 7, pp. 9) confirms that a
major definition of disadvantage is economic in
the United States as well:

olem man'^, seconded to the British Library
Research and Development Department as
Research Officer in Library Services for
Disadvantaged Groups during April 1979 to
March 1980, points out that sociologists
support this stl'uctural view of disadvantage. A
lack of access to services and facilities in
general, including library services, is seen as
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol,1999,19(1)

.

'If we had to choose a single demographic
variable that would be the most powerful
descriptor of those people considered to be
disadvantaged, economic level would be it. Far
and away, poor, poverty and impoverished are
used more frequently than any other single
label to define America disadvantaged.'
Childers (ref. 7, pp. 8) suggests that
disadvantage is relative. It is a function of a
particular context. To be disadvantaged means

to be lacking in something that the society
considers important. Examples of those
considered disadvantaged in the study by
Childers
were
the
imprisoned,
the
undereducated, the unemployed and the
racially oppressed. Even poverty is difficult to
define as the range of those classed as poor
varies from country to country. To a great
extent disadvantaged persons are handicapped
by language. Reasons for this could be a lack of
education, or fluency in a language that is not
used by the dominant culture (ref. 7, pp. 78).
Martin (ref. 31, pp. 7) placed the problem
decisively in the library context when he
perceived social powerlessness and economic
inequality as resulting from policies espoused
by traditional libraries. 'These were political
neutrality and a concern for general public
interest, rather than for discrimination in favour
o i deprived groups within society. He argued a
need for social intervention to give credibility
and practical effect to the concept of a public
library service. In support of this view tiendrya
expressed the need for 'positive prejudice'
toward the poor, the unemployed and the
dispossessed. Coleman's (ref. 31, pp. 70)
conviction is that: 'The problems of the
disadvantaged are the librarians' problems
Failure to provide adequate service for the
disadvantaged lies not in our stars but in
ourselves (ref. 3 1, pp. 24)'.

It is argued therefore that librarians and
libraries have a vital contribution to make in
addressing inequalities in access to information
and that the onus is on them rather than any
other group to remedy this situation. It is
suggested in this article that a neutral or passive
stance on the part of librarians results in the
aligning of librarians with the status quo,
implying a tacit acceptance of the existing
social and political order.
Green (ref. 17, pp. IS), in the introduction to
the first book in the Community Services
Group's publishing programme, brought the
concerns of ClSs up to date for the 1990s when
he argued that:
'Despite the social and economic changes
over the last 10 to 15 years great inequalities
remain in society. These inequalities are
heightened for people who for one reason or

another are unable to .take full advantage of
opportunities. Such people are disadvantaged
because of their gender, race, disability,
unemployed or low waged status, or
socioeconomic situation. The Community
Services Group has as its prime objective
increasing people's access to the services to
which they have a right.'
In the 1990s the importance of CIS in the
democratic process is given recognition in the
publication of the British Office of Arts and
Libraries (OAL) Setting objectives for public
library services (In ref. 2, pp. 20) when it refers
to the library as the focal point for information
about and for its local community, including
information to support the democratic process.
Ward (In ref. 2, pp. 28) goes further when he
argues 'without the right to information and
advice,' the other rights are liable tg be hollow
shams.
Usherwood sums up: 'Those who don't
know, don't get' and Harris notes that
information is the currency of democracy.
Usherwood suggests that the current economic
situation in Britain has increased the need for
information
and advice. The
rise in
unerr~ploymenthas intensified the demand not
just for information on employment prospects
but increased pressure on agencies dealing with
physical and psychological stress.
In assessing the statement that disadvantage
is the creation of the society within which the
individual exists, Alexander's comments" offer
insight into the South African situation in which
supposed differences in 'race', 'culture' and
'language' were used by the apartheid state to
justify inequality: 'Thus groups of people who
arrived in South Africa at different times and
under different circumstances were divided and
kept separately from one another deliberately,
as a matter of state policy, because it was in the
broad economic and political interests of the
ruling class to keep them divided (ref. 41, pp.
2-3).' In this way whites, Africans and Indians
were artificially created: For historical reasons
almost all the individuals in the ruling class were
officially classified as 'white' persons. The
working class was divided between a 'white'
and a 'black' sector, with white workers forming
a privileged group. This .group in turn enjoyed

-

22

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technd, 1999,19(1)

the right to vote. Through two fundamental
human rights, the right to form trade unions and
the right to vote, this group of workers was able
to gain for itself an extremely strong position in
the South African social, political, economic
and educational order (ref. 41, pp. 2-3). In
South African situation it can be strongly
argued, therefore, that disadvantage was the
creation of the society in which the individual
lived. Librarians had a role to play in enabling
equal access to information sources. This is in
keeping with the view that libraries should be
part of the process of addressing the causes of
disadvantage.

4.2

Lack of Access to lnformation
and Deprivation

. Ward (ref. 37, pp. 126) saw a close
relationship between lack of access to
information and deprivation:

Not having information provided about
services to ensure no one need fall below a
certain standard in terms of housing, income,
education or health is as much a feature of
deprivation as the lack of basic essentials
themselves. The success of this country
(Britain's) social services still depends to a very
large extent on those who need them knowing
about them and how to use them.
He pointed out that users of public services
experienced more and more difficulty getting
what is due to them and that restricted
opportunity to get and use information is one
of the major causes of deprivation (ref. 37, pp.
126).

4.3

lnformation and Social Change

lnformation or the lack of it, affects the
outcome of attempts of social change. Bundy
(ref. 22, pp. 2) describes information as one of
the major power tools employed by all sides in
the struggle.. Access to information does not in
itself give people power over their lives but lack
of access to information can render a person
powerless in the sense of being unable to
exercise intelligent life options (ref. 22, pp. 35).
Individuals become trapped in adverse
circumstances with few options in life and with
none of the available options fostering their
best interests. The power of people as
-

DESlDOC Bulletin ofInf Techno/,1 999,19(1)

individuals to change social conditions is
limited. Establishment institutions tend not to
introduce even the most urgently needed
changes. These often require systematic,
organised citizen action and legal action (ref.
22, PP. 5).
DurranceU states that: 'The most effective
response in a democracy is a group response;
individuals are generally
not effective
influencing decisions in a democracy when
they work alone'. She continues:
If citizens are to make informed decisions in
a democracy, and further, if they are to have the
accurate information needed to influence the
decisions which affect their lives and those of
others-to take advantage of their right to
know-they need assistance through a maze of
sources.
Ward (ref. 37, pp. 126) sees the ability to
find and use information as being affected. by
many things. These included factors such as
one's neighbourhood, one's mobility, the
amount of determination and commitment one
could generate to solve problems, and one's
literacy level, fatalism, and whether previous
experiences had been good or bad. All these
things could make an enormous difference to
the capacity to find and use information. Ward'"
concludes that:
'The least we can do is acknowledge that
some people, including many of the most
disadvantaged in this country [Britain],
experience many more obstacles than others
on their way to becoming informed and that
steps could and should be taken to remove as
many of these obstacles as possible.'

4.4

Access to Government
lnformation

A major part of the struggle for change is to
gain access to information which governments
and private interests make inaccessible.
Durrance (ref. 42, pp. 1) points out that low
levels
of participation in government processes
.
stemming from a lack of confidence were
accompanied by a marked increase in
organised citizen activity. Impatience with
traditional political processes lead to a situation
in which greater emphasis was placed on extra

parliamentary activity. Gibson" suggests that
people who are dissatisfied with the authorities
should work together in local government and
the voluntary sector: by4dentifying problem and
opportunity areas where they can tap into
public resources to release and bring into play
their own gifts of leadership, perseverance and
local knowledge for the general benefit.
Community information should not only be
thought of as crisis information in the life of the
individual or the community. The educative and
generally preventative value of s~lchservices is
potentially great. Promoting their use in the
long term could help people to avoid crises
before they happen, or to cope with thern
when they do, instead of being overwhelmed
by themu. Facilities in the British city of
Bradford have demonstrated the scope for a
modest but well-targeted senice': a feature of
which was a basic information kit. It was folind
that there was scope for the development of a
facility which was open to ail, informal,
confidential, backed by expertise, and helping
people who had either little or no idea where to
turn in making decisions which could lead to a
happier fuller fife.

5.

TYPES OF COMMUNITY
INFORMATION SERVICES

5.1

Independent Information
Centres and Library-Based
Services

Broadly speaking the alternative information
centres comprise two groups; the independent
information centres and those that are
library-based. Another distinction can be made
between those that serve local communities in
the sense of neighbourhood; and those that
serve communities of interest based on a
shared sense of social purpose and are more
geographically dispersed. The former are
geographic
and
the
latter
functional
communities (Clark In ref. 8, pp. 30). A
specialised service dealing with a particular
range of issues, for example, women's issues
would tend to use the term information centre
or resource centre as it does not claim to serve
a community generally. It would, however,
serve a functional community on a regional,
24

national, or international level. Centres differ
among themselves in interest areas, activities,
social and political views for example. They do
share, however, the common characteristic of
being unlike traditional or establishment
libraries. The types of service offered are not
unique to these centres and include aspects
common to establishment libraries. They differ
in that they offer vital alternatives to entrenched
education systems, traditional research and
consultation and the establishment media. They
have applied, and partially transformed skills
from the field of librarianship (ref. 22, pp. 2).
There were nearly 2,000 community
information and advice services in Britain in
1986. Most offered a general service which
included information and advice in any subject.
Others specialised in a particular area of work*.
Some were well-known nationally, for example,
the Trade Union and Community Resource
Centre (TUCRIC) in Leeds and the South Wales
Anti-Poverty Action Committee (SWAPAC).
These centres performed socially useful work
and represented models for organising
information services in support of social change
(ref. 22, pp. 3)
TUCRIC and SWAPAC brought together a
range of labour bodies, including trade union
branches, shop stewards committees and
women's groups. They
built up reference
libraries and research files to provide a database
on the political economy of the region; trained
staff to advise and conduct enquiries upon
request; disseminated information widely using
bulletins and publications; and formed a base
for worker education on a range of topics.
Libraries employing alternative information
centre principles differ among themselves as to
approaches. The 'British CABx for example,
attempt a kind of impartiality unlike the
Neighbourhood Advice Centres which are
openly partisan on the clients behalf. The latter
engage ik advocacy, community action and
lobbying where necessary (ref. 15, pp. 15-16).

5.2

Utban and Rural Services

A further variation lies in the differing nature
of urban and rural centres (ref. 15, pp. 21)
Venner and Cotton (ref. 46, pp. 130) stress that
there could be no blueprint for the

development of information and advice services
to communities in sparsely pcpulated areas. It is
possible to set up practical guidelines but the
choice of service for local needs should be
made locally. Experience suggests that the most
successful services are those where a wide
range of organisations have been involved (ref.
46, pp. 133). Martin (ref. 31, pp. 94) echoes
this:
The South Molton project increased the
visibility of the public library service to
unprecedented levels; enhancing the role of the
voluntary agencies without undermining their
independence; making possible the provision of
a full-time service which none of the 14
individual community organizations involved
could have supported on its own.
Ward (ref. 37, pp. 126) points .out that in
Britain in 1980 a very large proportion of the
population had virtually no access to
information and advice services, also that there
was great unevenness in the standard of
provision where it did exist. Most of the
specialist services were concentrated almost
exclusively in a handful of major urban centres
while large stretches of rural Britain were barren
of all services. The information and advice
needs of these rural areas were substantially the
same as those of people lived in towns but
were even more difficult to meet because of
problems with geographic dispersion, transport
and accessibility. It is not usually possible to
maintain the full range of information agencies
in small towns (ref. 33, pp. 59). In rural areas in
Britain, centralisation, the decline of public
transport and the loss of informal sources such
as the village schoolmaster, policeman, doctor
or clergyman, have contributed to a problem of
access to information and advice (ref. 46, pp.4;
ref. 2, pp. 29). In the United States, Drennan
and Drennan" regard the substantial enclaves
of minority groups in rural areas as some of the
most deprived people on the North American
continent. In rural areas the library may be the
central or sole source of certain types of
information.
'

In Britain, Devon County Library's Public
Information In Rural Areas Technology
Experiment (PIRATE) investigated the use of
locally created databases as well as
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Terhnol, 1999,19(1)

telecommunications networks in linking libraries
in different parts of the country (ref. 2, pp. 33).
Information technology such as that used in
PIRATE could alleviate the situation in rural
areas, particularly with access to the Internet
but still only those with the know-how and
access to a computer can benefit. There is also
the problem of some user's preference for a
more personal delivery of the information. The
role of the lnternet is explored further in
section 8.
The work of libraries in rural areas in Britain
has been highlighted by the 1997 Library
Association/Holt Jackson Community Initiative
Award. A nominee w a s Horley's Local History
Centre which is housed in the local library and
offers weekly advice sessions staffed by
volunteers. The provision of this service has
revitalised the library as a focus of the
communitya.

6.

CHARACTERISTICS OF
COMMUNITY
INFORMATION WORK

While there is overlap between public
library and CIS provision and while the type of
provision differs regionally and internationally,
Coleman (ref. 39, pp. 62-63) usefully defines
four distinguishing characteristics of community
information work.
Firstly it offers materials that are different in
both context and nature. The subject matter
deals directly with the lives of people and the
material is often ephemeral, consisting of
newspaper cuttings, pamphlets and leaflets.
There are virtually no established library
procedures for eithkr obtaining or organising
this type of material.
Secondly
in
community
libraries/
information services there is a different
relationship between the librarians and the user.
The degree of interaction needed to establish
the exact nature of the user's problem is greater
. than that usually engaged in conventional
reference work.
In
the
third
place
community
libraries/irifsrmation services rely on close links
with other agencies. The centre is part of an
overall network of information
andadvice
-25

agencies. It will depend on these for
information gathering to a certain extent and
will need to refer users to them. A CIS cannot
operate in isolation. Jordan and ~ a l l e note
~ ' ~
that in Britain community-oriented librarians
viewed their services as one part of the total
operation of the local authority.
In the fourth place si~cha service is overtly
political. It is this final point that truly
charatterises communit)~ libraries/information
srrvic:es since the first three could also apply to
other types of services. CiSs jre based on the
principle that everyone has a right to equal
access to inforrr\.+tion and to the nations
:esources. As LVard.(lnref. 3<1,pp. f:3) argues it
is not a service, but is an aid to making
den-iocracy work.
'The rationale for these cer-rtres iicj in their
perception of an essentially difr~rerit social
purpose. They differ from traditioo,~)libraries in
that they are proactive about their serlrie of
stjcidl purpose. There is a timely anticipation
and active seeking out of the inforrndtion
needed to fulfil the services role. it suggests a
kind of societal alertness to changes ii? nccd
patterns and an energy in the pursuit of service.
l a suggests fearlessness about going ahead with
a chosen path. These centres reject the idea of
neutrality as being neither desirable nor
possible and
acknowledge
a
political
connotarion to the use of information. They
show a radical difference in their approach to
definir~g information needs. Establishment
libraries, intentionally or by omission, essentially
protect the stattls quo and by default link
themselves with the interests perpetuating
social inequal~tyand injustice (ref. 22, pp. 1-2).
Establishment libraries tend to concentrate on
'coping inforrnation' whereas these centres
gather, organise and seek people with
initirrnation (not only published sources), with
the airn of changing social conditions. In short,
ClSs reject political blandness and represent a
highly attive form of social consciousness
which verges on militancy (ref. 31, pp. 96).
Harrism states this position forcefully when he
declares thet: 'the idea that access to
irtformation can be neutral, that information is a
some passive resource waiting for people to
use, is politically naive and amounts to collusion

in
the
processes
disadvantage.'

which

perpetuate

The author would add another distinguishing
characteristic of CIS: that the management of
the centre is democratic and usually a form of
participative management is employed. Further,
that instead of tinkering with the peripheries of
service, say in offering some sort of outreach
programme alongside traditional services,
radical redefinition of the purpose and function
of the service, in a system-wide approach is
required. Vincent (ref. 28, pp. 3) suggests,
however, that ClSs are not an absolute
complete states to be reached but are in
process, constantly re-evaluated and redefined.
Another issue linked to the client/library
worker relationship observed hy the author, is
tt:e need to make potential users aware that
they lack information or lack the kind of
information that will help ease their difficulties.
As Epstein (In ref. 50, pp. 56) has noted ... 'it is a
very sophisticated leap from merely not having
infortnation to being aware that there is
something you do not know, that knowing it
will help solve your problems, and that
thcrefore you need information.'
Linked to the issue of the range of formats is
tile practice of using people themselves as
important sources of inforrnation. llsherwood
{ref. 2, pp. 23) points out that in comnlunities
with a strong oral tradition information is most
frequently spread by word of mouth. This
for giving due
recognition is important
emphasis to local indigenous knowledge and
the informal networks that convey it. The point
has been made (Rosenberg in ref. 51,
pp.147-51 & ref. 52) that formal information
services are unlikely to succeed if the
indigenous knowledge system is overlooked.
This does not only, however, apply to the
situation in the South. A United States public
library has published a People to people index
to link topics with named individuals in the
community. Harris (ref. 50, pp. 53) argues that
we need structures that support the
presentation of communities own knowledge
through pamphlets and leaflets, resource
centres with desktop publishing, for instance, to
provide statements by marginalised groups: 'in
such ways it is possible to make the experience
DSIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technd, 1999,19(1)

individuals. Other aspects of this type of service
are current awareness services, keeping a
register of problems, a press cuttings service, a
loan collection of reference books, providing
publicity, educational materials an3 local
information.

of people in communities more visible, to make
their voices more audible, and their knowledge
more valid'. It is, however, important to realise
that these methods are not sufficient on their
own (ref. 2, pp. 23) and that exotic knowledge
needs to be brought in and blended with local
knowledge systems. In a wider CIS context
~empson" argued in 1986 that the Western
public library n.~odelwas as inappropriate to the
needs of ordinary citizens in all countries
whether 'developed' or 'developing'.

7.3

Information giving ranges from supplying
simple directional infolmation to providirlg
nlore complex data. For example, an enquirer
might need information ahout eligibility for a
benefit (say housing), or regulations. This could
involve guiding the person to where further
'help or advice could be obtained without
making contact with the service oneself.

Other characteristics of ClSs and community
libraries of a more practice-based sort are set
out in Stilwell (ref. 18, pp. 105-39).

7.

FUNCTIONS COMMON TO
COMMUNITY INFORMATION
SERVICES

7.4

25-27).

7.1 . Self-help

7.5

This requires that users find the answers to
their own problems. The information service
selects appropriate materials, reprocesses
information in a form that can be easily
understood, packages and arranges these
materials in a way appropriate to the user. This
kind of service is most suitable where there is a
shortage of trained staff to operate a personal
inquiry service, for example, in a small branch
or mobile centre, or for deposit in an unstaffed
centre. Materials are usually produced and
assembled in a regional or central office.

Escort

It might be necessary to escort clients who
do not have sufficient confidence to make
contact with the helpsupplying agency, or may
b e intimidated by offrci~ls,or are likely to have
difficulty in explaining their case. i t IS often true
that representatives of an information service
can obtain information from official hod~esthat
is denied or simply not ofiered to members of
the public.

7.6

Practical Help

This involves, for example, assistirlg with
writing a letter or making a telephone call.

Support for Other Information
Services or Groups of
ProfessionalWorkers

Where information services to the public are
adequate, informatiorral sf-~pport to other
organisations and workers may be important,
for example,
in providing a selective
d~ssemtnationof information service; in other
words, channelling information to meet the
expressed subject interests of groups or

Referral

Reierral differs irom ordinary information
giving in that it is a more active forrn of guiding
in which contact is made for the enquirer with
an agency that can help. Coleman (ref. 32, pp.
310) gives an estimate of 50 per cent for the
number of people who do not follow tllrough
on the giving of a name and address without
some form of further help.

A range of functions can be performed by
an information service. Not all of these will be
appropriate to a particular service or the
community it intends to serve. The main
functions are outlined by Bunch (ref. 9, pp.

7.2

Simple Directional Information

7.7

.

Advice

This is information tailored to individuai
need. It can be a fairly neutral activity, such as
setting out a course of action or options front
which an enquirer must make a choice, or it
can in\iolve the evaluation of availahie
information or services, and help with choosing
an option.

7.8

Advocacy

LVhere clients are not capable of obtaining
the information, services, benefits or justice to
which they are entitled, advocacy is needed. A
positive identification is made with the client's
case, which is then argued in front of officials,
tribunals or courts on the client's behalf.

7.9

Community Education

This type of focus concentrates on
educating the community about the services
that can help them, their entitlements to
benefits or rights, rather than providing an
information and advice service on a personal
basis.

7.1 0 Community Action
This can arise out of an analysis of enquiries
received when it becomes apparcnt that there
is a lack of a service or facility in the
community, or that a programme may be
working against certain groups of people. The
information service plays an active role in
precipitating change either by acting on its own
or encouraging individuals or groups to
campaign.

7.1 1 Outreach
In this context outreach is providing
information to a wider public than the services
usual clientele.

7.1 2 Counselling
Counselling requires much more time and
indepth probing. At one extreme it covers
simply listening to clients who, by externalising
their problems, may be able to face them and
arrive at a solution. At its other extreme,
counselling can lead to diagnosis and analysis,
followed by the referral of clients to clinics for
treatment. Specialised, professional skills are
needed by the interviewer where casework and
diagnosis are required.

7.1 3 A Continuum of Information and
Advice Work
It is important to stress that in practice such
clear distinctions can seldom be made (ref. 9,
pp. 2 7-28).

Usherwood (ref. 2, pp. 30) refers to the
Library ~ssociation's phrase 'a continuum of
information and advice work' and suggests that
there is still discussion within the information
profession about what community information
work is and which parts of it different agencies
should undertake. Bunch (ref. 9, pp. 98) also
recognises an information- advice-advocacy
continuum, arguing further that someone
seeking information or help is really interested
in obtaining a satisfactory answer or solution,
rather than an information service's concept of
its necessary cut-off points. What is important is
that if a particular service does set limits it is
able to deal satisfactorily with cases that need
to be taken beyond those limits. Usherwood
(ref. 2, pp. 30) quotes in this context, Bundy's
warning of
twenty
years ago
about
consequences if: 'Libraries continue to proffer
weak, ineffectual, and basically insulting service,
no matter what excuses,' concluding that the
'eradication of poverty and the future of people
are too important to be left dependent on any
institution's willingness to transform itself.'

8.

THE FUTURE OF ClSs
art in" places the argument for community

librarianship firmly in its social and political
context when he states: 'I believe in public
libraries and in their mission as a reforming and
interventionist agency. My benchmark is the
poverty and deprivation that continue in our
society today and the apparent lack of concern
about this fact in library circles.'
In spite of
the clarity of this vision
Usherwood (In ref. 55, pp. 21 5) concludes that
in the 1980s a good number of British public
librarians, together with many other public
servants, seemed to lose their way. Many
seemed to shift to the Right to make use of the
prevailing winds of political change. This
represented a tangible withdrawal from the
idealism and social commitment of public
librarianship in the 1960s and 1970s: 'Too
many in the profession became converts to the
idea of-market forces and took on board the
consumerist approach advocated by the
Thatcher government.' The consequence was
the commercialisation of library services and
the results were often, for example, stock
DESlDoC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1 999,19(1)

selection policies that were more concerned
with the quantity of issues than with the quality
of materials on offer.

cites the Department of National Heritage's
phrase, that the public library is 'a major
community facility.'

Harris and Greens6 note that problems in
promoting the social contribution of public
libraries have been the unevenness of activity
across the country and the lack of sustainability
of many initiatives in this area. Rosenbergs7
endorses the latter view in the African context
when she questions the sustainability of rural
community resource centres in Africa.

The LA Holt Jackson Community Initiative
.Award in recent years has recognised library
initiatives which provide services which really
change the lives of their users (ref. 56, pp. 184)
and this too has provided a renewed focus on
libraries from the community perspective. The
Library Association Record reported in 1995
that the concept of community librarianship
was to get a boost in November of the year
(with Library Associations backing) in the form
of guidelines that aim to give shape to current
developments. The guidelines were produced
under the auspices of the Community Services
Group of the Library Association and the
Home Office-funded Community Development
Foundation. Included in the guidelines are
examples of good practice, ideas on the roles of
various agencies and basic principles such as
empowerment, partnership and positive action.
They aim to be a practical tool and to provide
material for lobbyings9.

In the political context both the public
library movement and the notion of community
have come through difficult times over the last
10-15 years. Harris and Green (ref. 56, pp. 184)
suggest that some of the context and values
that at that time underpinned 'understanding of
the social role of
libraries and of
'community'-such as public ownership, and
the sense of neighbourhood associated with
cornershops and public space have been
eroded.' They continue 'The social context for
community librarianship as it evolved in the 60s
and 70s is irrecoverable. In order to shape new
policies for the social role of libraries, library
authorities need a platform of reszarch and
analysis, a set of demonstration examples and a
penetrating debate.'
An important British initiative is the Public
Library Development Scheme which was set up
in 1988 to encourage new enterprises aimed at
extending or improving public library services in
England. Activities that are likely to promote
co-operation between public libraries and other
libraries or organisations in the public or private
sector are of particular interest. The scheme is
funded by the Department of National Heritage
and administered by the British Library Research
& Development Department.
The scheme
provides up to 40 per cent of the funding for
projects with the remainder supplied by the
library authority or other organisation or its
partners (ref. 10, pp. 26-27). A recent book
Understanding communit y librarianship: the
public library in post-modern Britain by Blacks"
traces the history of community librarianship
and reconsiders the role of community
librarianship in tlie late 1990s and beyond.
Black reaffirms the importance of the public
library using a community perspective when he
'

DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/,1 999,19(1)

Harris and Green (ref. 56, pp. 184) suggest
that one role the library will be expected to play
is in promoting
the use of information
technology
in
local
communities.
An
encouraging development is to be found in the
provision of community information on the
World Wide Web. Kendall (ref. 16, pp.
212) reports that 'Uptodate answers for
community information inquiries can be found
through a growing number of World Wide Web
resources.' As Kendall quite rightly points out
some community librarians in Britain may as yet
have no access to the lnternet but she suggests
that as more public libraries provide individuals
with access to the Internet it will be valuable to
guide them to sources of information of
relevance to their lives. Four British authorities
which have established searchable community
information databases are Hertfordshire,
Islington, Manchester and Norfolk (ref.. 16, pp.
212). While the value of making local
information available internationally could be
questioned 'the multimedia nature of the Web
means that community information files can be
more easily presented in an attractive way.
There are, in addition, community information

resources of national and even international
relevance. An example is Women's health 'a
guide to lnternet resources relating to women's
health issues which has been set up by Project
Earl, a consortium of public libraries formed to
support, advise and help in the development of
the lnternet in British public libraries. The
Community Information Group of this project is
looking, in particular, at resources for
community health information (ref. 16, pp.
2 12).
A national web site for CABx is not yet
available. Through the Internet, however, since
1993 there has been national access to a
searchable database on the Web of the
National Association of Citizens Advice
Bureaux (NACAB) monthly updates of news on
changes in legislation through the efforts of the
Manchester bureau (ref. 16, pp. 213). It also
provides Cloggie's Advice Column which gives
'a selection of frequently asked questions and
answers.' In spite of the obvious potential of
these initiatives Kendalll' points out that there is
no wish to advocate that the Web replace other
ways of providing community information such
as face-to-face services. She notes, too, that
there are times when people need a more
personal service and quotes Usherwood's
statement 'a niachine can't see somebody cry
(ref 16, pp. 213). Another valid observation by
Kendall is that access to the lnternet needs to
be free for community information as the
people who need it the most are those who
are also likely to be less able to pay.

A factor which has emerged strongly in the
South African public and community library
situation is the need for stringent evaluation.
Bunch (ref. 10, pp. 138) urges continuous
evaluation in order to keep the service relevant
to the community and he supplies details about
techniques to achieve this assessment.
Usherwood (ref. 2, pp. 35) states that a CIS
must be evaluated in terms of its stated goals
and objectives. He argues convincingly that this
is an area for future research. There is a need to
examine not just what the services are actually
doing and what they cost but also the impact of
such services on the people and communities
they purport to serve. Harris and Green (ref.
56, pp. 184) note the difficulty of meeting the

need to demonstrate in measurable terms that
public libraries offer value for public money.
This has in fact been done in South ~fri;a in a
community library sited in an informal
settlementMand the findings are most useful for
planning and potentially for convincing local
and regional authorities that the library is 'a
good thing.' In Britain public libraries and
community libraries appear to have reached a
closer working relationship in the 1990s. Harris
and Green (ref. 56, pp. 184) comment: The
public libraries and communities movement i s
gathering momentum. The rhetoric of library as
community asset has been hard on the lips of
staff, elected members, researchers, and
politicians at cabinet level
This year 'Public Libraries and Community
Development' was to be one of the Library
Association Umbrella themes at the conference
in June and 'Libraries and Communities' is the
theme for the journal New Library. World in
November. A new programme of research and
related activities 'the social impact of libraries: a
research and demonstration programme' is, for
example, being promoted by the Community
Services Group of the Library Association.
Harris and Green (ref. 56, pp. 184) also report
that among the significant messages in two
recent reports in Britain was 'the need for
imagination and commitment in the way
libraries relate to their communities; and the
perceived importance of the library as
'community asset.'
Now more than ever before as Usherwood
(ref. 2, pp. 35) argues, ClSs need to be
promoted so that politicians, users and
potential users develop positive attitudes
towards the concept. He gives the example of a
number of British advice agencies joining
together in 1990 to host receptions at the
House of Commons and to organise meetings
at major political conferences to draw
politicians' attention to the work of community
information agencies. In other countries where
these services are at risk this example could be
emulated and impact studies such as Wyley's
lead the way. The closer relationship between
ClSs and public libraries is an interesting
development. Together with these closer links
one hopes will come an infusion of public
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/, 1999,19(1)

library practice with the theory and practice of
community - library and information servi'ces.
Literature read for this review suggests that in
Britain, at least, there is awareness of the need
to redefine the new context of the 1990s and
beyond for ClSs and community librarianship
and to provide evidence in the form of impact
studies to reassert time and again in a variety of
contexts that these services are a 'community
asset.'

REFERENCES
1.

Bunch, A. Community information.
Mousaion Series Ill,1987, 5(1), 2-15.

2.

Usherwood, B. Community information. In
Informing Communities: The Role of
Libraries and lnformation Services, edited
by M Kinnell. Community Services,Group,
Library Association, Newcastle, 1992.
17-39.

3.

Desai, V. Community participation and
slum housing: A study of Bombay. Sage,
New Delhi, 1995, 4344.

4.

Ciggey, sincerely. Rural community
resource centres: A guide for developing
countries. Macmillan, London, 1988. 11.

5. Thornton, R & Ramphele, M. The quest for
community. In South African keywords:
The Uses and Abuses of Political Concepts,
edited by E Boonzaaier & j Sharp. David
Philip, Cape Town, 1988. 19-39.
6.

Pinnock, D. Breaking the web: Economic
consequences of the destruction of
extended families by group areas
relocation in Cape Town. In Second
Carnegie Inquiry Into Poverty and
Development i n Southern Africa.
Department of Economics, South African
Labour and Development Unit, University
of Cape Town, Cape Town. (Carnegie
Conference paper number 258), 1984.

7.

Childers, T. The information-poor
Amedca. Scarecrow, Metuchen, 1975.

8.

Reid, 3. Community information and the
library. Australian library journal, 1977,
26(2), 30-36.

9.

Bunch, A. The basics of information work.
Bingley, London, 1984.

DLSIDOC- &/letin of Inf T i m 1999,19(1)
~

in

10. Bunch, A. The basics of community
information work. Ed.2. Library Association,
London, 1993.
11. Kinnell, M. Ed. lnforming communities: The
role of libraries and information services.
Library Association, Community Services
Group, Newcastle, 1992.
12. Rubakin, AN. The life of Nicholas Rubakin.
In Nicholas Rubakin and bibliopsychology,
edited by S Simsova, Bingley, London,
1968.
13. Harrod's librarians glossary of terms used
in librarianship, documentation and the
book crafts and reference. Compiled by R
Prytherch. Ed. 6. Gower, Aldershot, 1987.
Community information
14. Barugh, J.
provision in an urban area. In Joint
Conference of Association for lnformation
Management (Aslib), Institute of
lnformation Scientists ({IS) and Library
Association (LA) on The Nationwide
Provision and Use of Information, 15-19
September 1980, Sheffield. Library
Association, London, 1981. 141-49
15. Community information: What libraries
can do. Library Association, London, 1980.
16. Kendall, M. Web for the community.
Library Association record, 1997, 99(4),
2 12-14.
17. Green, A. Introduction. In lnforming
Communities: The Role of Libraries and
lnformation Services, edited by M Kinnell.
Community Services Group, Library
Association, Newcastle, 1992, 11-15.
18. Stilwell, C. The community library as an
alternative to the public library in South
Africa. Masters of lnformation Studies thesis
(Unpublished). University of Natal,
Pietermaritzburg, 1991.
19. Walters, S. Education for democratic
participation: An analysis of self-education
strategies within certain community
organisations in Cape Town in the 1980s.
University for Western cape, Centre for
Adult and Continuing Education, Bellville,
1989.
20. Illich, ID. Celebration of awareness. Calder
and Boyars, London, 1971.

21. Freire, P. Cultural action for cultural
freedom. Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1972.
22. Bundy, ML. Alternatives to traditional
library services: A casebook. Urban
lnformation Interpreters, College Park,
1977.
23. Estabrook, L. Emerging trends in
community library service. Library Trends,
1979, Fall, 15144.
24. Nauratil, MI. Public libraries and
non-traditional clienteles: The politics of
special services. Greenwood, Westport,
1985.
25. Muller, N. Community information: A brief
appraisal. Cape Librarian, 1985,29(8), 3-5.
26. Bundy, ML. Urban information and public
libraries. In Libraries in society: A reader
edited by D Gerard. Bingley, London,
1978.1081 25.
27. Luck, C. Staff training for the information
centre. Drexel Library Quarterly, 1976, 12,
69-80.
28. Vincent, ). An introduction to community
librarianship.
Association of Assistant
Librarians (Group of the Library
Association), London, 1986.
29. Durrance, JC. CISs: An innovation at the
beginning of its second decade. Advances
in librarianship, 1984b, 13, 100-28.
30. Matthew, H. Community information: A
manual for beginners. Association of
Assistant Librarians Publishing (Group of
the
Library
Association),
Newcastle-under-Lyme, 1988.
31. Martin, WJ. Community librarianship:
Changjng the face of public libraries.
Bingley, London, 1989.
32. Coleman, PM. Community information
policy and provision. Aslib Proceedings,
1986, 38(9), 305-16.
33. Ritchie, S. Ed. Modern library practice.
Elm, Buckden, 1982.
34. Bowen, J. Making information work for
local people. British Library, Boston Spa,
1989.
35. Ainley, P. United we stand divided we fail:
Bridging the gap in community
32

information. Assistant
74(6), 83-97.

Librarian,

1981,

36. Jackaman, P. Public libraries, information
and the community. Assistant librarian,
1973,66(2), 18-21.
37. Ward, J. Who needs to know: Identifying
information needs in the community. In
Proceedings of the Joint Conference on
The Nationwide Provision and Use of
Information. Association for lnforrnation
Management & Institute of lnforrnation
Scientists and Library Association, 15-19
September 1980, Sheffield. Library
Association, London, 1981. 126-31.
38. Jordan, P. Librarians and social
commitment. In Public Library Purpose: A
Reader, edited by B Totterdell. Bingley,
London, 1978. 150-59.
39. Coleman, PM. Whose problem: The public
library and the disadvantaged. Association
of Assistant Librarians, . Newcastleunder-Lyme, 1981. 1-15.
40. Hendry, J. A positive prejudice - serving the
culturally disadvantaged. Assistant Librarian,
1973, 66(12), 194.
41. Alexander, N. Sow the wind: contemporary
speeches. Skotaville, Johannesburg, 1985.
42. Durrance, JC. Armed for action: Library
response to citizen information needs.
Neal-Schuman, New York, 1984a.
43. Gibson, T. Grassroots information for
neighbourhood change. I n Joint
Conference of Association for lnformation
Management (Aslib), lnstitute of
lnformation Scientists (11s) and Library
Association (LA) on The Nationwide
Provision and Use of Information, 15-19
September 1980, Sheffield. Library
Association, London, 1981. 132-40.
44. Dolan, J. Round about right: Community
information in the local library. Assistant
Librarian, 1981, 74(6), 88-93.
45. Carlton, P & Williams, S. Innovations in
CISs. In Joint Conference of Association for
lnforrnation Management (Aslib), lnstitute
of lnforrnation Scientists (IIS) and Library
Association (LA) on The Nationwide
Provision and Use of Information, 15-19
DESIDOC Bulletinof Inf Technd, 1999,19(1)

September 1980, Sheffield. Library
Association, London, 1981. 149-156.
46. Venner, D C & Cotton, S. lnforrnation for a
rural community: The South Molton
community information project. (Library
and information research Report 40),
British Library, Boston Spa. 1986.
47. Drennan, A & Drennan, H. Rural
populations in the 1970s. Library Trends,
1980, Spring, 493-5 12.
48. Community boost.
Library Association
Record, 1997,99(8), 41 3.
49. jordan, P & Walley, E. Learning about the
community: A guide for public librarians.
School of Librarianship, Leeds Polytechnic,
Leeds, 1977.
50. Harris, K. Freedom o f access to
information. In Informing Communities:
The Role of Libraries and lntormation
Services, edited by M Kinnell. Community
Services Group, Library Association,
Newcastle, 1992,41-59.
51. Lundu, M C & Milimo, RH. The provision of
information to selected disadvantaged
groups in Zambia. In lnformation and
libraries in the developing world, I
SubSaharan Africa, edited by M Wise & A
Olden. Library Association, London, 1990,
144-58.
52. Karlsson, J. Methods of information
provision to rural communities in South
Africa. In Proceedings of the Seminar on
l n f o r r n a t i o n Provision t o
Rural
Communities in Africa: Proceedings of the
seminar, edited by E Johanssen, 22-25 June,

1994, Botswana. Uppsala
Library, Uppsala, 1994, 47-57.

University

53. Kempson, E. lnformation for self-reliance
and selfdetermination: The role of CISs.
IFLA Journal, 1986, 12(3), 182-91.
54. Martin, WJ.Librarianship without buildings.
Library Association Record, 1984, 86(1O),
4 18-19.
55. Kinnell, M & Sturges, P. Continuity and
innovation in the public library: The
development of a social institution. Library
Association, London. Review by J D
Hendry. 1996. A case of never mind the
quality feel the width. Library Association
record, 1995, 98(4), 21 5.
56. Harris, K & Green, A. Social impact of
public libraries. Library Association Record,
1997, 99(4), 184.
57. Rosenberg, D. Rural community resource
centres: A sustainable option for Africa.
Information development, 1993, 9(1/2),
29-35.
58. Black, A.
Understanding community
librarianship: The public library in
post-modern Britain. Ashgate, Aldershot,
1997.
59. Community guidance. Library Association
Record, 1995,9,470.
60. Wyley, C. The application of a participatory
evaluation method to the public library:
The case of the Tholulwazi Library, Besters
Camp, Inanda, Durban. Masters of
lnformation Studies thesis. University of
Natal, Pietermaritzburg, 1997. 124.

'Dr Christine Stilwell is presently associated with lnforrnation Studies, University of Natal, Private Bag X 0 1 ,
Scottsville Pietermaritzburg, Kwazulu Natal, South Africa.

DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/,1999,19( 1 )

33

