DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 19, No.1, January 1999, pp. 35-37
8 1999, DESlDOC

Community Information Network
A Amudhavalli*

Abstract
This article overviews what community information means and its
implications on the role of a library and information centre. No single
institution can meet the general information requirements of any given
community. I t attempts to examine how . a cooperative venture of
interagency network can lead to an effective community information
service suitable for the local population.

1.

INTRODUCTION

the term 'information'. Despite this, many have
attempted to define community information.

The key concepts of the information age are:
information, community and access. No
organisation, including that of the library and
information centre, can function well and be
effective, if attention is not directed towards
these key concepts from varying standpoints.
Today's information society has grown to be
complex warranting lots of initiatives, strategies
and
implementation
of
informing
the
comniunity under the range of service of a
given library and information centre. This article
intends to give an overview of the implications
of community information (CI) on the role of
libraries. The libraries may not be able to
accomplish this task single handed in addition
to their routine and/or other services. There are
a few insights into how effectively multi and
inter-agency networking can enhance the CI
service. A few constraints in this are also
highlighted.

2.

The most quoted and accepted definition of

CI is that of the Library ~ssociation'.It reads as:
"which assists individuals and groups with daily
problems solving and with participation in the
democratic process. The services concentrate
on the needs of those who do not have ready
access to other sources of assistance and on
the most important problems that people have
to face, problems to do with their homes, their
jobs, and their rights". This seminal definition
implies that CI is an activity which involves a
wide range of organisations and many different
forms of communication media. A service of
information,
advice,
referral, counselling,
guidance, advocacy and feedback of social,
fiscal, ethical, political and cultural issues is
recognised
as
the
need for
skilled
information-aware and conscious community.
The term community librarianship refers to
the "exploration of the relationship between the
library and the people which it serves"'.

DEFINITION

The title and the prime objective of this
article implies three basic concepts which are
easier to describe than define. There are a large
number of definitions to the term 'community',
whereas no consensus has been reached over
DESIDOCBulletinof Inf Technol, 1999,19(1)

.

3.

FEATURES OF C1

The need for information has become
greater as the society is becoming more and
more complex. Those who wish to use CI
35

services will come from a wide range of
socioeconomic, cultural, education and other
such backgrounds.
The public and academic libraries in
collaboration with campaigning agencies like
government, self-help and pressure groups,
mass media, voluntary agencies, clubs and
councils-all play a vital role in the CI network
of a neighbourhood.
The availability of a wide range of diverse
sources of information is fundamental for a
healthy community so that information
surrounds people which can be used to
stimulate ideas and initiatives, and flourish.
Information is an essential ingredient in
community development; and the latter is an
important
factor
in
working.
towards
participative democracy. The sustenance of the
local community to cope with economic and
social change depends heavily on access to
information.
The level and complexity of the language
used in community information service, both in
oral and graphic encounters need to be simple
and clear. Access to information is often not
adequate to solve problems. This may require
the involvement of a variety of community
groups, organisations and the like. People living
and working in communities tend to have very
unstructured information environment.
In
community
groups
and
local
development agencies, the formal provision of
information tends to have a low priority. Often
is
because,
in
under-resourced
this
circumstances, information cannot be shown to
be of direct relevance to their objectives. When
one is dealing with the reality of poverty,
ill-health or unemployment against other severe
constraints, it is hard to justify the kinds of
investment, for uncertain return, which
information demands. What we are concerned
with here, after all, is the kind of environment
'where the absence of information is a constant
irritant rather than a major concern'. For people
in households, the same tends to apply, except
that the minor irritant is not constant but
occasional and may be unpredictable. This
means that there is a natural inertia in the home
and in the neighbourhood environment for a
systematic approach to information.
36

Some other problems in offering CI service
by libraries and/or
other organisations
individually include low status funding of the
library, physical and attitudinal barriers, and
operational environment. However, all of them
could possibly be overcome with serious efforts
and attention. To be more effective, all the
activities must operate from a secure base of
carefully programmed aims and objectives.

4.

LIBRARIES VERSUS CI

Though other communication media and
other governmental and non-governmental/
voluntary agencies handle these issues
independently, the wide range of such services
emphasise that CI is primarily a library function.
By early 1970s, the library profession has
realised its social responsibilities seriously.
Particularly that the mission of a public library
supports CI and it can serve CI beneficially to
the society. And, its extended easy access to
knowledge/ideas
contribute
to
social
enrichment
and
empowerment.
Such
developments are a reflection of a continuity of
library purpose and the fact is that there are
many missions rather than one.
A public library is already fulfilling its
responsibilities with regard to social need by its
fundamental functions of informing, educating
and entertaining. With the recent developments
in information technology and in the economy,
the society is undergoing sea-changes. The
direct and major impact is the division of
society into two groups-the 'haves' and the
'havenotsf--leading to the formation of a section
termed as 'disadvantaged'. This would entail a
much more structured and focused response
than that at present available with the
designation of 'community librarianship' as an
area of high priority. A public library must
challenge this deprivation of information and
become demonstrably more responsive towards
community.

5.

CI NETWORK

No single institution can meet the
information requirements of the modern
society. Cooperation among organisations
providing information to the community has
now become an established practice across

-DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1999,19(1)

many sectors. Public libraries, academic
institutions, advice centres, voluntary groups,
business organisations, statutory services, and
the mass media are in regular contact with each
other as part of their efforts to satisfy the
increasing sophisticated demands expressed by
the modern society. A user accessing one
agency will often have to be referred to
another, as each individual organisation has its
own 'culture'-policies and practices.
Three types of inter-agency cooperation
'.
have been suggested by Owen ~ c ~ o w e l lThe
first is termed as 'networking', whereby two or
rrrore agencies may develop stronger links to
improve the services each offers to its users.
For example, a regular exchange of information
via mailing newsletters and current awareness
bulletins, etc. The second benefit of cooperative
working is the potential it offers for increasing
the level of resources available for providing
infoimation. For example, voluntary groups,
local and health authorities and other interest
groups come together to strengthen the
information resources to provide health
information. The third form of cooperative
working is the strategic planning of library and
information services within a particular locality.
It would seem that there are a number of
choices available to librarians wanting to
improve their information services such as:
(a) Improve the library holdings; arrange
exhibitions and posters; publish pamphlets,
leaflets, newsletters, information package,
bulletins, house journals, self-help booklets,
and directories; offer telephone help line
designed to provide much of the information
that is required as a means of developing the
speedy form of provision of relevant material.

(b) Improve information service o n purely local

such as consumer affairs, household
finances, housing, electricity and gas supply.
The range of these. information services can
be providing an explanation, notification,
advice, guidance, practical aid, mediation,
active referral campaign, updating, secretarial
aid, self-help initiative, etc.

6.

CONCLUSION

Libraries can make a provision for CI in two
ways. They can try to provide a service direct to
individuals and groups by running an advice
desk/bureau/centre
handled by specially
trained professionals. Alternatively, they can
provide this service indirectly in conjunction
with other agencies targeted for focused group
like disadvantaged community within a locality4.
In urban areas, the role of library and
information centre will be supplementing and
complementing while in rural areas there will
be a need to initiate this activity. ,

REFERENCES
1.

Kinnell, Margaret. Informing communities:
The role of libraries and information
services, CSG, LA, London, 1992.

2.

Library
Association.
Community
information: What libraries can do! LA,
London, 1980.

3.

Liddle, David. Community librarianship.
New Library World, October 1980, 81,
197-99.

4.

Martin, WJ. Community librarianship:
Changing the face of public libraries. Clive
Bingley, London,l989.

5.

Martin, WJ. Outreach. Library Review,
1984, 33(l), 22-28.

matters and act as a referral agency or
sign-posting agency t o other local services
'Dr A Amudhavalli i s presently a Reader at the Depar.tment of Library & Information Science, University of
Madras, Chennai - 600 005.

DESlDOC Bulletin of Ini Technol, 1999,19(1)

37

