DESIDOC Bulletin of lnformation Technology, Vol. 19, No. 1, January 1999, pp. 39-43
0 1999, DESIDOC

lnformation Supermarkets in the Context of Community
lnformation Services
Vishwa Mohan*
Abstract
Community information (CI) is an umbrella concept. It can be described as
'survival information', hence the scope of Ct will be proportionate to the
numerous ways and means of survival of the members of the community.
There is a need for controlling and in$titutionalisation of CI services.
'Information Supermarkets' in the context (3f CI which could be called as 'CI
Supermarkets' (CISMs). This would ensure the availability of CI at 'one stop'
information supermarkets to suit the information seeking behaviour of the
modern customers. The paper discusses the need for information
supermarkets in general and the ClSM in particular, describing the nature
and scope of CI. It briefly presents the important features of CISMs. The
author opines that, with the emergence of Internet and Intranets, the
concept of ClSM will be a reality in near future.

1.

INTRODUCTION

The concept of supermarkets is very recent
one. Supermarkets have emerged in the
modern world, where the consumer behaviour
is different from that of the earlier societies. The
'consumers/customers of the modern times
have a very limited time for shopping. They
expect availability of everything at one place or
point with reasonably good or high quality. To
satisfy the changing needs and behaviour of the
customers, the business world in the modern
times has evolved supermarkets to sell their
products more effectively and efficiently.
This being the case with marketing of
essential commodities, what will be the fate of
marketing of information services and products.
that are often done away with? To a large
extent, many an information needy does not
even have perception. There is also an element
of indifference towards the use or consumption
of information. Fuither, unlike essential goods
DESIDOC Bullet~nof lnl Technol, 1 999,19(1)

and services, the information needed by
members of the community will be widely
vdried and innumerable. The amount of time
spent or wasted for obtaining required
information is usually considerable, because of
the information being widely scattered and
geographically
dispersed
and
almost
uncontrolled and unorganised. Many a time,
people loose interest in obtaining the required
information, and thus, there is an attitude of
doing away with information and its use or
consumption. The same is true with CI because
it is by and large, uncontrolled and flows
through
informal
channelsjinformation
networks. Being informal channels, they are
disorganised, and uncontrolled and thereby
almost unknown and inaccessible to the seekers
of information. Therefore, institutionalisation of
CI is very much inevitable to counter these
problems. When CI is institutionalised, the
factor of one-stop availability or information
flow through a single window is possible.
.%
9

Hence, it IS desirable to promote information
supermarkets, because, of late, even the
governments at state and central levels prefer to
have single window system to facilitate the
citizens.
Besides the very nature of CI implies the
establishment of information supermarkets in
the context of CI. Therefore, information
supermarkets have to be promoted to facilitate
the flow of CI through single window.

2.

CI CENTRES ON T H E
ANALOGY O F
SUPERMARKETS

According to Michael ~dwards',"community
information is considered to be that information
required by mdmbers of the public (or those
acting on their behalf) to make effective use of
the resources potentially available to them in
the communities in which they live. Such
information may be needed to solve problems
in the fields of housing, disability, household
finance, marriage, employment, and so on."
Here Michael Edwards had listed only a few
problems and the rest are implied with the
expression 'so on', giving a greater scope for
the concept of CI.
Whereas, Joseph ~onohue',considered to
be one of the earliest creators of CI, describes
and defines CI as 'survival information' and
'citizen action information'. This implies the
significance and scope of CI. Each member of
the community will have his/her own ways and
means of survival and the CI has to cover all
walks of life. These definitions indicate that the
concept of CI covers varied areas that are of
interest and crucial need o i different members
of the community.
Summing up various definitions on CI,
Durrance' opined that the most serviceable
definition of community was developed by one
of the earliest creators ot CI service, Donohue,
who identified two types of information to be
provided by such a service: Survival information
such as that related to health, housing, income,
legal
protection,
economic
opportunity,
political rights, etc., and citizen action
information, needed for effective participation
as individual or as member of a group in the
-- - .. .... .
.
- --

40

-.
--

-

-

social, political, legal, economic pro'cess."
Durrance called the former (information/
component of Ct as defined by Donohue)
'information and referral (I&R)' and the la!ter
'public policy information (PPI)'. He added to
these two a third component called 'local
information', which according to him is
information-appropriate and useful to the
community, including a calendar of local
events,
courses
and other
educational
opportunities, and basic information concerning
government agencies,
local organisation,
fraternal groups, and clubs. These three
components for Durrance will constitute a basis
for the understanding of presently practised and
emerging CI services. Thus, according to
Durrance "CI services is an umbrella term that
encompasses these three components."
However, the above conclusion by Durrance
also suffers from implicit and intrinsic
overlapping of the constituent components at
the conceptual plane. As stated by him I&R
component refers to survival information. But,
in reality I&R is again an umbrella concept
because it can include all types of information
and referral services. Thus it can include the
other two components, namely, public policy
information and local information. Another
important and implied dimension is the
neighbourhood information or trans-local
information that has not been dealt with clearly
by him nor was clearly spelt out and discussed
by anyone else. For example, information about
medical specialists in the neighbourhood
(locality) may be of great value in case of
emergencies; employment opportunities do not
always emerge from the local community itself.
Therefore, information about such opportunities
elsewhere would, also be of great value.
Therefore, survival information does not and
should not have any geographical boundaries
or limitations. Further, the boundaries of
neighbourhood are also relative. In view of this,
the scope of the CI goes beyond the local
boundaries, social groups and so on. The nature
and scope'of CI will be in conformity witti and
proportionate to the numerous ways and means
of survival and citizen action of the member of
the human community in general and the local
community in particular. Therefore, the CI
centre is an umbrella centre. Consequently, the
--

DESIDOC~Bu!letinof Inl Technol, 1999,19(1)

CI centres should be information supermarkets.
In fact, as quoted by Bunch', Goodmanb
referred to the CI centres as one-stop
information supermarkets as far back as 1976
itself.
Further, because of the nature of CI, the CI
centres need to meet diverse information needs
of the members of the community. There shall
be no discrimination among the users of the CI
centres by age, sex, caste, creed, economic and
educational status, etc. The CI centre should
collect all local, trans-local, public policy and
subject and discipline-oriented information and
develop referral databases.
The collection, organisation and functioning
of these information centres may be on the
same lines of supermarkets.

3.

THE SUPERMARKET
ANALOGY

The basic features of a supermarket in
general are:
(a) Dealing with varied varieties of products to
ensure availability of a number of products at
one-spot,
(b) Super organisation and display of the
products to attract the attention o f the
customer to each and every product, and
(c) Ensuring availability of quality and packed
products, with an open access for the
customers to reach, select and pick up the
products, thereby saving the time of the
customers.
The CI centres also should deal with a
variety of items of information. They should be
organised and displayed in such a manner that
the moment the users enter the CI centre, they
may find various items of information well
displayed and accessible without much wastage
of their time in information searching and
retrieval.

4.

INFORMATION COLLECTION

The information in CI centres should be
supplied by the generators and distributors of
the information or all persons who are
concerned with their respective fields of
operation or activity. This is essential because,
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Jechnol, 1999,19(1)

collection of CI will be very difficult by the
information workers especially in those CI
centres where there is meagre staff.
Further, it is difficult because of lack of
control of the local, trans-local and other
information. Therefore, as far as the CI is
concerned, it is imperative on the part of the
generators and the members of the community
to contribute authentic and reliable CI, which
they generate or acquire, to the CI centre. For
instance, the local doctor may provide the CI,
especially, in the field of medicine by offering
voluntarily freeconsultation, advisory and
awareness generation services once or twice a
week at the CI centre. He/she may also provide
the CI centre with the pamphlets and other
government and non-government publications
on health and hygiene, which comes to the
clinic/health centre.
In case of CI centres in urban areas, the
hospitals, nursing homes and diagnostic centres
may provide the local CI centres with
information about the facilities and specialists
available with them.
The local lawyer(s) may be associated with
the CI centres to provide advocacy and legal
advisory services and current material on
important legal and legislative aspects, which
are of higher concern to the public at large.
The agricultural extension officers may
contribute information on their respective field.
Thus, every official, expert, professional, etc. in
the community may have to provide or supply
information to the CI centre for the
socioeconomic development of his or her own
community. There shall also be a few young
voluntary information workers who will also
collect much of the local information on behalf
of the CI centre.

5.

INFORMATION
ORGANISATION

Information will be usually . organised
according to its subject. The organised
information on shelves and in machine-readable
form will have various retrieval aids and
facilities. Apart from organisation of information
on shelves and in machine-readable form, the
CI may also be organised in a different fashion,

for better service, marketabiiity and display.
Much of the CI needs to be displayed as the
commodities in supermarkets.
There will be several forms of CI which need
to be displayed. These include: material, like
pamphlets, pictures, and charts, and ephemeral
material, especially pamphlets, prospectuses,
etc. for dispensing purpose. The pictures and
posters on health and hygiene, environment,
agriculture, useful arts, etc. may be displayed on
notice boards, show cases, and windowdisplay,
etc. meant for each subject. Thus, much of the
current information should be displayed to the
extent possible.
There should also be pamphletdispensing
trays in which the dispensable pamphlets may
be placed. The CI must also be organised and
repackaged in a manner that suits the needs,
taste, expectations and levels of the members of
the community.
lnformation organisation h o u M be a
continuous housekeeping process. Updating
the information is essential. There shouM be
aesthetics in the display of the pamphlets,
charts, posters, etc. The internal and external
decoration and environment should be
pleasing, attractlve and welcoming. This is
essential to create demand for and promote the
optimum consumption of CI by the members of
the community for personal and community
development. The volunteers have to help the
CI centre in organisation, updating and
*.
housekeeping operations also.

5.1

Service

The CI supermarket (CISM) may render all
kinds of information services. it may render, a
part from services already mentioned,
community current awareness services, and
selective
dissemination
of
community
information services. As listed by Bunch: they
may also extend advocacy, advisory, practical
help, etc. to all the members of the community.

5.2

Staff

The staff should be well trained information
workers with marketing and communication
skills. The size of the staff should be
considerably moderate. A single information

worker or a single staff Cl centre will be most
unhelpful. There must be at least three staff
members. One on information receiving side,
second on information organisation and third
on rendering personalised information services
and coordinating the efforts and service of the
volunteers.
The
volunteers
(voluntary
information workers) also form part of the staff
of the CI centre. They need training,
coordination and motivation.

6.

CISM REALITY

in view of the scope and nature of CI, many
experts in the field expressed doubts relating to
the feasibility of rendering CI services; same
have opposed to the very concept itself.
Wilson' feels that'the use of the term CI itself is
certainly dangerous for librarians as it conflicts
with similar areas and services' of 'information
dealt with by other departments. He cites an
example of social welfare, 'an area of
information, advice a d advocacy in the US.
However, there has been considerable
growth of several CI services in the Great
Britain, USA, Canada, Australia, etc. Sor~leof
the African and South American countries have
been curious to develop the concept and the
service in recent past Further, in view of the
emerging IT, information super highways and
global networks, CISM will be a reality.
Particularly the availability of internet and the
intranets facilitate the emergence and
development of a true and practical CISM. The
CI services through internet will be so effective
and efficient, provided there will be speedier
lines'without traffic jams, through which the CI
may be rendered i t i its true spirit. As far as the
concerned,
even
local
information is
information about an individual member of a
community can be accessed and provided
when there is a web site of the member on the
internet. This is an ultimate facility for rendering
the CI services. However, it takes time for every
organisation and individual to beaon the WWW.
Once a fully matured web emerges, the CI
centres could be one-stop information centres.
lnformation access will be easier and the
amount of time spent will be minimal. In fact,
the idea of internet and intranets is to facilitate
the universal flow of information in general and
DESIDOC Bulktin of Inf Techno/, 1999,19(1)

.

CI in particular. In spite of the emergence of
CISMs, there will be a need for intermediaries
and information providers. The modern
technology will merely help the system, but it
will not be able to replace the system.
Further, in the third world, it will be a long
way to go to realise the objective of
accessibility and affordability of IT on the part
of each and every household. In view of this,
the ClSMs backed by Internet and planned CI
control in every country will transform the
developing societies into the information
societies in the 21st century.

Society for lnformation
Washington, 1976.
4.

Durrance, Joan C. Community information
services-an innovation at the beginning of
its second decade. Advances in
Librarianship (Vo1.13) edited by Wesley
Simonton. Academic Press, Inc., Orlando,
1984. pp. 99-128.

5.

Edwards, Michael. Cooperation in
community information provision: Practice
and potential. British Library Research and
Development Department, 1977.

6.

Goodman, Henry James Abraham. 'Trends
in community and citizens' information
services in Canada and abroad: The
emergence of 'one stop' information
'supermarkets'. Proceedings of the Fourth
Canadian Conference on lnformation
Science. 1s.l.l: Is.n.1, 1976.

7.

Wilson, Alexander. public information
service and the public. Library Association,
Public Libraries Group, London, 1979.

REFERENCES
1.

Bunch, Allan. Community information
services: The origin, scope and
development. Clive Bingley, London, 1982.

2.

Bunch, Allan. The basics of information
work. Clive Bingley, London, 1984.

3.

Donohue, Joseph C. Community
information services-a
proposed
definition. Proceedings of 39th ASlS annual
meeting on Community lnformation
Politics, edited by SK Martin. American

Science,

*Dr Vishwa Mohan is Reader at Department of Library & lnformation Science, Osmania University,
Hyderabad- 500007.

DEslDoC Bulktin of lnf Technol, 1999,19(1)

43

