DESlDOC Bulletin of lnformation Technology, Vol. 19, No.1, January 1999, pp. 45-47
0 1999, DESIDOC

Community lnformation Services: Nature & Relevance
K Sarada*
Abstract
This article stresses upon the need of Community lnformation Centres (CIS)
as nodal source of information regarding health, family matter, legal, social,
housing, employment, etc. Various steps in designing and establishing a CIS
to be followed are also given.

1.

COMMUNITY INFORMATION
SERVICES' NEEDS

My son has just completed high school
education, I want to know the availability of
different courses for him to pursue further
studies and their respective job potential along
with the addresses of the educational
institutions offering these courses in the
neighbourhood. I want to perform the marriage
of my daughter. I would like to have authentic
information on shopping for the event. I am a
retired person, I would like to have information
on old age homes, emergency medical 'care
and about voluntary. organisations
which can
utilise my knowledge and expertise. I am an
unemployed young man, I need information
about selfemployment schemes or job
opportunities. Where do I get this information?
These are only a few examples of the felt
information needs of different groups of people
in any community. Public is starving of
information required to solve problems they
face in their daily life and subsistence.
There are some government offices and
agencies that
give
information about
agriculture, family planning, employment
exchanges, etc. Public libraries also provide
some information. Large gaps exist between
information required by different sections of
population and the availability of such
information from a nodal source. The
'

DESIDOCBulletinof lnf Technol, 1999,19(1)

community information services (CIS) centres
developed to fill this gap for infbrmation on
need act as nodal agencies to provide
information to all segments of people in a
community.
The needs of a community can be classified
into general and specific needs. General
information needs are those which are felt by all
people in a community. These relate to
information regarding ambulance services,
nursing homes, medical practitioners, transport
facilities, employment services, communication
facilities, shopping guides, lawyers etc. These
general needs can be broadly grouped into:
(a) Health: information regarding emergency
health services, hospitals, nursing homes,
specialist medical practitioners, etc.;
(b) Family matters:
marriage,
adoption,
maternity rights, will making, etc.;
(c) Consumer problems: consumer
standards, how to complain, etc.;

rights,

(d) Money matters: personal finance, how to
obtain loans, how to claim welfare benefits,
how to file tax returns, etc.;
(e) Employment
news:
employment
opportunities,
selfemployment
opportunities, training opportunities, etc.;

(9

Legal information: citizens' rights and duties,
legal aid and informationabout lawyers; and

45

(g) ~ o u s i n information:
g
finding a house for rent,
landlord-tenant relations, repairs, buying and
selling, security and related matters.

(h) Special loan schemes for weavers,
washermen, barbers, fishermen and other
similar groups are administered.

In addition to these general information
needs of all people, there are specific
information needs of special groups of people
in the community. Often these groups are not
articulate. They are disadvantaged and cannot
even identify and express their information
needs. They are not aware of the agencies that
offer welfare services and special programmes
to improve their living conditions.

(i) Also development schemes for the
promotion of education, social welfare
hostels, community halls, etc. are designed
and implemented.

1.1

Welfare Programmes

There are a number of welfare programmes
provided by central and state governments to
alleviate their condition of poverty ignorance
and disability.

To understand the nature of welfare
measures provided by governments, a brief
outline of such programmes provided by the
government of Andhra Pradesh (A.P.), is given
here as an example. To improve the living
conditions of the disadvantaged groups A.P.
Government is taking the following steps:
(a) Acquiring and distributing land for
construction of houses on the basis of lists
prepared at village level, enlisting names of
people who belong to scheduled castes,
scheduled
tribes,
backward classes,
minorities and poor people who do not have
a house and who did not avail the benefit
earlier.
(b) O n this basis, categorisation lists are
prepared and pucca houses are sanctioned.
(c) On the same basis, a scheme is promoted/

implemented by the State Government to
allot land for cultivation to the landless poor.
(d) Similarly,
loans
are
sanctioned
to
unemployed poor to start self-employment
projects.
(e) For women and children, there are separate
benefit schemes.

(9

There are. scl;emes
educating girls.

for protecting and

(g) Sociat welfare schemes and pension schemes
for the old and disabled people are designed
and implemented,.

Some
voluntary
organisations
and
non-government organisations (NGOs) also
provide help to the disadvantaged people. The
poor and illiterate groups for whom these
ser.vices
are
addressed
need to
be
provided/enlightened
with
information
regarding the availability of'these schemes and
services.
There is no single agency which collects all
this information, and repackage it in a suitable
form for the use of these sections of the
society.
The
community
information
service/centre should emerge as the nodal
pointlagency to provide information service; to
all people, and cater to both specific and
general information requirements of both
literate/articulate
and
illiterate/inarticulate
groups of people, in the manner and form that
is understood by them.

2.

PLANNING OF CIS CENTRE

To design, develop and establish a CIS
centre that can become the nodal point for all
information services, a systematic planning is
necessary. Following steps can be considered
for planning of such a centre:
(a; Identification of the information needs of a
community, both expressed and potential
needs.
(b) Listing out and consulting the existing
agencies or providers of community
information
like
government
and
non-government agencies for designing an
integrated service. One can also consider the
possibilities of setting up a CIS with shared
premises and resources with a cooperative
management committee and local liaison
group.
(c) To gather material for the provision of
community information services. The
selection of material should be done by
people who belong to and know the
community best.
DESIDOC Bulletinoflnf Technol, 1999,19(1)

I
I

(d) A selection committee may be formed with
leaders of various groups of the community.
For example, teachers, lawyers, doctors,
politicians, heads of government agencies,
religious and charitable organisations and
NGOs etc.
(e) Material should relate to specific local needs
that are identified by the agency.

(0

Since CIS is oriented towards problem
solving, material should be up-to-date,
accurate and capable of solving problems of
individuals and groups in their day-to-day life
and long-term progress.

(g) To satisfy general information needs of a
community, directories of hospitals, nursing
homes, educational institutions, etc, may be
compiled.

(h) A list of useful emergency contacts like
police, ambulance, doctors, and fire service

may be maintained along with addresses and
phone numbeis.
(i) To provide information to the needs of
disadvantaged groups of people in the
community, the CIS must enlist'itself on the
mailing lists for receipt of information
brochures of the relevant government
agencies, like agriculture extension workers,
village development officers, small scale
industries departments, public relations and
publicity departments and non-government
agencies and organisations. The relevant
information should be repackaged in a
suitable form, language and media so that it is
easily understood by both literate and
illiterate people.
Once the service is initiated by CIS, a
constant review programme may be undertaken
to find out the effectiveness of the service, and
changes and modifications qay .be made if
necessary to improve the service.

*Prof K Sarada is Retd Professor of Department of Library & Information Science, Andhra Universiy, Andhra
Pradesh and is presently residing at 7-20-3Kirlarnpudi Layout in Visakhapatnarn - 530 023.

DESlDOC Bulletin of lnf Techno!, 1999,19(1)

47

