DESlDOC Bulktin of Information Technology,Vol. 19, No. 2, March 1999, pp. 23-25
O 1999, DESIDOC

Information System on Marine Ecology
L Kannan* & R Kannan**
Abstract
Increasing exploitation of marine resources coupled with increasing level of
pollutants and endless pressure of human population is posing a threat to
marine habitat. United Nations has also emphasised on the protection and
sustainable devdopment of marine and coastal areas at the national,
sub-regional and global levels. In this situation, information systems are
assuming an ever increasing importance in the development. The authors
describe the sources and services provided by the ENVIS Centre at the
Centre of Advanced Study in Marine Biology.

1.

INTRODUCTION

About 71% of the earth's surface is covered
with the sea water which harbours rich and
diversified biota. Ever increasing exploitahon of
marine resources, exponentially increasing
levels of various pollutants and endless pressure
of human population have posed threat to the
diversified marine life forms. As a result,
sensitive coastal habitats such as mangioves,
estuaries, coral reefs, lagoons and biotic
communities have been rapidly destroyed or
degraded world-wide. Hence the United
Nations Conference on Environment and
Development held at Rio de Janeiro in June
1992 ernphasised the protection and
sustainable development of marine and coastal
areas at the national, subregional and global
levels. Various case studies on the survey of
coastal areas around the world also lend
evidence lo the theory that coastal erosion is
increasing and its impact on coastal
environment is serious. Major cause for such
near helpless situation is nonavailability of
desired information, therefore information
systems are assuming an ever increasing
importance in the development.

Advances in marine science and technology
depend upon the effective flow of information
and data from the collectors/various types of
users. The available data on marine life are
scattered and hence prevent access to desired
information, at times. Hence sustainable
exploitation of these living resources needs
proper, adequate, upto-date and constant flow
of information on various aspects of marine
environment. The main constraint in sustainable
coastal environmental management i s the lack
of an organised information system that would
help ptovide basic 'spatial and non spatial
information for various organisations in their
planning and decision-making. In order to
satisfy the information needs of researchers,
planners, environmentalists and common
people, efficient on-line and off-line ways of
retrieval and dissemination of data with the aid
of computer technology have become
imperative. This will help resqurce managers
and decisiomakers to make rational
judgements and plan to allocate the existing
natural resources for optimum socioeconomic
utilisation and conservation. Hence proper
collation of data in speedy retrieval fom
--

DESIooC Bulletin of Inf Techd, 1999,19(2)

23

becomes necessary so as to avoid existing
informationvacuum.
Considering these facts, the Ministry of
Environment and Forests, Government of India,
established the Environmental information
System (ENVIS) Centres across the subcontinent
to serve as communication bridges to reach out
to the masses. ENVfS is a decentralised system
using the distributed network of data bases to
ensure integration of national efforts in
environmental information, collection, storage,
retrieval and dissemination. It acts as a
repository of information for in-house use and
also functions as a resource centre for
appropriate technology and environment
management for the external users.

2.

EMVJS OPERAJiNG LINK

The ENVIS network with a centrally located
Ministry as its Focal Point, presently consists of
24 centres on diverse areas of environmental
research such as pollution control, toxic
substances,
environmentally sound and
appropriate technologies, coastal and offshore
ecology, energy and environment and
biodegradation of wastes, etc. These centres
have been set up in specialised and reputed
institutions in the country with a view to
provide environmental information service to:
satisfy present/future needs of the users,
disseminate information speedily to the users;
to promote national and international
cooperation and liaison for exchange of
environmental related information; and to
promote, support and assist educational and
personnel training programmes.

3.

ENVCS CENTRE AT CENTRE OF
ADVANCED STUDY 1N
MARINE BIOLOGY

The ENVIS centre at the Centre of Advanced
Study in Marine 8ioiogy, Annamalai University
is a pioneer marine biologicaj research institute
in the country and is one among the 24
centres. This centre has been assigned to
collect and disseminate information concerned
with the marine environment especially the
mangroves. estuaries, coral reefs and lagoons.
The centre has built-up a reasonably good

information base by collecting pubfications,
reports, reprints, bib)iographic abstracts and
databases since its inception from 1992. The
information base is being continuously
strengthened through regutar collection,
collation and storage of scientific and technical
information on coastal environmental areas.
Further, the centre has responded to various
requests for information on diverse areas
related to coastal wetlands from different user
groups.
The centre is responding to about 1000
queries annually and has procured many
records to provide substantive information to
the user community. The centre is receiving
queries from various research institutes,
universities,
colleges,
governmental and
non-governmental organisations mostly on
ecology of mangroves, coral reefs and
conservation and management of coastal
wetland ecosystem. The centre has subscribed
several national and international journals and
owns books and publications in the field
specified. Additionally the centre has prepared
status reports data bises and bibliography on
its subject interest. All these materials are
maintained well in the library to disseminate the
details to researchers and interested people in
the field of their specialisation.

4.

SERVICES

Among the avaiiable databases with an
international coverage, the best suited for
marine living resources is ASFA (Aquatic
Science and Fisheries Abstract). Hence ASFA
CD-ROMdisc is regularly purchased to update
the information in the field of aquatic science
and fisheries research. Information search and
retrieval from this database is an art and one
requires some knowledge about query
formulation, data elements and search
methodologies. Each bibliographic record in the
ASFA CD-ROM consists of many data elements.
Each word in a record is indexed which
facilitates very fast searching of the refevant
information. Searches on database can be
made through authors, titles, subjects, keywords
and serial numbers. Hard copies of abstracts
are also available. Reef Base and Fish Base-the
global databases on the resources af coral reefs

.

and fKhes respectively are also available in
COROMS with this Centre. The centre is also
publishing a biannual newsletter, Seshiliyana
(ISSN:0971-8656).

The centre is well equipped with
infrastructure facilities such as computers,
scanners, laser printers and photo copiers for
photobard copying and downloading the
collected information. It is also heading to enter
into information highway by Internet Znks. The
centre has been servicing since 1992 with
motto "Cdlect, Collate, and Disseminate". The
centre is engaged in several information
services:
fJ Query/answer service
Q Abstracting service

9 Press dipping service
a Publication of annual report
P Oevelopment of databases
P Liaison with other informarionsystems.

Its library has flock of books including
policy
newsletters, conference papers,
documents, suppIffmentary publications, etc.,
which can be freeiy used by students, fisheries
specialists, researchers and others.
%is information nucleus, really a sought
after resource for the marine environmentafists,
is taking wery effort in getting the tight
information in the right form so as to
disseminate to the right persons at the right
time, in the right place rb take right decisions.

?rdL Kuwun is ENWS IrrCharge, Environmentai)nfarmationSystem Centre, Centre of Advanced Study in
t J k h Biology, Annamabi Univenity, Parangipettai 608 502, Tamilnadu.

Prof R Kurrun is associated with Environmentd {nhrmation System Centre, Cenm of Advanced Study in

Marine Bidogy, Annamalai University, Parangipettai608 502, Tamilnadu.

