DESlDOC Bulletin of information Technology, Vol. 19, No.3, May 1999, pp. 5-13
8 1999, DESIDOC

Library Classification in Computer Age
P Dhyani
Abstract
Library classification is constantly being influenced by multifaceted,
multidimensional, and infinite growth of literature on one hand and the
users needs on the other. Dewey pioneered in devising a scheme of
classification for the documentation utility of the organised knowledge.
Subsequent schemes of classification worked purely without any theoretical
foundation, colon classification being the exception. With the emergence of
computer technology the library classification is being metamorphised. This
paper attempts to delve a state-of-the-art of library classification in the new
computer age.

1.

INTRODUCTION

The
discipline--Library
Classification-is
conditioned by the constant multifaceted,
multidimensional and infinite development of
the macro and micro knowledge and users
needs. Change is the law of nature and
whatever does not change with the changing
needs and demands becomes static and
redundant like a piece of artefact in a museum.
Accordingly, it has been the attempt of library
and information scientists, associations and
institutions to work in the direction of making
library classificatior; a living discipline, a
discipline which can cope with the
ever-growing and infinite demands and
challenges both of knowledge and users o f
libraries and information centres.

2.

ERA OF TRADITIONAL
S C ~ M E STH
: E INDIVIDUAL
EFFORTS

It was Melvil Dewey upon whom dawned
the realisation of the utility of organised
knowledge and he became the pioneer in
devising a classification scheme for classifying
documents of the libraries on the basis of which
DESlL3OC Bulletin of Inf Techml, 1 999,19(3)

the disorganised libraries henceforth could be
organised in a helpful manner. So the genesis of
a scheme for the systematic arrangement of
documents heralded in 1876 under the name
Decima\ Classification. This idea subsequently
sprouted in many more corresponding
classification schemes, such as Expansive
Classification of Cutter, Subject Classification of
Brown, Universal Decimal Classification of FID,
and Library of Congress Classification.
All these schemes were purely practical
classification schemes without any theoretical
foundation and designed with narrow and
limited objectives. These, however, 'greatly
contributed in the furtherance of library
classification. The need for a theory o f
classification became conspicuous after the
publication of Sayers Canons of Classification
(191 5)-a small book providing elementary
rudiments of the theory of library classification.
Thereafter appeared his monumental works
Introduction to Library Classification (1918) and
Manual of Library Classification (1926). The
works of Sayers changed the direction of the
discipline of library classification. Bliss added a
new feather to this by writing his two scholarly
works-Organisation of Knowledge and the
5

Systems of Sciences (1929) and Organisation of
Knowledge in Libraries and the subject
Approach to Books (1933) in which he also
expounded his 32 principles for library
classification. Thereby, a new idea was
propagated that the design of a scheme for
classification should be based on a sound
theoretical foundation. But, it was Dr SR
Ranganathan who sensed the nature of the
multidimensional universe of knowledge vis-a-vis
the changing needs of the users of the libraries.
A scholar of mathematics, logic and Hindu
philosophy, he easily visualised the required
parameters for a theory-based practical
classification and the way it was going to
benefit both the libraries and the information
centres and their users. He, therefofe first wrote
a monumental work, Five Laws of Library
Science (193 1) which enunciated the guidelines
for all library operations and services including
library classification. This work laid the
foundation for all his future works and theories
for library classification. The genesis of Five
Fundamental Categories, the terms Facets,
Focus, Phase, etc., changed the whole arena of
library classification a d resulted in, what may
be called the first revolution in the realm of
library classification. Thus the classificatory
concepts changed gradually from Enumerative
(7876) to Almost Faceted (1905) to Rigidly
Faceted (1933) to Freely Faceted Classification
(1952).

3.

COLLECTIVE EFFORTS

3.1

Classification Research Group

Stage I-Special Schemes: Till 1950s the
individual classificationists dominated the library
classification scenario. However, Bibliographic
Classification of Bliss and Colon Classification of
Ranganathan were viewed by the international
scholars as a mere theoretical rhetorics and
interesting curiosities. To them, these schemes
could jn no way be solutions for problems
created by the limited notational system and
inherited limitations of the existing schemes in
use like DOC and LC, for grappling the vast
plethora of the published literature. In this
backdrop, the Classification Research Group
(CRG), London, came into existence in 1952
with only a dozen of active members who

mainly were librarians of special libraries fully
conversant with the difficulties and travails in
the use of existing general classification
schemes. The long experience in the use of
these schemes became the focal point for CRG
to design the special scheme to meet the
demands of modern information users.
Consequently, the members of the CRG
produced innumerable schemes based on some
original ideas and techniques which influenced
the shape and direction of the trend of modern
classificatory research. The Group members
also utilised terms and techniques of Colon
Classification, such as Facet and Facet Analysis.
Whereas, the user of PMEST was more
conspicuous in the categories. Sequel to this,
many
faceted
special
schemes were
constructed by the members of the CRG, such
as-Soil and Earth Sciences; Classification for
Astronomy and also Faceted Classification-a
guide to the construction and use o f special
schemes by BC Viceroy; Metal Box Company's
Classification, Scheme for Food Technology and
Scheme for Health and Occupational Safety by
DJFoskett and Scheme for Music by EJ Coates.
JOEL Faraday, another important member of
CRG, propounded the concept of relational
operators, which he used with uniquely
definable items of knowledge termed as
isolates. The relations symbols inserted between
these isolates were termed as operators.

Stage II-General Classification Scheme:
The concept of special schemes could not yield
the desired results. The classificatory problems
remained the same as were initially during
Stage I. Again the solace was sought in the
construction of a New General Scheme. The
desirability of a new general classification was,
therefore, envisaged in the two conferences
held in England in 1957-Dorking Conference;
and Reference and Special Libraries Section
Conference. In 1962, NATO report Increasing
the Effectiveness o f Western Science appeared
which also recommended a new scheme of
classification for science and technology. NATO
Science Foundation awarded a grant of f5,000
to the Library Association to study the project.
Library Association entrusted this task to CRG.
In 1963 CRG's plan for research into a new
generat classification was formally launched.
Two research assistants-Mrs Helen Tomlinson
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technd, 1999,19(3)

1964-67 and Derek Austin 1967-68 were
appointed to work on this project. The result of
the project was addition of few new terms and
concepts in the classificatory terminology-such
as Artefacts-man-made or processed entities;
Mantefacts--Entities constructed by human
mind and the theory of integrative levels for the
arrangement of the entities.

3.2

International Conferences

The themes of discussions of the six
international
study
conferences
on
Classification
Research
held
between
1957-1997 are the indicators of the changing
requirements in library classification. These
conferences became the rallying forum to
highlight and project the challenges of scientific
and technological developments, the deluge of
published macro and micro literature and their
revolutionary impact on library classification.
The Dorking Conference (1957) examined and
evaluated the theories propounded by Or
Ranganathan to overcome the problems
resulting from the use of enumerative
classification. It resolved that the most helpful
form of classification scheme for information
retrieval is one which groups terms (isolate
ideas) into well-defined categories which can be
used independently to form compounds and
within which the terms (isolate ideas) can be
arranged in hierarchies. The Conference,
therefore, gave in positive terms the message
that the era of faceted classification has begun.

This change was also visible in the attempts
of FID to replace the Committee on
Classjfication Research with new objective
visualising the vital role it had to play in the
development of classification. In 1950, FID had
established the Committee on General Theory
of Classification (FID/CA) which was replaced
by Committee on Classification Research
(FID/CR) in 1961. In 1986, it was replaced by
Committee on Classification Research for
(FID/CR)
in
Knowledge
Organisation
accordance with the contemporaneous theories
and principles in the discipline of library
classification and developments in scientific and
technological fields. Accordingly, the scope of
the Committee was also expanded to promote,
DESIDOC Bulktin of Inf Techml, 1999,19(3)

sponsor and engage research in the field of
classification as it applies to all aspects of
knowledge organisation in storage and retrieval
systems and all areas of information handling.

4,

ERA OF COMPUTER AND
INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY

During 1 9 5 0 ~rapid
~ strides in scientific and
technological advancements took place when
new areas like space science became the
subject for interdisciplinary research.
The
natural outcome of this was a deluge of
literattlre containing multifaceted micro
subjects. As already described, the various
solutions were put forward by individual
scholars as well as professional groups to face
the onslaughts, of the new knowledge
explosion. Ranganathan thought the solution
lies in a self-perpetuating analytico-synthetic
scheme; CRG found the solution in designing
special schemes, while others thought to use
something which is not classification and
experimented with various systems of word
combinations. Mortimer Taube even thought
that his uniform system would solve all indexing
problems without using subject classification.
But the indexing systems had to take help of the
thesauri, while the CRG finally decided to
design a new general classification scheme.
However, with the advent of computer
technology and other electronic systems and
their unlimited potentialities for providing faster
a d better information services and handling
library operations, the library scientists had to
undertake entirely new exercises to cope with
the demands of the newly emerging
technologies.
The new action plan was
therefore, activated in two ways: (i) to modify
the existing library techniques to suit the needs
of new technology; or (ii) to develop new
methods and techniques on the basis of the
demands of computer and other electronic
systems. In so far as library classification is
concerned the classificationists had either to
experiment the extent to which the existing
schemes with or without changes and
modifications can be used in the information
storage and retrieval systems or if new schemes
need to be designed for the said purpose.
7

4.1

The Existing Schemes

The existing schemes have undergone many
tests and experiments for their compatibility
with inforination storage and retrieval systems.
The following are some examples:

4.1.1 Faceted Classification
(i) Universal Decimal Classification
As early as 1934, in the general introduction
to the full English Edition of UDC-BS 1000, Vol.
I Pt. I, it was argued that the UOC was suitable
for mechanical sorting. In 1948, the Royal
Society's Working Party on Mechanical
Indexing had noted that 'the UDC system (is)
the only (form of indexing the contents of a
paper) worked out in detail for the whole of
science. This is ready for machine coding.'
However, it was only in the middle of 1960s
that some pioneering work started to test the
viability of UDC as an indexing languge for
computerized control and processing of
information in all fields o f knowledge. The first
attempt in this regard was made by M Rigby
who presented in Elsinore Conference (1964)
the
printout
of
Meteorological and
Ceoastrophysical Titles that has started the use
of computer for author and subject indexing
(UNIDEK).'
However,
the first
online
bibliographical retrieval system using the UDC
was demonstrated in 196768 by Robert R
Freeman and Pauline Atherton who then
observed that 'there is no longer any doubt that
the UDC can be used as the indexing language
in a mechanised system .... in either batchprocessing or interactive .mode.' A more
complete survey on the use of computers with
the UDC was compiled by Rigby in 1974 which
described about sixty empirical and operational
systems in fifteen countries and four
international projects.'
(ii) Colon Classification (CC)
Doc. Finder:To Ranganathan, the term computer
was improvised to do calculation. In finding
documents there is no calculation. Therefore, the
term computer is not appropriate. Further, the
efficiency of finding documents will beqome
greater if the electronic machinery used is the

special purpose Doc. Finder instead of the
general purpose computer:

Experiments Conducted in DRTC: The DRTC
ResearchCell started conducting experiments on
the use of electronic machinery in document
finding starting from May 1968. One of the
objectives o f fhe series of experiments
conducted was to examine the feasibility of using
a conventional general purpose computer in
document finding system using a freely faceted
version of CC.' Experiments were also carried out
to design a special purpose computerised
document searching and called Doc. Findeb
Number of papers were written on these
experiments and published in Library Science
with a slant to Documentation, Vol. 5 and 6. In a
paper published in 1970s about information
retrieval system based on CC described a set of
fifteen programmes which provide for storing and
updating a reference catalogue, a classification
schedule, an alphabetical index to the schedul&
and a catalogue of user profiles.'
Michael Shepherd of the School of
Computer Science, Canada, also conducted a
set of experiments in 1981 to determine the
suitability of CC as a basis for automated
analysis, representation and retrieval of primary
information from the full text of documents. He,
however, concluded stating that the CG-based
systems6 did not perform significantly better
than the other systems. However, Michael A
Shepherd and CR Watters in a paper presented
in International Conference on Ranganathan in
1985,
demonstrated that
the
recent
developments in the area of relational database
management system (DBMS) are making it
feasible to take the advantage of faceted
classification, such as CC for information
retrieval. The purpose of this paper was to
demonstrate that, in addition tb traditional
Boolean retrieval, relational DBMS can provide
sophisticated retrieval based or( the faceted
structure of subjects. It can readily provide
answers to such question as: What are the
matter isolates of a given PersOnality? what is
the facet string for a particular document? To
them the use of such a relational structure may
even be able to provide the basis for common
retrieval
language
as
suggested
by
Ranganathan'.
DESIDOC Buktin of Inf Technd, I 999,19(3)

Faceted Principle: Several empirical studies have
also been conducted to prove that the faceted
principle propounded by Ranganathan is
extremely useful in computerised information
system. This is evident from the works of Winfried
Godert and Hemlata lyer (1 991) .
Godert illustrated the use of faceted
principle in online retrieval system. For this
purpose, he adapted Buchanan's Short
Classification Scheme for Zoology and the
notation of the classification scheme as is used
in Library and Information Service Abstracts
(LISA). On this basis, Godert demonstrated with
examples the possibilities of using faceted
classification in online retrieval system and
found that the faceted classification systems in
some respect are superior to other techniques
of online retrieval as far as facet and concept
analysis is combined with an expressive
notational system in order to guide a form of
retrieval which will use Boolean operators (for
combining the facets of one special citation
order) truncation for retrieving hierarchically
different sets of document$.
An experiment of comparative retrieval
strategies was conducted by lyer, where the
faceted search model was compared with two
other types of searches: Quorum Function
Search and Online Boolean Search. The
retrieval results indicated that the faceted model
search perform at a higher level of precision
and recall than the other two search models. It
was also found that structuring the queries
using Ranganathan's theory is helpful in the
process of searching and retrievaL9

4.1.2 Enumerative Classification
(i) Library of Congress Classification (LCC)
The Library of Congress Classification is now
available in US MARC Format. With this the US
MARC format for Classification Data joins the
family
of
MARC
(Machine Readable
Cataloguing) formats. The machine readable
format for classification data has been
developed to allow for communication of
classification records between systems and to
provide a standard for the storage of
classification data in the computer. The format
was developed between 1988 and 1990 in

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1999,19(3)

close consultation with two major classification
schemes in use in the United States-Library of
Congress Classification and Dewey Decimal
Classification (DDC). By 1994, about two-thirds
of the LCC schedules had been converted to
machine readable form. It was expected that
the entire conversion will be completed by the
end of 1995. The Cataloguing Distribution
Service will also distribute the records as a
MARC distribution service arid is exploring a
CD-ROM product. Once all the schedules are
converted in the US MARC classification
format, it would be possible to search across
the classes enabling the user to have access to
a wider range of materiaL Moreover,
incorporating classification data in online
systems would result in the addition of rich
subject terminology for online searching.
The US MARC format for classification data
contains
specifications
for
converting
classification data into machine readable form
for communicating and storing classification
data. US MARC classification records provide
the authority for classification numbers and
their captions. Each classification number of
caption is given its own US MARC classification
record, which may include not only the number
and caption, but also any notes or other
information associated with it."

(ii) Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC)
Online Projects
In January 1984, a research team in the
OCLC Office of Research undertook the DDC
online project. The project was supported by
the Council on Library Resources, Forest Press,
and OCLC. The project had the following
objectives :

+
+
+

to use the consensus of DDC experts to
determine
strategies
for
searching,
browsing and displaying DDC in an
experimental online atalogue;
to implement and demonstrate these
strategies in this catalogue;
to test the effectiveness of DDC as a
searcher's tool for subject access, browsing
and display in this catalogue; and

t to evaluate and disseminate the research
findings.

The project team incorporated records from
DDC 19 Schedules and Relative lndex into an
experimental online catalogue. The libraries
which provided machine readable cataloguing
records to the experimental online catalogue's
database in selected subject areas are-library
of Congress (Management); New York State
Library (History and Geography); Mathematics
Library of the University of Illinois at
Champaign-Urbana (Mathematics); and Public
Library of Columbus and Franklin Country
(Recreation). Users of the experimental online
catalogue were library-patrons of these four
libraries who also volunteered to take part in
online retrieval experiments to test the
effectiveness of DDC as an online searcher's
tool for subject access, browsing and display".
The principle investigator for the project was
Karen Markey, the research scientist of OCLC.
Results of the experiments were examined at a
meeting held in Dublin, Ohio in January 1986,
in which 30 invited participants reviewed the
results of the research. The final report of the
DDC online project is available from OCLC.
Results of the online retrieval experiments using
this experimental catalogue demonstrated that
DDC provided new and fruitful subject
searching capabilities that were not possible
through the alphabetical and keyword searching
permitted by existing online catalogue.

(iii) DORS-DDC Online Retrieval System
An experimental classification interface
called the Dewey Online Retrieval System
(DORS) was developed at the University of
California, Los Angeles, under the direction of
Professor Elaine Svenonius. DORS consisted of
four components:
(a) a database comprising the DDC 700 (Arts)
Schedules DDC-20;
(b) a database of bibliographic records;
(c) a database of Library of Congress Subject
Headings (LCHS); and
(d) a Chain-Index to the schedules which was
created automatically by extracting
significant terms from the schedules and the
DDC Relative lndex and then constructing
them into chains based on their hierarchical
relationships.

DORS was developed to conform to the
following specifications:

+

interface should
enhancement;

r

interface should support call number
searching;

+
+

interface should support global browsing;

1)

provide

vocabulary

interface should enable the users to
investigate easily and effectively through
the classification; and
interface should be compatible with other
methods of subject access.

Given a database of blbliographic records
(titles) that contain both LCSH headings and
DDC numbers, DORS facilitates switching from
an LCSH search to a DDC search and
vice-versa. However, the usefulness of DORS as
online catalogues is yet to be tested".

4.2

New Schemes and Techniques

The character and direction of library
classification research underwent a change after
the emergence of computer technology during
1960s. It became the core area of discussions
in local, national and international meets,
seminars and other related platforms. The first
important confabulation in this regard was held
in a conference held in London (1963) where
CRG's plan for research into a new general
classification scheme was formally launched.
One of the important guidelines stipulated was
that 'the new general classification scheme
should be for manual retrieval of books on
shelves and entries in indexes, but it should aim
to reach the maximum possible, compatibility
with machine retrieval systems.' At the Second
International
Study
Conference
on
Classification held in Elsinore, Denmark, in
1964, automatic classification was discussed at
length to understand the utility and viability of
the automated classification systems. The final
conclusion that emerged from these discussions
was that 'automated classification includes:
(i) the mathematical derivation of classification
schedules (the work of classificationist) and
(ii) the automated assignment of documents to
categories (the work of classing which is the
work of the classifier), regardless whether the
categories were automatically derived or were
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1999,19(3)

chosen from a classification scheme previously
devised.' Since then, automatic classification
has been the subject of debate and discussions
in almost all the international conferences held
in 1975,1982,1991 and 1997.

The English Electric Company's Classification
for Engineering was the largest faceted scheme
designed by the members of CRG. The first
edition of this scheme appeared in 1958 and
the third edition in 1961. With the advent of
computer technology, the scheme was
accordingly revised and published in 1970
entitled The Thesaurofacet: A Thesaurus and
Faceted Classification for Engineering and
Related Subjects. Thesaurofacet is a scheme in
which classification scheme is combined with
fully structural thesaurus as Index. The
classification section displays the universe of
subjects displaying hierarchical relations while
the thesaurus section displays related terms,
broad terms and narrow terms. In the
classificatory terminology thereby a new term
Thesaurus was added by Aitchison who
constructed the scheme1'. However, research
on automatic document classification started
during 1960s according to which document
surrogates may be grouped using the counting
and matching operations of the computer.

4.2.4 Concept of Switching Language
During 1970s, a pilot project BSO was
launched by UNISIST with which eminent
library science scholars like El Coates, I.
Dahlberg, DJ Foskett, etc., were associated. As
a result, the Broad System of Ordering (BSO)
was designed to function as a switching
language or link language or intermediate
language between two information systems of a
network using different indexing languages. It
led to the publication of Broad System of
Ordering-Schedules and Index in 1978. An
expanded version of the BSO is now available
on computer disc. However, the scheme has
not proved a success. In her recent article, Dr
Dahlberg narrates the incidents of this project
giving reasons as to why the scheme could not
be used as a switching language and remained
only a theoretical proposition. Thus the scheme
eventually ended up on the Coate's BSOIS.
BSO is a faceted general classification
system or a coded classification of about 4000
subjects- which are arranged at three levelssubject areas, subject fields and subject field
divisions. The scheme is greatly influenced by
Ranganathan's ideas (For detail See Library
Classification: Theory and Principles by P
Dhyani, Wishwa Prakashan, N.D., 1998, pp.
354-359, 263-63).

42.5
One such system was developed at Harvard
University by Salton and his associates who
conducted a wide variety of term-based
document clustering experiments and named
the system as Salton's Magical Automated
Retrieval Technique (SMART). The system stores
document texts and matches the words and
phrases in search queries to words in the text.

4.2.3 Keywod Classification
Sparck-Jonesand her associates developed a
keyword classification in which keywords are
grouped automatically. The system was
experimented at the Cambridge University
Computer Laboratory. The System is based on
the theory of Clustering or Cloumps".

Information Coding C/assification
VCC)

Dr Dahlberg too has developed a Universal
Ordering System for disciplines and domains
that
provides
for
cross
disciplinary
combinations and domain interaction with a
potential to function as a switching language.
According to her it can be used as a switching
language between many different languages.lb
Dahlberg has also prepared in 1980 Guidelines
for the establishment of compatibility between
information language in social sciences for
UNESCO which is an unpublished document
wherein she stressed that interesting results in
harmonisation have been reached in the field of
energy and medicine but at the price of huge
financial efforts.

4.2.6 Reference Language
However, according to J Maniez, the
celebrated French coordinator of ISKO, a

DESlDOC Bulktin of Inf Tecbnd, 1999,19(3)

switching language should fulfil three main
conditions:
(a) to allow for bidirectional convertibility with
all information languages Lx-L and SL-Lx;
(b) to reach the same level of specificity as the
most specific information language, so that
the loss of information should be minimized
in the course and the double translating
process;
(c) as a standard, to react naturally to a natural
language and consequently, to be artificially
coded.
To him, no information language can
provide bidirectional convertibility with all
other information languages. He, therefore,
suggests the concept of Reference Language
which has to fulfil all the requirements of a
switching language except the condition of
bidirectional convertibility. The process of
conversion in Reference Language is bilateral
and unidirectional as with the concordance
tables in which the two column tables establish
the closest possible corresponding index terms
between A and B, but the number of tables and
conversion programmes amounts only to that of
the different languages, i.e., 12 tables for 12
languages. However, to Maniez the role of this
reference tool will differ depending on whether
the choice of the type of information language
take place at the starting point or at the final
point of the conversion. If the concordance
tables are oriented from the Reference
Language to the various information languages,
then Reference Language would be nothing but
a classification scheme and if the concordance
tables are oriented from the information
languages to the Reference Language then it
would be a universal thesaurus. Then all the
indexing formulas would automatically be
converted into a general language, i.e, IL-RL
and the queries should themselves be
expressed.in RL. (Maniez, 1997, p. 222).
In a seminar on the compatibility of
Information Languages held in Warsaw on
13-15 September 1995, about 25 papers were
presented. The scholars provided various
solutions and theories relating to compatibility
of indexing languages. For example to
G Riesthuis of Netherlands there are two simple

solutions (i)not to use a controlled information
language at all; and (ii) to get everyone to use
the same information language. Whereas to
Barbara Sosinska-Kalata of Poland, the UDC as
an international standard for knowledge
organisation in bibliographic databases and
library catalogues is the best language.

5.

CONCLUSION

If we look retrospectively at the fundamental
basis of classification for the helpful and logical
arrangement or clustering of documents from
Dewey era to computer age, categorisation of
universe of subjects has been the core factor.
Both human beings as well as machines use
one or the other form of classificatory language
for
the purpose of classification or
categorisation. As already observed with the
advent of computer technology varied methods
have been evolved and experimented to
provide a proper and helpful classification
system for use in information storage and
retrieval system. However, the problem of
compatibility still remains the potent subject for
further research. Many of the scholars are still of
the view that 'there is no substitute for
classification' and the human classification has
all the advantages over computer technology or
that computer is not intelligent-it is an idiot. It
is not able to understand the meaning of terms,
nor to appreciate the relationship between
them",
To Ranganathan, 'classification involves
judgement-judgement of the subject of the
document in all its facets and arrays manifest in
it.' Therefore, 'classification will have to be done
by human, until the computer can have the
faculty of judgement built into it. Even then can
the computer be made to do research in
classification."'
As is evident, Artificial
lntelligence (Al) is superimposed in a computer
by Natural Intelligence (Nl). Its raison d'etre or
very existence depends on NI. In the
construction of a scheme of classification the
classificationist is free to use any and many
principles and theories which he thinks are
helpful to the users of the libraries. No such
freedom can be exercised in designing a coding
system for information storage and retrieval
system as the freedom of the classificationist is
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf rechnol, 1999,19(3)

conditioned by the limitations of the computer.
Similarly, a classifier knows what is written in a
document which he is classifying, who are its
users, and what local variations the class
number of a document requires to reach to its
readers quickly and expeditiously. Such
intelligence, judgement, sensitivity and personal
touch is sinequa-non to classification, which a
computer can never acquire. May be in future
some universally suitable information coding
system is evolved. Whatever be the extent of
experiments and technological researches in
this regard the traditional schemes of
classification would stay as an important tool
even in the new information storage and
retrieval systems. The relevance of classification
is eternal.

REFERENCES
1. Rigby, Malcolm. Standardisation for
Classification
in
Computerised
documentation systems. In Proceedings of
International Study conference o n
classification Research (Elsinore),
Copenhagen, 1965. pp. 425-539.
2. Dahlberg, Ingetrant. Major developments in
classification. In Advances in Librarianship,
Vol, 7. 1977. p.77.
3. Ranganathan, S. Doc-Finder. Lib%.
5(4), 298.

1968,

4. Neelameghan, A. Use of machine in
document finding. DRTC Seminar, 6, Paper
DC., 1968.
5. Gupta, BSS. Programme package for
document fmding. Lib.Sc. 1970, 7(2), 25-35.
6. Shepherd, Michael A. Text passage retrieval
based on colon classification. ). Doc., 1981,
37(1), 25-35.

7. Shepherd, Michael A & Watters, CR.
Implementationof facet-basedretrieval using

a relationaldataba'se management system. In
Proceedings of lnternational Conference on
Ranganathan's Philosophy-Assessment
Impact and Relevance 1985, ND, 1986. pp.
649-57.
8. Godert, Winfried. Facet classification in
online retrieval. Int Class., 1991, 18(2),
98-109.
9. lyer, Hemalafa. Subject representation and
entropy. Int Class. 1992,19(1), 18.
10. Guenther, Rebecca S. Library of Congress
classification in the US MARC format., Know
Org, 1994, 21(4), 199-202.
11. Drabenstott, Karen Markey. Experiences with
online catalogues in the USA using a
classification system as a subject searching
tool. Advances in knowledge organisation.
Vol.1. lndeks Verlag, 1990. pp. 36-37.
12. Liu, Songgui & Svenonius, Elainc. DORS:
DDC online retrieval system. LRTS, 1991,
35(4), 359-75.
13. Aitchison, Jean.Thesaurofacet. I. Doc., 1970,
26(3), 188-203
14. Jones, Karen Sparck. Automatic classification
for information retrieval. Butterworth,
London, 1971, pp. 55-56.

15. Maniez, Jacques. Database merging and the
compatibility of indexing languages, Know.
Org., 1997, 24(4), 2 13-23.
16. Dahlberg, Ingetrant. ICC-Information
coding classification-Principles,
structure
and application possibilities. Int. Class., 1982,
9(2), 87-93.
17. Buchanan, Brian. Theory o f library
classification Clive' Bingley, London, 1979.
Pp.110-124.
18. Ranganathan, S. Prolegomena to library
classification. Ed. 3, Reprint 1989, SRELS,
Bangalore, 1967, pp. 544-46.

-

Dr (Mrs) P Dhyani is presently residing at 4-la-3, jawahar Nagar, jaipur 302 004.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1999,19(3)

13

