DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vd. 19, No. 3, May 1999, pp. 15-21
O 1999, DESIDOC

Technical Services in the Electronic
Information Environment
MP Satija
Abstract
Technical services are as a mix of skilled and professional jobs (done mostly
behind the screen) to provide user services in libraries. Technical services
have been with the libraries throughout their evolution from the days of clay
tablets, papyrus to paper and virtual libraries. Technical services have
evolved making use of available technology of the day. In the days of all
powerful and era-defining information technology, the technical services are
still necessary to help libraries to accomplish their mission of connecting
users with the needed information. New technology affords splendid
opportunity to extend and augment intensively and improve qualitatively
the library services to the users. OPACs not only haw tremendous capacity
but equally versatile powerful searching capabilities and mechanism.
Classification has many new roles to play in designing, searching and
managing electronic databases. This paper cites Electronic Dewey as an
example to illustrate the role of IT in editing and publishing classification
schedules. At the end some unsolved issues have been identified and
emerging trends in technical services are enumerated.

1.

LIBRARIES AND TECHNICAL
SERVICES

Library technical services can be defined as
a mix of skilled and professional jobs (done as
homework mostly behind the screen) to provide
user services in libraries. Bibliographic control
constitutes the essence of technical services.
Cataloguing and classification in turn form inner
core of bibliographic control processes. Use of
information technology (IT) in libraries has
indeed disturbed this distinction. It has often
been heard, mostly from those dazzled by the
power of IT, that classification and cataloguing
have become redundant in the days of
c~mputerised information retrieval and
information networks. It is like feeling and
saying IT and computers constitute librarianship.
DESIDoC Bulletin of lnf Technol, 1999,19(3)

These technophiles overtook the basic fact that
IT is simply a tool, not the contents of library
services. A tool does not define a profession,
though could be central to it. Even today,
catalogue is a tool central to library service and
management, Indeed a computer catalogue is
bit more than its outer form. Computer is not
the mission but a technological power to
accomplish it. Physical plant, its outlook, shape
of its wares may change, but value and mission
of library and information centres remain the
same that is to provide timely information to
those who need it. Library is more of a process
than a place. To provide the right information in
right quantity at the right time in a costeffective way has been and will remain the
function of libraries.
15

Both the librarians and library users have been interested in the catalogue as an information
retrieval tool irrespective of its form. However, the objectives set out by CA Cutter as far back as 1876
are still being attempted by librarians throughout the world. The librarians in the automated
environment are required to develop more effective methods of service to facilitate better access
point and multidimension searches in the library holdings. Dr Sewa Singh throws light on these areas
in his article. M r Rajesh Singh's paper addresses such problems in cataloguing in two different
technological contexts-printed card catalogue and online catalogue.
The fundamental purpose of a library is to see that its resources are utilised for maximum help to
information seekers. Classification and cataloguing are the two techniques designed to facilitate its use.
These help to expedite the fullest possible revelation of knowledge stored in a library tollection. For
total retrieval strategy, a complementary approach is essential for satisfactory revelation of the
contents of the collection. Support is, therefore, necessary from alternative means of accessing
information, such as catalogues, bibliographies, Subject indexes with alternative subject approaches
and reader's advisory services in guiding the user through the collection. Any system, either manual or
mechanical, shoutd be able to display a great deal of resources on any subject and thus save time in
allowing purposive browsing and searching for information.
Atthough researches in this aqa have been going on for the last two decades, still there is no sign
that automatic procedures are sufficiently developed to replace manual procedures. Most of these
findings lack theoretical iustification. In document classification, it is necessary to recognise the
inter-relationship of terms and keywords. Then devise a mechanism in algorithm-design to compute
similarities between keywords. This is a tough job. Though several attempts have been made at
automatic technique the main barrier still remains the same, i.e., the lack of complete theory of
knowledge representation. This is the area for research with great promise.
It is, therefore, more befitting to conclude this discussion by quoting Arthur Maltby which holds

good even today. Maltby states: "The real issue confronting is to find a constructive and viable
alternative to classification that can serve most library situations so well-for despite the difficulties
classification is a good servant." This stands equally good for cataloguing too.

Dr NR Satyanarayana is Head of the Department of Library and Information Science, Lucknow
.University, Lucknow.

Table 2: Some features of the 2lst century libraries

Tool

Feature
Compact storage

Digital form, CD-ROM, DVD (Digital Video Dix-has 13 times
more storage capacity than a CD-ROM)

Ease of reproduction

Scanners; computer copying

Remote access: removal of time
and space barriers

Networks

Non-linear, multidimensional
interactive texts

Multimedia and hypermedia

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

In brief,' OPACs are compact, efficient,
economic and powerful in bibliographic
control. With the OPACs, keyword searching
has. gained popularity. Another advantage is
that many variant forms of a heading can be
retrieved, e.g., 'University Delhi' and 'Delhi
University' both can be retrieved with two
keywords 'Delhi' and 'University'. Ideally an
online catalogue should allow the retrieval of a
set of headings and then permits all headings in
that set to be changed in the preferred form.
OPACs allow enormously enhanced and
economic access through multitudes of access
points.
There is no need to place restriction on the
length of the entry or on the number of subject
headings anymore. Technology has an
important role to play in determining what
could be included in the catalogue record. It is
now possible and viable to add extended
annotations, or table of contents, or even
back-ofhe-book index to the catalogue entry.
An online caialogue works as a classified and a
dictionary catalogue;
and also as a
alphabeticoclassed catalogue, simultaneously.
It is rightly said that with OPACs the libraries
have regained some of the advantages of
classified catalogues. Class number searching or
shelf order br~wsingon the computer screen is
now possible in all online systems. It has
become, in fact, a ptandard feature now. Entries
can be displayed in a strictly classified order.
This will collocate information distributed in
several different physical locations and can also
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1999,19(3)

be made to indicate the status of the
document, viz., whether out on loan, or still
under process; or missing from the library or
transferred to any other location. In addition,
the subject headings in indirect form, e.g.,
Engineering-Civil Engineering-Bridges can be
used with much advantage. These can thus
work as alphabeticoclassed catalogues.
Above all, an item can be assigned more
than one class number; or an entire collection
may be classified by more than one
classification system. For example, a whole
library or a part of it could be classified both by
the DDC and the CC; and thus could be
browsed on the screen in two ways.
Simultaneous use of two systems on a given
collection though bit costly could be quite
useful in comparative classification and
research. Easy reclassification of an existing
library is another advantage.

4.

USES OF CLASSIFICATION IN
ONLINE DATABASES

The various uses of classification in online
system were listed
long back by Elaine
Sven~nius:~
In areas of knowledge, admitting of natural
taxonomies, classification can be used to
improve recall and precision and to save the
time of the user in keying in search terms. In
other areas of knowledge, perspective
hierarchies can be used to contextualise the
meaning of vague search terms, enabling the
computer to stimulate in part the negotiations
of a search request carried out by reference
17

librarians. Classification in online systems can
be used to provide a structure for meaningful
browsing. Classification can be used to
provide a framework for the representation
and retrieval o f non-bibliographic
information, e.g., statistical data. Automatic
classification can be used to collocate
citations in ways not possible in manual
systems, e.g., by similarity of linguistic
features, to achieve compatibility of retrieval
languages by serving as a mediating or
switching language.
Lois Mai Chan lists some additional uses of
classification in computerised database^.^
Call number can be used effectively in
retrieving large sets of related records on a
particular topic, area, form, time or language. In
a faceted classification searches could be made
by any of the facet. Since long, libraries in
Finland and Switzerland have been using UDC
with many advantages in their computerised
cataJogues.'
Call number searches combined with verbal
headings can locate data from many aspects
and viewpoints. Such a highly manoeuvred
searching may not be possible in traditional
catalogues. Such versatility is useful for SDI
services and for downloading subsets from
large or cumulative databases.
Classification schemes with hierarchical
notation, such as DDC, UDC and CC are
designed for shelf arrangement as well as for
subject retrieval. Built in hierarchy allows
moving up and down the chain to move to
precisely specific topics: to move from the bole
to the newly sprouted leaf and vice-versa.
Hierarchy allows expansion, refinement or even
negotiating a search. We can construct virtual
multidimensional
classifications.
Again,
according to Chan: "with computer capabilities
particularly hypertext, the development of
poly-hierarchical
and
multidimensional
classifications
and
post
coordinate
classifications appear promising".'
CK Ramaiah informs that a call number
added to a hypermedia catalogue "helps the
users in locating the information and also the
~hvsicallocations of the books in different

floors showing the pictures of those floor,
stacks, e t ~ " . ~

5.

COMPUTER EDITING OF
CLASSIFICATION SCHEDULES

Conversely speaking, IT has come handy in
editing and production of classification
schedules. Computers and other elements of
information technology find varied, vast and
valuable applications in editing classifications in
machine readable form. For example, since
1994, the DDC has been made available in
CD-ROM version. For this a Unix-based Editorial
Support System (ESS) was developed by
lnforonics for the Forest Press in 1984."
The ESS format is closer to the MARC
format. The Dewey for Windows (DtW), the
CD-ROM edition of DDC2l (1996), provides a
Windows interface for the DDC. In the
electronic version, upward and downward
hierarchy has been added to each schedule and
table record which provides disciplinary context
of a number and shows major subdivisions of a
number. It is easy to move up and down the
hierarchy by highlighting and clicking. The
relative index has been augmented by
additional free tax terms; and Library of
Congress Subject Headings (LCSHs) have been
added to it.
The DDC databases at the Library of
Congress today serves as the basis for standard
English language print and electronic. editions.
Translated editions are also made from this
database. It is extremely helpful to understand
the use of class numbers in various ways, and to
evolve an end user browsing mechanism using
amplified DDC captions with DDC numbers.
Translations are used to develop multilingual
browser with Dewey notation as the common
language."
Printouts from this database are made
available for discussions at the regular meetings
of the Editorial Policy Committee. Members of
this committee can now interact via the
Internet. A prototype is available at the Dewey
Web page : http://www.oclc.org/fp/.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technd, 1999,19(3)

6.

PROBLEMS OF USING OLD
TOOLS IN NEW
ENVIRONMENT

Our traditional subject access tools, such as
classification and subject headings lists were
designed for manual catalogues. Economically it
is unviable to have new catalogues independent
of these MARC records. The tools, such as the
DDC or the Sears List, have simply been
transported to the OPAC environment.
According to Chan, studies show that users are
not faring well in subject searches in OPACs.
However, these fools provide a springboard for
augmenting searches. She sugests:12
One road for such improvement is to load
features of ciassification schemes into online
catalogue to provide alternative routines to
catalogue records to enhance vocabulary of
the catalogue and to provide users with a
map of how topics are inter-related. A second
route is improvements to LCSH and the
policies governing its use. The legacy of
classification schemes and subject headings
can be incrementally improved and adapted
in the online environment.

7.

and subject headings-be used to control the
great volume of information on the Web?

8.

In the West the technology is highly
unstable. As in other matters so in library
automation, India is a country of great paradox.
There are libraries no better than a jumbled
store house of books where accessioning is the
only technical processing to the most advanced
use of technology available anywhere in the
world. But at the moment, a large number of
libraries are through their first pangs of
transition. Some of the .trends can be easily
vis~alised:~~~~
P Card catalogues are beibg frozen and

discontinued.

o

More and more libraries will get automated,
though virtual and print libtaries will coexist.

P Very little original cataloguing will be done

locally relying mostly on copy cataloguing;
large scale out-sourcing of technical services
may also be resorted to.

o

More librariesare using multimedia interactive
catalogues for various purposes.

P More regional area networks and subject

networks are being established for pooling
and sharing of resources, processes and
experiences.

SUBJECTACCESS TO
INTERNET

The World Wide Web has emerged as a
gold mine for subject access to information and
documents on the Internet. Librarians are at
work to bring some order to the chaos of
information available on this information super
highway in order to improve subject access to
it.13

CURRENT TRENDS

a

CD-ROM or now DVD (Digital Video Disc)
databases will become popular especially in
small and remote libraries, and in the Third
World countries libraries still strugglingto have
reliable telecommunication system and
services.

o

More and more non-print materials are being
acquired. in libraries. barge percentage of
acquisition budgets is getting spent on
electronic media, and large amount of
budgets earmarked for buying access to
commercial databases on networks.

o

Technology will be used to add class number
and other unique numbers to digitised
material and hypermedia.

1. How can the subject retrieval tools found on
the Web adapted for use in library
catalogues?

o

Hierarchical classifications and subject
headings are being inter-linked to provide
intersecting searches.

2. How can the traditional tools for subject
retrieval in library catalogues-classification

0 Navigation tools based on broader outlines of

There is no tradition of cataloguing or
classification for the Web documents which is
an uncontrolled but exponentially growing
source. Mostly one has to rely on automated
tools for subject access, especially the keyword
access to full text documents. Chan pointedly
identifies the following two questions grouping
for answers in the new matrix."

DESIDoC Bulktin of lnf Technol, 1999,19(3)

knowledge in libraries are being developed.
19

o On the other hand traditional classifications
will be adapted to organise and mine
information on the Net.

a

Formatting of classification schedules is being
improved to carry more information in the
form of extended notes, instructions and
improved terminology.

0 In fi~ture,there may be two subject access

systems: one for the indexers/cataloguers, and
the other for the end users.
0 Reclassification and switching over to a new

system is on the increase. Automation
providesa splendid opportunity to switch over
to a better system without many hassles faced
in the days of card catalogues (Title is retrieved
from the database and the new class number is
assigned on the computer screen. Later the
spine level of the book is changed). A linked
question is the retrospective conversion of old
record into machine readable format. It is
indeed a formidable task for which local
policies have to be formulatedwhether to do it
or not. If yes, then how to do it.

information. There is a growing need to
organise and retrieve subject information on the
Internet. Aspects of traditional classification are
being explored to use them in the new system
and set up. Reciprocally, the subject access
tools of the lnternet may be adapted for use ir,
the traditional libraries. Technical services will
continue to play their supportive role and
know-how details in helping the libraries to
accomplish their humane. and cultural mission
of acquiring, organising, dissemination and
preserving knowledge for progress of the
society and welfare of its citizens.

REFERENCES
1.

Younger, Jennifer, et a/. Technical services
organisation. In Technical services today
and tomorrow, Ed. 2, edited by Michael
Gorman. Libraries Unlimited, Littleton,
CO~O,
1998, pp. 165-82.

2.

Gorman, Michael. Technical services today
and tomorrow, Ed. 2. Libraries Unlimited,
Littleton, Colo, 1998. p. 201.

In OPACs more access points and less
description will become the norm. To do this,
cataloguing codes will have to be revised.

3.

Buckland, Michael. Redesigning library
services. ALA, Chicago, 1992. p.6.

4.

Ibid. pp.9-17.

o Catalogues will be mountedon the Internetor

5.

Svenonius, Elaine. Use of classification in
online retrieval. Lib Res and Tech Sen:
1983, 27(1), 76-80.

6.

Chan, Lois Mai. Classification: Present and
future. Cat & Classif Quarterly, 1995,21(2),
5-17.

7.

Satija, MP. FID-88 Preconference seminar
on computer application of UDC. Int
Classif, 1988, 15(3), 149-50.

8.

Chan, Lois Mai. Op.cit p.11.

9.

Ramaiah, CK. Multimedia systems in
libraries and their applications. DESIDOC
Bull of Inf Technol, 1998, 18(6), 35.

o

on regional and national networks. Catalogues
will be integrated with other databases in the
library.

o

9.

A major problem confronting libraries to be
faced in near future is how to integrate all the
databases housed or accessible in a library
into a single user friendly system with a single
interface.

CONCLUSION

Technical services have come a long way in
libraries. Procedures and then practices
pari-passu with the media and tools available
have changed. The mission remains the sameto connect the user with the right information in
the most efficient way. In the online
environment the value of classification as a tool
of retrieval has been greatly enhanced. It
complements rather than duplicates the
function of subject headings. Classification
tends to play many new and more effective
roles in the electronic and networked

10. Finni, John ] & Pauline, Peter j. The Dewey
Decimal Classification enters the computer
age: Developing the DDC database and
editorial support system. Int Cataloguing,
1987, 16(4), 46-48.

11. Beal, Julianne. Dewey for Windows. In
Dewey decimal classification and
international perspetives. Ed. 21, edited by
DESlDOC Bulktin of Inf T e d , d , 1999,19(3)

Lois Mai Chan & Joan S Mitchell. Forest
Press/OCLC, Albany, NY, 1997. pp.29-42.
12. Chan, Lois Mai, et 'a/. Subject cataloguing
and classification. In Technical services
today and tomorrow, Ed. 2, edited by
Michael Gorman. Libraries Unlimited,
Engkwocd, Cola, 1998. p.107.
13. Kao, Mary Liu, Cataloguing and
classification for library technicians. The
Haworth Press, New York, 1995.
pp.130-32.

14. Chan, Lois Mai, op.cit. p. 108.
15. Kao, Mary Liu, op.cit pp.130-32.
76. Chan, Lois Mai. Classification present and
future. Cat & Classif Quarter?, 1995, 21(2),
16.

17. Cochrance, Pauline Atherton. New roles
for classification i n libraries and
information networks. Cat & Classif
Quarterly, 1995,21(2), 4.
18. Ramaiah, CK, op.cit., pp.25-40.

Dr MP Safija is lecturer at CND University, Amritsar
decse-gndu%yahoo.tom

DESIDOC Bulktin of Inf Technol, 1999,19(3)

143 005. E-mail: libsci@gndu.ernet.in;

21

