DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technolbgy, Vol. 19,
@ 1999, DESIDOC

No. 3, May 1999, pp. 23-28

Automatic Document Classification

Abstract
A computer cannot determine the subject content of a document the way
the librarians do. Automatic classification is concertted with the procedures
and systems that can make comparison between terms used. Using the
computer to provide automatic indexes can only be considered for the
automatic production of title indexes or the keyword enhanced index.
Classificatory techniques, in fact, can be used for improving he efficiency
of these title indexes. This paper attempts to trace solutions to the
problems, such as truncation, stemming, etc. Automatic keyword
classification is only an attempt. The use of automatically constructed
classification is still a subject for investigation.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Classification is basically thought of in terms
of subject headings, i.e., documents are
grouped according to their subject matter as
determined by skilled librarians. This is the main
function of classification schemes. But it is not a
suitable principle on which automatic
classification can-bebased. A computer cannot
determine the subject content of a document
the way a librarian does. A computer can
process words. The principle on which
automated 'cassification system is based is
statistics\, whereas documents can be classified
on the basis of the words they contain.
Computers are incapable to make association
between concepts, which is fundamental to
classification theory. However, computers can
perform two basic functions with n
i credb
ie
l
speeds, j.e, count and compare. In order to
harness the power of the computer to provide
meaningful classification, we must use these
two basic functions. These functions can in fact
be used to provide what appears to be a degree
of intelligence. It is illustrated in the recent
-

-

OSIDOc Bulktin of Inf Technol, 1999,19(3)

-

developments in artificial intelligence and its
application.
To proceed further, it is essential for us to
make a distinction between the h e termsautomatic indexing and automatic classifiiation.
Automatic indexing deals with the automation
of the process whereby we assign index terms
to documents, that is the terms which are used
later to retrieve a subject of documents from a
file. Automatic classification is concerned with
procedures and systems which can make
comparison between terms used to index
documents.
From this, we draw conclusions concerning
the degree of similarity of the key words used
to index documents or the degree of similarity
of the document themselves. For automated
methods in order to replace fully the manual
creation and use of c~assification schemes,
implies the following;

O A classification system for the whole subject
range of bibliographic material can be
automatically devised;
-

-

23

0 Automated

procedure which correctly
allocates any document to the classes
provided by the scheme created; and

AUTOMATIC DOCUMENT

3.

CLASSIFICATION (WORD

FREQUENCY)

0 System fully satisfies the requirement of the
user to find material on a specific subject
and related subjects easily and quickly.
There are two main areas of application of
classification methods in information retrieval,
viz.,

0 Considering

the relationship between
documents (document clustering); and

P Considering the relationship between terms
(keyword clustering).

2.

KEYWORD ENHANCED TITLE
INDEXES

The simple technique using the computer to
provide automatic indexes can be considered to
be those which deal with the automatic
production of title indexes or keyword
enhanced title indexes. keyword indexing
system, though not a new method, is based on
the principle that the title of scientific document
represents its contents. Each significant word in
the title serves as a keyword in turn when the
entries are generated by a compute;, the
computer moves the title literally in such a way
that a significant word for a particular entry
always appears either on the extreme left hand
side or in the centre of the column.
Non-significant words
are
automatically
omitted. The efficiency of the keyword indexing
system depends on the title of a document, i.e.,
if the title reveals the content fully the system
also reveals it fully. The title index provides
current awareness to some extent, but for
subject retrieval devices there are so many
limitations. Some af the limitations are:

*
*
*

Dependence on title for indicating the
contents of the document,
Use of natural language rather than controlled
vocabulary, and
Lack of r'eference system for ensuring proper
unity of the index.

Precision and recall from these techniques
alone helps a great deal to overcome these
.limitations.

24

For improving the efficiency of these title
indexes, classification techniques can be used.
But any classification system, based upon a
preconceived and logically organised set of
categories, becomes outmoded and inadequate
very soon as a result of dynamic growth of
knowledge. What is needed is an empirically
derived dynamic system of classification
wherein a set of documents at a particular point
in time and capable of being recognised with a
minimum of duplicated effort is made possible
by the use of modern computer technology. In
order to apply classification automatically, it is
important that we first establish how we can
construct representation of a document
capable of computer manipulation. It is
generally assumed that the more frequen~lya
word is used in a document, the more likely it is
that the word is a significant indicator of the
subject matter. While describing the frequency
of a word the first step is that the document is
translated into machine-readable code. A
computer program develops a machine listing
of all words in the document, arranged by
frequency of occurrence and alphabetically
within frequency. Functional words, such as
articles conjunctions, prepositions, etc. are
excluded. Depending upon the degree of
sophistication the derived words that have the
same stem can be counted either as repetitions
of the stem or as separate words. Statistical
processing of the document produces a list of
words arcanged by frequency of occurrence,
from which index terms can be selected
automatically according to pre-specified rules.

3.1

Problems

There are some problems, when we apply
this method, viz.,

+

+

Application of this rule will invariably result in
the selection of a large number of index terms,
many of which will have very little retrieval
value.
Computer, computers, computing, these are
related words but computer will treat these
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/,1 999,19(3)

+

words separately. This problem can be seen if
we use online databases.

3.2

Use of synonyms is also a big problem. To
introduce a style in writing authors do not use
same word they use different words for similar
concepts. So it is necessary for the computers
to identify similar and related terms.

Solutions

3.2.1 Need to use more refined terms
There is a need to use more refined
technique than simple word frequency counts,
if we are to use the words contained in a
document as a basis for determining its subject.
No need to select words according to the
frequency of occurrence in the text, but
according to the relative frequency of
occurrence of normalised terms. Words
belonging to the closed set of syntactic or
grammatical words are eliminated from
consideration. It is also necessary that the
selected terms enable relevant documents to be
retrieved in response to a request.

3.2.2 Tmncation and stemming
It is a solution for the second problem.
Truncation allows the searcher to input an
arbitrary symbol at the end of part of a sought
after term to be used to indicate that any
sequence of characters occurring in this
position should constitute a match if preceded
by the input term. It is possible to search on
parts of words by the principle of truncation.
Four types of truncation can be recognised.

1. Right Truncation is ignoring the ending of a
word. ThC truncation CRACK will for example
retrieve documents containing CRACK,
CRACKS, CRACKING, CRACKED.
2.

Left Truncation is ignoring the beginningof a
word. The truncation mycin, for example, is
likely to-retrievedocuments discussing a targe
group of antibiotics.

3. Simultaneous left and right truncation
4.

Infix Truncation, i.e., specifying the
beginning and end of a word but leaving the
middle unspecified.

Right truncation is the most useful for most
application and it is a powerful device for
sea~hing
on large groups of related words.
DESIDOC Bulktin d l n f Techd, 1999,19(3)

One major fault of truncation is that it may
also bring in same words that have no relevance
to a particular request. It must be used with
care.
Stemming is a technique which eliminates
common inflectional suffixes and prefixes. It is
able to reduce words which are common.

3.3.3 Use of Thesaurus
The solution of the third problem is the use
of a thesaurus. For controlling synonyms we
can use thesaurus. But it is the product of
considerable intellectual effort. To automate this
activity there is need to produce a system
which could use the computer to generate
keyword classification.

4.

CLUSTERING OF
DOCUMENTS

Several attempts have been made at
automatic clustering in the area of documents.
Some such methods are single linkage,
complete linkage, group average and word
clustering. One important among all hierarchic
methods is single link method. It is based on
dissimilarity coefficient. The output from this
method is a tree type structure in which clusters
are represented by nodes on the tree. A lot of
researches have been done in this area, but
except of Karan Spark Jones and Salton all the
experiments lacked proper evaluation of those
automatic classification.

5.

SMART

The SMART system works on the principle
that the use of many techniques are likely to be
more efficient than one. It is a fully automatic
system for analysis, search and retrieval of
natural language text.
The SM-ART project was initiated in 1961 at
Harvard University. Its aim was to design and
implement on a computer, a fully automatic
document retrieval system which is capable of
processing documents and search requests and
or retrieving those documents most similar to
the corresponding search requests. From its
inception, the system was designed both as a
retrieval tool and as a vehicle for evaluating the
effectiveness of automatic search and analysis

technique. The initial version of the SMART
system consisted of three main parts:
(1) An automatic content description system
which used a variety of text processing
devices supplemented by stored dictionaries
to assign a set of automatically generated
content identifiersto each stofed information
item and to each incoming search request.

(2) A supervisory or monitoring system which
could process the query and document
contents and by suitable matching
operations. It could supply to the users
references to those documents whose
content vectors appeared to be most similar
to the corresponding query vectors.
(3) An evaluation system which provided formal
measurements of system's effectiveness in
terms of satisfaction of user needs.
For actual processing in the SMART system,
user indicates the particular processing options
which are to be operative at a given time, i.e.,
whether thesaurus, concept hierarchy, syntactic
processing, etc., are to be incorporated into the
current run. The SMART system accepts those
input instructions, together with document
collection, user queries and stored dictionaries.
he monitoring system then calls on the
appropriate
subroutines at the required time.
.. .
tn the SMART content, the main evaluation
viewpoint taker is the user, and the overriding
criterion of system effectiveness is the ability of
the system to satisfy the user's information
need.

5.1

SMART-MEDLARS Comparison

One of the aims of SMART project has been
the comparison of fully automatic text
processing systems with the manual indexing
system that are widely used in operational
information
retrieval
environment.
The
MEDLARS system has been operating for many
years on large databases of several hundred
thousand document citations in the medical
area, using a controlled indexing vocabulary
applied by trained indexers and searchers. The
SMART system was tested in a comparison with
the MEDLARS in a series of experiments which
led Satton to the confident conclusion that the
SMART system worked so well that no technical
justification appears to exist for maintaining
controlled manual indexing in operational
retrieval environment.

6.

KEYWORD CLASSIFlCATlON

keyword classification i s the automatic
construction of classification schemes through
an examination of keywords used in indexing
documents. Its primary objective is not to
cluster the document collection but to derive
grouping of keywords, keyword classification
can be used to characterise the document in a
collection as an aid to retrieval. It is required as
a device for providing characterisations for all
the documents in a collection. The use of a
keyword classification itself is familiar to any
one who has worked in information retrieval. If
the characterisation of a document or a request
is by a single keyword or term list, a keyword
thesaurus is intended as a device that permits

Table 1. Simplified summary of SMART ptacessing option
User of alphabetic word dictionary
.
Expansion by downward
Concept expansion by Expansion by
addition of term on
movement in hierarchy
moving upward in
hierarchy
same level using
the theorises
Sentence co-occurrences Extraction of significant sentences
Syntactic processing
Use of criterion phrase dictionary for matching purposes
Term associated
Use of term correlations for expansion of document identification,
statistical phrase and term cluster formation
Document association
Use of correlation between document identification and information
request
Dictionary lookup
Concept hierarchy

26

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Jechnol, 1 999,19(3)

matching between requests and documents
that do not actually contain the same word.
Keyword classification is in fact a vocabulary
normalisation device rather than means.

8.

AUTOMATIC KEYWORD
CLASSIFICATION

Automatic keyword classification depends
on the hypothesis of co-occurrence where
classes consisting of words with a tendency to
co-occur in documents will permit satisfactory
sub-situations, i.e., ones that promote the
retrieval of relevant documents. If two words
c w c c u r in a document, they can be regarded
as alternative representative of the topic. If they
c w c c u r in every document in which either
occurs, they can be presumed to have a very
strong topic connection.
Now, the question comes whether we can
obtain a better retrieval performance with a
keyword classification than with the keywords
alone or whether we can construct such a
classification automatically? There are some
difficulties in automatic keyword classification:

*

It may be the result of an experiment to the
character of the classification used, or to the
fact that an automatic procedure was used to
generate it.

t We have to consider not only the character of

*
9.

the classification itself but how it is used as a
component of an indexing language or a
retrieval system.
There is a general problem of establishing a
satisfactory methodology in information
retrieval research.

THEORY OF CLUMPS

Research in automatic classification for
information retrieval is associated with the
theory of clumps. The criterion for a clump is
that the terms in it should be more strongly
associated with each other than with the terms
outside the clump. The clumps are based
entirely on the terms chosen to index the
documents.
Sometimes
it
looks
like
conventional classificatory groupings. For
example, grammar, parts of speech, adjective,
proposition, phrase, phrase marker, tense, stem,
syntax, look very much like the sort of groups
DESfDoC Bulletin of lnf Techno/, 1999,19(3)

one would construct intellectually except that
title does not include terms such as 'noun',
'verb', etc., because they do not occur in the
indexing of this particular set of documents.
The application of clumping techniques to data
of different kinds gave varied results. Clump
Classification, if derived from similarity matrices,
works very well compared with other types of
classification. Theory of clump has not yet been
wholly satisfactory in itself, because:

0 It explicated our intuitive idea of a class as a
set of things that are somewhat loosely
organised by family resemblance; and

R It did not require perfect data, or depend
on over simple geometrical models of the
kind that treats clauses as footballs.
The theory of clumps has just stimulated
research in automatic classification in a way.

10. STRINGS, STAR AND
CLIQUES
The test results from using the clumping
technique proved to be disappointing but work
continued to refine the model for clumps
further by using statistical and probabilistic
techniques. The other form of relationship
identical are strings, star and cliques.
Strings are the simplest form. They are
constructed by starting from one specific
keyword and finding a second keyword strongly
connected with it. The process is repeated with
the second keyword. A maximum length of
seven terms was permitted in the construction
of strings.

Strings
:0
-0-

O------0

:

Stars are taken as their starting point with a
single central keyword, and other keywords
connected with this central keyword are
included on the basis of their strong allocation
with this term.

Stars

Cliques are obtained by identification of a
set
of
fully
interconnected keywords.
Techniques used in the evaluation were
complex and results are difficult to interpret.
However, the conclusion is that information
retrieval system can be enhanced through the
use of keyword classification clearly.

phenomenon in the field of classification.
Therefore, it can be said that the future of
classification will be just as interestifig as its
long history.

REFERENCES
1.

Bakewell, KGB. The SMART System
1961-1976, Experiments in dynamic
document processing. Encyclopaedia of
library and information science, vol. 28,
pp.1-36.

2.

Bosko, Harold. Automatic language
processing. John Wiley and Sons, New
York, 1968.

3.

Dhyani, Pushpa. Library classification:
Theory and principles. Mishra, New Delhi,
1998.

4.

Foskett, AC. Subject approach to
information, Ed. 4. Clive Rustey, London,
1982.

5.

Jones, Karen Spark. Theory of clumps.
Encyclopaedia of library and information
science, Vol. 5. pp.208-24.

6.

Narcella, Rita 81 Nemton, Robert. A new
manual of classification. jaico, Mumbai,
1997.

7.

Rijsbergen, Van. lnformation retrieval.
Butterworth, London, 1975.

Cliques

11. CONCLUSION
Though research is taking place' in the
various fields of automatic classification, it has
been seen that automatic classif~ittionis not in
a position to replace manual classification. The
use of automatically constructed classification is
still a subject for investigation. The reason
behind this is simple. Although so many
techniques have been developed but successful
implementation of such techniques has not yet
been made possible. It is because there is no
complete theory of knowledge representation.
S o automatic classification still remained a goal
rather than a reality. But it is also true that
automatic classification is an interesting

Ms Babita jaiswal is presently associated with the Department of Library and lnformation Science,
Lucknow University, Lucknow.

28

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1999,19(3)

