DESIDOC Bulletin of lnkmation Technobgy, Voi. 19, No. 3, May 1999, pp. 29-33.
O 1999, MSlDOC

Computerised Information Retrieval System: Role of
Minimal Level Cataloguing
Rajesh Singh
Abstract

.

a

1.

This paper addresses some problems in cataloguing in two different
technological contexts: printed card catalogues and online catalogues.
Some of the current problems in cataloguing in the environment of online
library catalogues have been reviewed and highlighted. In particular,
minimal-level cataloguing as defined by Anglo-American Cataloguing Rules,
has been discussed to the extent to which it can play an effective role in
computerised information retrieval system. A number of research questions
haw also been suggested for further examination of role and prospects of
minimal level cataloguing in the OPACs, and specifically its implications in
computerised information retrieval system.

INTRODUCTION

Libraries and information centres with
growing collection of books, serials and AV
materials, such as microforms, computers,
CD-ROMs and multimedia, etc., besides other
non-book materials, are confronted with the
problems of their bibliographic control, physical
access and use. Where to house and how best
to service these materials? Should they be
circulated or restricted to in-house use? How
should one catalogue them? What method
should be used to provide for their custodial
maintenance and prevention?
One of the recent solutions to many of
these cataloguing problems, similar to those
facing the Library of Congress in the 1940s, is
found in the proposal commonly referred to as
minimal level cataloguing (MLC). MLC is also
known under the headings of short cataloguing,
brief record cataloguing, simplified cataloguing
and less than full cataloguing. In 1978, Library
of Congress introduced MLC as a means to
DESlDoC Bulktin of Inf Technol, 1999,19(3)

combat crisis in cataloguing, stating that some
access is better than none.
After more than 10 years it was felt that
since we have not learned as yet whether the
provision for briefer records (of possibly more
materials) is better than none, we read that
MLC, in general "has been highly effective in
providing such access through the online
retrieval system by means of such elements of
bibliographic description as author, title and
series."
In this paper, we examine the problems in
cataloguing in two different technologicai
contexts: printed card catalogues and online
catalogues. Then we review some of the
problems in cataloguing in our own era of
online public access catalogues (OPACs). In
particular, we discuss the extent to which
minimal level cataloguing can play an effective
role in computerised information retrieval
system.
29

2.

M L C VIS-A-VIS ONLINE
LIBRARY CATALOGUES

The recent growth of online bibliographic
networks (e.g. OCLC, WLN, RLIN, UTLAS), the
escalating cost of cataloguing entries, the use of
MLC in machine readable cataloguing (MARC)
records, and the Cataloguing-in Publication
(CIP) Programme, have all highlighted the need
for empirical research on the usefulness of MLC
and on the relative merits of verifying levels of
detail for describing and identifying materials.
Research is necessary to establish the needs
of various categories of library users; how often
they would make use of bibliographic elements
and the purpose for which they would be using
them. Lambrecht asks, "If 10 per cent of users
and staff of the most sophisticated research
libraries are unable to locate an item, distinguish
it from very similar item, or determine needed
details about it, has the catalogue served them
well enough?Cutter...would not believe it had."
Lambrecht reminds us that the library
literature of the period 1982-91 has witnessed
numerous proposals which call for revaluation
of the costs and benefits of full cataloguing;
little progress, however, has been made in this
direction to this date.
In 1991, Lambrecht surveyed 22 national
cataloguing agencies to assess their practices
and attitudes toward MLC. The survey indicated
that only seven of the 22 national agencies
included all mandatory ISBD data elements in
all of their catalogued records and that only
four of the 20 elements designated as
mandatory in the lSBDs were considered of
vital importance. Further, the statement of
responsibility, place of publication, series title
proper and edition statement of responsibility
were considered the bare bones of description
for new IS80 (MLC) practices.
The main purpose of MLC might be more
than offset by the increased cost of providing
local reference services to collections with
inadequate bibliographic control.
In some of the most advanced online
catalogues of large collections, users will
typically retrieve some useful items from the
collections in response to a given query, but
30

they have no way of knowing what has not
been retrieved. Handman persuasively argues
that for media collections that are becoming
"bibliographically accessible from remote
locations, the lack of effective subject access
means valuable resources potentially lost on the
shelves forever."
He shares anecdotal
information that MLC records when searched
on the University of California system wide
online catalogue. MELVIL
catalogues are
virtually useless to the majority of users. This is
in sharp contrast to the belief which was
expressed ten years ago by library of Congress:
"Although represented by a less than full
catalogue record, it was judged that the power
of the online retrieval system would, to some
extent, compensate."
Handman again said: "Even under the best
of circumstances provided by the MELVIL
catalogue, including to the hilt standard
cataloguing; key word and Boolean searching;
and format, date, language, and location
limitation capabilities, our patrons frequently
find themselves rudderless and listing in stormy
bibliographic seas."
While some of the writers have offered
different proposals to combat the crisis in
cataloguing in 1970s and 1980s suggesting
extension of the Linked System Project to the
online exchange of bibliographic records
among networks, and establishing shared
cataloguing to cover special categories
inadequately
catalogued,
others
have
experimented with their own in-house standards
of what MLC should be.

3.

MLCANDTHE
COMPUTERISED IRS

AACR-2 (1988) provides three levels of
detail in the description as follows: First level of
description, or 'minimal' (rev, rule I. OD1);
second-level or 'core' (rev. rule I. OD?); and
third level of description or 'full' (rw. rule I.
003).
When accessing the catalogue online, the
result of a search will either (a) be displayed on
the V W screen or (b) output to a printer. The
former may be the only facility available, or
alternatively the initial search results may be
DESIDOC Bulktin d l n f Tedmd, 1 999,19(3)

viewed on the screen, and, when a satisfactory
results has been obtained, a print out of the
relevant entry of entries may be requested. The
latter is obviously desirable. Some of the
criteria, e.g., lay out, spacing, etc., are relevant
in online information retrieval system. The
screen should not be over-crowded; entries, if
there is more than one displayed at a time,
should be clearly distinguishable and particular
elements within the entry should be
identifiable.

ILLUSTRATION
Catalogue entry shown here is in
traditional AACR-2 format
Pandey, B.P.
Economic Botany1B.P. Pandey-1st
ed.-New Delhi: S. Chand, 1981
VIII, 803 p: ill.; 24 cm.
ISBN 1-219-0017-4
581.6

Some questions which might be asked in
connection with the above are:

Tabular or labelled format of MLC

(a) Is a single entry only to be displayed at any

Title

Economic Botany

Author

Pandey, B.P.

one time?
(b) If not, how are the entries to be separated?

Publisher

S. Chand

(c) How much detail is to be included in a
displayed entry?

Year

1981

(d) ISa choice of level of detail to be provided?

Class

581.6

(e) Is a narrative, paragraph type dispiay (as on a
catalogue card) to be used or is a tabular
form to be preferred?

(f)

If a tabular form is to be used, are the
various elements to be labelled?

As online catalogues have become more
prevalent, Hildreth states: "Many librarians have
urged catalogue planners and designers to
retain the traditional main entry card format.
These librarians feel that this format should at
least be included among the alternatives
available to the user, if not the 'standard' format
in an online catalogue." But, as Hildreth, from
whom this quote is taken, points out, this
opinion "though popular is not universally
shared" and many librarians see the traditional
format as unsuitable in an online context.
Recent studies recognise the importance of
display format design and appeal to indicate
that tabular or labelled formats of MLC are
preferred to traditional or narrative lay outs by
the users. Both the cataloguing formats have
been shown opposite:
User friendly MLC display format permits
multiple entries to be displayed simultaneously.
Other fields, e.g., ISBN, etc., may be present in
the record and searcheable, but can be
suppressed in the display.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1999,19(3)

One very interesting point noted in surveys
regarding online ca~aloguesand catalogue use
is that it now becomes possible to examine the
way in which the reader approaches and uses
the catalogue without the reader being aware
that he is being observed, i.e., by using the
in-built capabilities of the machine. Clearly this
makes for a more realistic and unbiased
analysis. It could be ascertained, for instance,
how many searches had been undertaken for a
known item and how many for a subject.

4.

WHETHER AACR?

Whether a catalogue is stored on optical
disc or magnetic disc, "access techniques
should be simple and easy to use, with both
intellectual and physical manipulation held to
an absolute minimum." Kilgour, from whom the
above quote is taken, believes that with such
catalogues it will not be necessary to have
extensive descriptive cataloguing rule systems,
such as the second edition of Anglo-American
Cataloguing Rules. Other writers disagree that
we must not give up almost 250 years of
Anglo-American
cataloguing service
for
technological sizzle. We must not limit the
catalogue. We must exploit the new technology
to enhance its proper performance of its
essential, historic and traditional functions.
31

A study of full and short entry catalogues
undertaken by the Centre for Catalogue
Research at the University of Bath points to the
advantages of the short entry, i.e., MLC and will
doubtless encourage more libraries to use them
in their online public access catalogues.
Whatever the view taken of MLC, Michael
Gorman predicts, and also the author of this
paper hopes that he is right, "there will never be
an AACR-3. The next general cataloguing code
will be a manual on how to create MARC
records for the national online network. Those
MARC records will be different to our present
linear records as they will be multidimensional
and based on authority file concepts such as
those partially established in the WLN system.

5.

SCOPE FOR FURTHER
RESEARCH

With regard to retrieval tooling, we need to
examine the following:
(a) Information seeking patterns and retrieval
success rates of the user who uses OPAC
where cataloguing records for books, serials,
and other formats are integrated according
to the conventional Anglo-American
cataloguing practice.
{b) What inquiries do users bring to library
collections most frequently?
(c) How do they actually search
answer their needs?

in' OPACs

to

(d) What are the most common types of errors
which lead to aborted searches?
(e) How are broad searches modified? Is there
an emerging pattern in the error behaviour
for certain types of searches?

Research is needed to determine which data
elements are necessary, desirable and essential,
to represent library materials in OPACs in the
contexts of the economic implications and
users needs. We also need to understand which
access points would be useful for different
classes of users and how cost effective different
levels of description are in view of a growing
number of virtual repositories that are
searcheable mostly. Among levels of details, we
need to study the extent to which MLC core
and full cataloguing might be cost effective in
searching and retrieving the information.

6.

Nobody can predict exactly what will
happen in the next century but we can be sure
that the impact of the computer will become
ever more pronounced. These are exciting
times for the catalogue producers. The function
of the catalogue remains unaltered but the
means of implementing that function grow ever
more sophisticated and the basic function may
ultimately be enhanced by an ability to retrieve
not only relevant document citations but the
actual documents themselves. The catalogue is
a key to the doors of knowledge; in the past, it
has not always been the most efficient of
device, but, computerised, it should become a
golden key with a golden future. Remember,
that computer encourages the creative and
innovative urge. In order to make full use of it,
one must look beyond the restrictions of
traditional cataloguing theory. Start afresh, think
a new, the frontiers are boundless.

REFERENCES
1.

Anglo-American Cataloguing Rules, Rev
Ed.2. Canadian Library Association,
Ottawa, 1988.

2.

Ereego lac, Z. Minimal level cataloguing:
What does it mean for maps in the
contexts of card catalogues, online
catalog~es, and digital libraries? IASIS,
1998, 49(8), 706-19.

3.

Holzberlein, Denanne. Computer software
cataloguing: Techniques and examples.
Howorth Press, New York, 1986.

4.

Hunter, EJ. Computerised cataloguing.
CIive Bingley, London, 1985.

(f) How do we measure user's success in
retrieving relevant information?
The ultimate goal is to design systems which
would be compatible with users' seeking
behaviour, level of search sophistication, and
retrieval requirements. The subject access must
be improved, i.e., the system should be
designed to accommodate various searching
levels and collect those entries that satisfy a
given user's goal.

CONCLUSION

DESIDOC Bulletin 01 lnf Technol, 1 999,19(3)

5.

Lubetzky, S. Principles of cataloguing.
Institute Library Research, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA 1969.

6.

Malinconico, S Michael & Fasana, Paul I.
The future of the catalogue: The library's
choice. Knowledge Industry Publications,
New York, 1979.

Shri R
a
w Singh is junior Research Fellow, Department of Library & Information Science, Lucknow
University, lucknow.

DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1999,19(3)

33

