DESiDOC Bulktin of lnfomtion Technology, Vol. 19, No.3, May 1999, pp. 35-37
d 1999, DESlDOC

Role of Cataloguing in the Automated Library
Activities and Services
Sewa Singh
Abstract
Automating house-keeping operations is a major effort in the area of
computer application to libraries. Technology is the most significant factor
forcing libraries and information centres to develop more effective methods
of service delivery. Catalogues are being computerised the worldover to
facilitate better access points and multidimensional searches in the library
holdings. The emergence of online catalogues has offered better access
capabilities. Access to a variety of databases i s one of the recent
developments which is greatly influencing library services in general and
catalogues in particular. Librarians now require to maintain their library
catalogue in such a way that it should be able to serve the diversified needs
of a wide range of users and systems.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Catalogues have been in existence in one
form or the other perhaps as long as the
libraries themselves. Amongst many ancient
libraries, the famous library of Alexandria had
also
a catalogue developed by
its
scholar-librarianCallimachus what was called as
Pinakes. Both the librarians and the library users
have been interested in catalogue as an
information retrieval tool. However, Charles
Ammi Cutter set out the objectives of the
library catalogue way back in 1876; and since
then the library professionals haw been
attempting to fulfil those objectives through
card form of the catalogue.

2.

ROLE-OFCATALOGUE

As libraries and information technology
progressed, computer applications in' libraries
began as an effort towards automating the
house-keeping operations, such as acquisition,
circulation, serial control, and also cataloguing.

OESIOOC Bulktin d l n f Techno/, 1999,19(3)

Technology is forcing libraries and
information centres to dewlop more effective
methods of service delivery. Catalogue record
has been computerized to facilitate better
access points and multidimensional searches in
the library holdings. The libraries in automated
environment have to make maximum avenues
of access to knowledge and information
collected by them, and more and more libraries
are now heading toward that.
Libraries have 'identified and organised the
records for ease of retrieval', said Wedgeworth,
and stated further that they 'have developed
extensive bibliographic standards and controls
tha,t enable the users to identify and find
individual items among the millions of works
created each year throughout the world.' He
has clearly underlined the importance of
catalogue which has guided generations of
scholars, and now their relevance in the
automated environment has rather been
increasing.

35

In the automated library activities and
services, the role of cataloguing becomes rather
important. The librarians have to make known
to its users the availability of the range of
documents coI{ected. Librarians, through their
catalogues, have to arrange and present the
information contained in a wide variety of
documents so that their intellectual contents
become clear to the users. As the catalogue will
be integrated with other automated library
activities, it will be able to provide access to
materials other than books alone unlike the
manual system. This will further boost the
library services' which can be made more
efficient as well as effective by retrieving
citation to many more formats of documents.
In such an environme~t, emergence of the
online catalogues has offered bener access
capabilities. libraries can also think of extending
the catalogue, while making it online, and
providing access to a range of databases and
information services. The OPACs in the
automated environment are becoming more
than the catalogue, as through database these
provide access to a variety of other documents
such as periodicals, special files, catalogues of
other libraries, reference and information
sources, etc., located at different places. Thus
OPACs are not only sdwing as information
retrieval system but as a module of an
integrated library management system.
But in most of the casbs, libraries at present
are in a transitional stage from -card catabgue
to online catalogue. Even in developed
countries, it will take some more time to reap
the full benefits of a networked information
system as there are various stages of
development among the libraries going for
online catalogue, whereas developing countries
lack infrastructure support in terms of
technology and finance. In the libraries of these
countries therefore the traditional approach to
catalogue will continue for some more time at
least for two reasons: (i) millions of existing
records in libraries; and (ii) enormous financial
implications of the change from one to another
format.
However, in the times to come, the attempts
towards online catalogues leading to OPACs are
increasing the worldover. This is keeping in
36

pace with the challenges and opportunities of
the future libraries, what could be called as
electronic or digital libraries. These libraries with
such catalogues can make available to their
users much wider range of information from a
series of containers more speedily. The'users
also seek efficiency and the libraries have to
use technology oniy to serve their users, and
society.
In order to fulfil the users' information
needs, catalogues generally integrate, structure,
control, and maintain information about the
library collections.
When
computerised
catalogue will provide for complete, up-to-date
structure,
the
computer
will
allow
multidimensional searches in comparison to
linear searches in earlier forms. Computer can
now provide as many access points as the data
elements and thus enhance its capabilities.
Computerised catalogue has therefore more
flexible access mechanism than the card
catalogue, and hence it makes possible linking
of data at the 'post-coordinate' stage. This will
also increase the service level to the users.
In this way the bibliographic access system
of the library is reaching out for the benefit of
the users. These access systems will have to
adequately take care of the growing needs of
growing variety of users. Pat Oddy is of the
view that 'the second age of bibliographic
control' is at the threshold, and we may find
ourselves away from the well established
MARC, UNIMARC, etc., because the move of
linking the catalogues to other databases and
catalogues of other libraries is increasing. Such
moves will help integrate the catalogue with the
documents facilitating better access to the new
variety ot materials even imdigitized form.
In order to create a future library
bibliographic access system that will provide
efficient and high quality retrieval, Oddy
realises the following need for at least three
requirements:
0 Work towards a common analytic approach
and development path for both general and
specialist bibliographic standards.
Extend the use of bibliographic standards and
tools over a wider range of materials.
o Develop a subject approach to information.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1999,19(3)

3.

CONCLUSION

It is therefore asserted that an integrated
automated catalogue can function effectively
and efficiently in 'retrieving the intellectual
content from the collection. Ultimately, the
library catalogue has to be maintained in such a
way that it i s able to serve the diversified needs
of a wide range of users as well as systems. We
have to attempt to find a solution to give an
access to the excess of information resulting
from information deluge of today. Our libraries
are now striving to adapt themselves to the
changing world and developing technologies,
problems notwiihstanding. It is believedthat the
new technologies may offer opportunities
about equality of access to information,
particularly access to electronically stored
information in electronic rnteriats, so that ..we
could serve the users better than before, and
accomplish the goal of shaping the society into

a d l formed society. This is the real challenge
that lies ahead.

REFERENCES
1. Anthony, LJ. (Ed). Lines of thought: Selected
papers of Maurice B Line. Cliw Bingley,
London, 1988.
2. Aruna, A. Online Public Access Catalogue.
DESlDOC Bull of Inf Techno/, 1998, 18(5),

3-8.
3.

Hussain, S & O'Brian, A. Recent trends in
subject access to OPACs: An evaluation.
In@ernationa/ Classification, 1992, 19(3),
140-45.

4.

Oddy, Pat. Future libraries, future catalogues.
Library Association Publishing, London,
1997.

5. Wedgeworth, Robert. A view toward library
users. IFLA lournal, 1996, 22(4), 277-79.

Dr S e w Singh is lecturer at Department of Library and information Science, Guru Nanak Dev
University, Amritsar 143 005.

-

DESlooC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1999,19(3)

37

