DESlDOC Bulletin of lnformation Technology, Vol. 19, No. 4 & 5 , July & September 1999, pp. 3-10
43 1999, DESIDOC

Role of Librarians in the New Millennium of
lnformation Technology*

i

..

Abstract

I

f

This article highlights the librarians' connotations of lnformation Technology
(IT), IT developments in libraries, and areas of IT as relevant to libraries. It
also discusses the future IT use and role of librarians in future.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Information Technology (IT) is all pervasive.
There is hardly any activity of educational,
economic and social importance which is not
influenced by IT. Even the common man now
feels the benefits he is getting from IT.
lnformation technology has been given
different ~0nn0tati0nSby people belonging
different subject disciplines and specialisations.
The
computer
and
telecommunication
specialists connote IT as a specialisation
'covering the technologies of computers and

ldecommunications

hardware) aspects.

and

The information technologies that are
releMnt
to librariesmainly
cover the following:
(a) Computer Technology;
(b) Telecommunications ~echnolo~ies;
(c) Reprographic Technologies;
(d) Library Technologies;
(e) Technical Communication.
The activities and services in libraries in
which these technologies are used are indicated
/in Fin.1.

-

r

In the field of journalism, IT is generaliy
t a technology used for information
inaticr which includes systems like telex,
printer, e-mail and so on. For a librarian,
has a much wider connotation. which
ludes the technologies and systems like
microfilms, microfiche, CDROMS, computers,
information networks, etc. In IT, we will discuss
all those technologies which libraries and
information centres use for collection,
processing, storage, retrieval and dissemination
of recorded information.
' A n extract from the keynote address delivered at the
44th All India Library Conference of the ILA during
25-28 Feb 1999 at Hyderabad.
DFSIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1999,19(4 & 5 )

IT AS RELEVANT TO
LIBRARIES

2.

The Information Technology Task Force
recently constituted by the Government also
seems to accept this wider connotation of IT, as
can be seen from the recommendations it has
made.

3.
\

IT DEVELOPMENTS
Most of us generally know that more and

more powerful computers in smaller and
smaller sizes are amiving into the market day by
day. Laptop and palm-size computers have
already become common. Still smaller size
(credit card size and still further smaller) are on
the way. Similarly, fibre-optic cable networks
with Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN)
capabilities for transmitting huge volumes of

-C~ification
- Organisation
Datebase
&
- WneOement
Library

-DatabaM,

Creation

- CAS
- SDI

MnaOemgnt

Operatii

Networks
-- Library
Information
Networks ,

- Photography
- Microfilms

e
T
z
>

-- OpticaVDigital
AudidVideo
- Technical Writing

-- Editing
PuCilicrMng

Fig. 1: Areas of Information Technology as relevant to libraries
data in a few seconds are also increasing in
various countries. including India. Optical digital
'discs (ODD) 07 higher and higher storage
capacities will continue to come in. Presently,
the ODDS can store from 2.6 to 3.9 gigabytes
,of data on a singldayer CD size platter, which
is equivalent to more than 2700 computer
floppy disks.

entire Encyclopaedia Britannica in a few
seconds.

(b) Handle real-time services like high qu
videotonferencing..There will be a varie
research challenges and many
commercial services will start operatin

The US Government announced, a couple
of years back, the implementation of Internet41
which will provide the following facilities:

(c) Meet national goals and missions rela
scientific
research,
national s
(including information warfare), dista
education, environmental monitoring.
health care.

(a) Connect
universities
and
national
laboratories with high-speednetworks (10 to
100 times faster). While majority of them will
be about 10 times faster, a few will be 100
times faster. These can eventually transfer the

A look at the developments taking plac
various areas of IT would suggest
developments are very fast, with high i
various sectois . like education,
commerce, industry and government acti

We find, even in a developing country like
India, computers being used in schools,
colleges, commercial shops and other small
trading units, etc, apart from educational and
research institutions. We also flnd information
networks like Education and Research Network
(ERNET) of the Department of Electronics for
communicating educational and research
information, National Informatics Centre
Network (NICNET) of the Planning Commission
for providing access to as well as
comniunicating governmental data
and

network, which provides m a i l facility' and
access to Internet. The VSNL has ptesently over
1,30,000 Internet customers with the actual

megabits. Soon, the advaned countries will be
providing backbones or information highways
of terrabits capacity and lndian networks will be
having the capacity in gigabits. Similarly, several
agencies in the Government and in the trade
are producing multimedia products and
CD-ROM and online databases. Although, the
number of such indigenous online databases
and CD-ROM products is presently not high, it
is expected to grow exponentially soon after
the high capacity information networks and
information highways become available. The
time lag in the release of a computer or
communication hardware or software in the
market in the advanced countries and its
availability in the lndian market is hardly a
couple of months at present and the use of
such technologies soon after their arrival in the
country is also increasing very fast.

4.

the liberalisation of the telecom policy,
era1 private 'organisations have also started
oviding networks or communication services
the public. These include the m a i l and

Similarly,

we

find

the

reprographic

The information networks in advanced

t of the coaxial cables. The lndian networks
also providing backbones of capacity in

NATIONAL TASK FORCE
ON I T

To give a big boost to the use of IT in
various sectors in the country for economic and
all round development, the office of Prime
Minister of India constituted a National Task
~ o r k eon lnformation Technology and Software
Development in May 1998. The Task Force has
prepared an IT Action Plan and made 108
recommendHtions for the implementation of
the Action Plan. A notable aspect of the
recommendations is that the Task Force has
recognised the development of information
content in the form of databases and other
information products as crucial for realising the
benefits of the developments in IT. A clear
indication of this is evident in that, out of the
Abur Working Groups constituted by the Task
Force, one is devoted to lnformation Content
Development (ICD). The Working Group on
ICD, which
had its first meeting on
4 December 1998 noted among other aspects,
the following :
(a) The content development industry has a very
huge potential for development which is far
larger than the software development
industry and so, major thrust must be e;iven
for promoting the ICD industry in the country
if the communication networks and other IT
developments are to be fully exploited.

(b) The information products like databases and
value-addedinformationserviceswould have
global scope and international market. Such
products include databases of maps, satellite
pictures of geographical regions, agricultural
statistics, natural resources, industrial and
commercial
products
and
market
information, TV programmes on Indian art
and culture, analysed information products,
and so on.
(c) Enormous human resources will be needed
for information content development in
various sectors. To generate such guantum of
human resources quickly, the universities and
other training institutions must be advised to
organise training programmes on a large
scale. The universities must re-orient their
information science programmes to provide
human resources with appropriate skills
required for the content development
industry and related activities like providing
access to information using various
information systems and networks.
The four working groups were expected to
submit their recommendations by the first week
of January 1999.

5.

following changes:
Collection Development and Acqu
price escalation of publications, the

databases and on online networks. Even
selection of publications, many libraries
include not only paper versions but
!
electronic
publications,
CD-ROMs,
multimedia products. Acquisition thro
Internet is also becoming common.
Cataloguing and Classification: The tradit
catalogue is being replaced by online p
access catalogue (OPAC) which is a databa
holdings of the libhry.
Circulation: This function has been influ

of library collections is reduced to that e
Reference Work: The library professional

I T DEVELOPMENTS IN
LIBRARIES

It is interesting to note that library profession
does not usually lag much behind in the use of
techrrologies relevant to it. One can notice
when the mainframe comptiters came into
operation in late 1950s, libraries started using
them in early 1960s. Similarly, when the
personal computers (PCs) arrived in 1980s, they
soon entered in the libraries a1s.o and were put
into use for automating library actiliities and
services and for development of databases. The
activities in a library mainly include the
following:
(a) Collection development and acquisition;
(b) Cataloguing and classification;
(c) Circulation;
(d) Reference work;
(e) Preservation, conservation and archiving.

Preservation and Archiving: Since
acquisitions are increasingly in non-paper
like electronic, CD-ROM or multi
publications, the preservation measures
these media also.
Also most of these library activities a
Services (CAS) and Selective Dissem
Information (SDI) services are comput

6.

I T USE IN FUTURE LIBRA

v

ternet and other information networks, and so
n. However, one can also say that the extent
f use of these facilities and systems will vary
he libraries. While the elite libraries will be
different information technologies for
t of their activities and services, the
dowed libraries will be using only some
ese technologies and provide services
tly in a manual mode. However, the
ections or visualisations of some experts
o have made detailed studies and visualised
future libraries, are worth noting.
Philip Barker, Professor of Applied
mputing and Research ~irector at the
niversity of Teesside visualises the following
gories of the future libraries :

edia Libraries

-

with .collections in
independent media like paper,
Im, compact disc, etc. The organisational
management processes within these
ries are basically manual in nature.

-

Libraries
which will have
use of computers and such other
tabases and automated
keeping and computer-based decision
c media includes both

-

Digital Libraries
in which all information
exists only in a digital electronic format. The
information itself may however-. reside on
different storage media such asn*;electronic
memory or magnetic or optical disk but users
will not necessarily perceive any differences
between them.
d

great advantage of having information
5;in One
digital form is that it can be accessed
pimultaneously by many users and at a low cost.
i~hus,while a conventional library might only
[hold one or two copies of a book, a digital
[library could generate an unlimited number of
[copies 'at the touch of a button'.

-

!virtual Libraries which use the technology of
[virtual reality (VR). This is known as
[telepresence in its simplest form. In a virtual
[environment one would be able to browse
Laround
i
a library system without having to
!physically go to it

around its rooms and shelves, use an index or
catalogue, select a book (by pointing to it and
touching it), open it and read it. Of course, the
only place where the book really exists is in the
computer and within the minds of its readers.
The use of IT in the new millennium is reflected
vividly in the vision of the policy document
titled Strategic agenda fbr the Ottawa public
library (published in June 1996). It says :
The paradigm is shifting. Our world is
increasing?. depending on information. Libraries
will be electronic doorways to information.
Library hrkers of the future will be the
navigators, the facilitators and the mediators of
the digital revolution. They will help people
retrieveD organise or develop the information
they need. Library workers will be as
comfortable with computers, networks and
databases as they are with books, tapes and
story-times, They will need to train and retrain
constantly. They will have skills and strategies to
meet the needs of people from different
cultures, age groups, social and economic
backgrounds, and lev& of ability.
Based on the expected use of IT in libraries,
Natalia Grygierczyk, Project Manager of
Electronic Library of the University of Utrecht,
The Netherlands, makes a voyage into 2050.
She visualises:
Optical fibre cables and quantum-leap
processors constitute the structure of the Global
Library, a repository comprising a colossal digital
collection amounting to the volume of atleast
25,000,000
complete Britannicas. All such
information is available at fingertips. Without
having to browse through dreary catalogues,
without being afraid of missing crucial
information because of an erroneous code; not
knowing 'the author's name. The disheartening
'out on loan' has become a thing of the past, a
phrase in a dictionary.

7.

USEf'OF IT IN INDIAN

Use of IT in the Indian libraries has been
slow though such attempts started as early as in
the 1970s. .INSDOC in 1976 started getting
Chemical Abstracts condensate and providing
SDI services in the country,-using the ISM 370

' computer of IIT, Madras. In 1975, a one-week
demonstration of online accessing of the
databases held by the European Space Agency
lnformation Retrieval 'system (ESA-IRS) was
organised at the TIFR, Bombay. Also, during the
1970s, INSDOC, Publications & lnformation
Directorate (PID) of CSIR, and a few libraries in
the country started automating some of their
activities and services.
Now a number of "libraries in the country
use computers for library automation, have
e-mail and Internet facilities and acquire
CD-ROM and multimedia publitations. Several
software packages for library automation,
current awareness and SDI services have been
developed and are in use. However, such use of
IT is more in the libraries of the S&T
organisations but in many non-S&T libraries also
the use is picking up fast.

8.

programmes.
As recognised by the IT Task Force
Group on ICD, content development
libraries and information centres re
enermous human resources. Since the li
and information professionals are best suite
the content development activity, they
cash on this opportunity and prove

ROLE O F LIBRARIANS IN
FUTURE LIBRARIES

The importance of information content
development has already been recognised in
the advanced countries. This is evident from
several thousands o r databases being made
available by those countries in various forms as
online
databases,
CD-ROM/multimedia
databases, etc. These are marketed in various
countries. the world over. Also, the role of
libraries in national development is recognised
in various countries. For example, the Library
and lnformation Commission in UK has
recognised that the. library and information
science sector is a substantial part of the UK
economy. It has announced its Vision. 2020
covering the following aspects:
connectivity-providing universal access to the
products of the human mind
Content--creating a digital library of the UK's
intellectual heritage of culture and innovation

providing documents that contain answe
the queries which the user has to go

analysis and repackaging in future father
just providing documents.

ern Australia, librarians
organisations will

teams that need these .roles and will wo
those teams rather than in a library.
According to Peters, there are several
in which today's information professi
develop new skills and strategies in
world of electronic information. These i

Competences-equipping
individuals
and
organisations to play their full role in a learning
and information society.
lnformation content development requires
skills in data organisation, structuring and
presentation of the content in a helpful format
so as to enable easy retrieval of required

that can help them in decisio
lnformation professionals can help

Using information resources to create a
knowledge base to support development of
intellectual capital, presentsan important new
strategic
marketing opportunity
for
information professionals.
To be able to survive in the digital and thus
the end-userariented era, re-engineering might
be the only solution. Ribbler lists a few but
nevertheless critical elements of reengineering
by the information professionals. These are:

o In the reengineering process, the role of
information professionals changes from one
of producing data and information to one of
integrating new information technologies.

o
o

He will assist people in the organisation by
taking away the task of information gathering
and organising.
He will perform the creative tasks of
information product development and
product synthesis
thus providing
informationsolutionsand notjust information.

-

9.

PROBLEMS OF IT BASED
INFORMATION SYSTEMS &
PRODUCTS
s. They also emphasise that future
will have no paper documents and no
and they will provide information
and products as well as documents
ocates are acknowledged computer or
the top bosses of organisations tend to
ept these ideas as such and keep advising
libraries to transform their libraries into the
forms. However, many library managers

r networked libraries. Colin Johnston, an
Librarian, brings out some of the
s faced in libraries with the use of

digital collections4nciuding CD-ROM, and
Digital Video Discs (DVD)-and Internet-based
access to publications. Some of them are
discussed here:
Paper-based publications provide far more
comfortable reading, when one has to read
continuously and in comfortable postures (in
easy chair, sofa, bed, etc.), than any electronic
or digital publication. So, the libraries
designed with a view to accommodate more
digital collections and expectedly fast
decreasing paper-based collections will have
problems in finding space for the paper-based
collections.
0 With the rapid changes in IT, the CD-ROMs
which are considered as 'interim technology'
and are likely to be replaced by DVDs in the
near future, will become unusable as the
drives for the CD-ROMs will go out of market.
The heavy investments made in CD-ROM
collections will have to be repeated for
acquiring the new technology based
collections.
0 Using lnternet-based publications has two
main problems. One is lack of organisation of
the information published through lnternet
and so, one has to spend several hours even
for reasonably exhaustive information
searches. The Internet may be compared to a
large library withoui a catalogue, whose stock
is unclassified and randomly shelved. Given
such chaos and the time needed to become
familiar with its ever-changing resource,
academicians and researchers even in
advanced countries mostly prefer
paper-based scholarly publications than thek
lnternet editions, perhap5 because of the
convenience. Second, a large part of the
information available on lnternet is not
evaluated or authentic and therefore can not
be relied upon for serious use. Such a situation
can sometimes lead to the possibility that
lnternet becomes a vehicle for disinformation,
ranging from conscious deception to
inadvertent inaccuracies.
0 A survey, published in the journal Computers
in Libraries in 1995, found that librarians
usually took less time to provide information
from library 'collections than from Internet. A
paper published in 'Communications of the
ACM (1995) also advises, "If you are in a hurry,

'

go to library, not to Internet". Searchingon the
Net is often less expeditious. This is not to say
lnternet is not usefulfor accessinginformation,
but its contribution should n o t be
overemphasized. If lnternet is goingto be used
by librarians, then a number of steps wiU h a y
to be taken to make it more useful. Fdr
example, it will be necessary to develop and
implement standards for organising and
evaluating information. O n e possible
approach could be by developing catalogues
for the materials available on Internet in which
case the feasibility for such cataloguing is to be
worked out first. A problem with such an
approach could be that different versions of a
file may be accessed ,through different
gophers and files can disappear, be removed
or amended without warning. Thus, any library
cataloguing information of its interest available
on lnternet has no control on such aspects.

million. The number of electronic
projects is continually increasing a
literature search in (Library & lnforma
Science Abstracts (LISA) or Library Literatu
show. However, as I mentioned earler,
with the electronic or IT-based informat
sources, products and services, the trad
paper-based book collections also will gra
library professionals will have to gear
handit! both the current as well as trad
forms of collections.

11. CONCLUSION
Iwould like to condude now that the ro
future library professional will be:

4 to develop as a provider. of access to
information,
information
intermedia-

and as an integrator of
and as an information
1

0 Although more than 1,000 library catalogues

are available on Internet, getting a book after it
is located from such a catalogue would not be
easy. Here the traditional inter-library
cooperation has still to help the document
supply, although some document delivery
services are providedb y some vendors.
0 Convertingthe existing library collections into
digital libraries will be a formidable task with
the associated software, human skills and
copyright problems.

10. THE RIGHT ORLENTATION
In spite of all these
it is certain
that more and more electronic or IT-based
information will be entering libraries and its use
will grow year after year. The European
Commission is presently funding about 75
electronic library projects at a cost of Ecu 898

4 to use current information technologies for
effectively and efficiently doing the job.

49

4 to provide information solutions rather than

ii
4

volumes of literaturethat containthesolutions.
He/she will develop necessary analytical skills q
and general understandingof the disciplinesin
which information is to be provided.

-I

4 to develop appropriate informatio
knowledge bases and informationpro
meet the information requirements
clients.

I believe, the following observation of El
relevant in the present IT era and will also
of'T:
in the new
Where is the life we have lost in living?
Where is the wisdom we havelost inknowle
Where is the knowledge we have lo
information?

y is Director, Defence Scientific Information & Documentation Centre,
Metcalfe H use, Delhi 110 054.

-

10

DESILWC Bulletin of lnf Technol, 1999,19(4 & 5 )

