[

[

DESIDOC Bulletin of inlonation Techmhgy,Vol. 19, No. 4 & 5, July& September 1999, pp. 27-34
@ 1999, MSlDOC

A Systematic Approach to Handle Refeience Queries
Sumati Sharma
%

Abstract
The need of information service in special libraries has been outlined. It
discusses various facets of reference queries and suggests a working model
for handling queries in a more systematic way. It also*lists key information
resources of print as well as electronic media available at Defence Science
Library in the area of Defence Science and Technology.

1. . INTRODUCTION
To provide the right information to the right
reader, in the right way and at the right time, in
the right personal way is the4basis of aH
rence work. According to the American
rary Association's Glossary of Library Terms,
Reference Service is that phase of library work
which is directly concerned with assistance to
readers in securing information and in using
resources of the library in study and research.
Ranganathan defines Reference Service as
rsonal service to each reader in helping him
find the documents answering his interest at
e moment pin-pointedly, .exhaustively and
expeditiously". Both definitions convey that
Reference Service means "process
of
tablishing contact between a reader and his
uments in i+ personal way". 'His documents'
r to those which will serve his requirements

.

FACTORS THAT NECESSITATE
REFERENCE SERVICE

Following are the key factors thatmecessitate
ference service in libraries:
@ Users' day-today information needs and
demand for intensive search service
O Complexities in the growth of libraries and
their use
DESlDOC Bu\let,n of lnf Technol, 1999,19(4 & 5)

9 Modern tools and technbues employed in
libraries
+$+ Volume and variety of documents

+@ Impact of information technology

3.

CATEGORIES OF REFERENCE
QUERIES

On the basis of experience gained at the
reference desk of Defence Science Library
(DSL), which is a central special library of
Defence
Research
and
Development
Organisation, shows that the queries asked at a
reference desk are unpredictable and vary from
simple directional requests to elaborate
research questions from various micro fields of
S&T iiformation. Complex queries involve
considerable search time and the use of many
reference sources. To provide information
against such queries, reference librarian may
make use of resources of the library as well as
those resources available outside the library.
And sometimes a simple query proves to be
difficult to answer as either it is unfamiliar or the
resources for the same are not available in the
library. Nevertheless, reference librarians are
expected to! answer unfamiliar or complex
reference queries wjth the same skill they
exercise for familiar or simple queries.

On the basis of time spent and information
resources required to be consultec& reference
queries/requests received at DSL may be put
under the following three categciries:
1. Directionalguidance in the use of the library,
its collections or services.
2. Ready reference service or short range
reference service.
3. Exhaustive search service ot long range
search service.
Directionalguidance is generally sought by
persons who use the library for the first time.
Such persons may seek help or assistance, for
example, in locating the current issues of the
periodical title, or where books are displayed or
in general to know what services are available
in the library.

Ready Rekrence Service involves reference
queries of fact finding nature or identifying a
few documents relevant to a particular query.
These are kinds of needs. which are clearly
understood without too much discussion and
the source(s) required are obvious and fairly
easy to identify. In this service search is usually
restricted to ready reference sources like
dictionaries,
encyclopaedias,
yearbooks,
biographical sources, directories, etc. Such
services do not take much time and hence are
also known as short range reference services.
Thus the concept of ready reference service is
mainly based on duration of time spent. This
service is distinguished from the purely
directional level of work by the fact that
reference librarian need to consult some sort of
reference source(s) rather than simply
answering from personal knowledge. The
professional skills required here are knowledge
of
reference sources,
their
contents,
organisation and presentation, etc. and
matching the question with the appropriate
reference source to have the answer.
Exhaustive Search SemMce deals with
research 'level questions. Research level
questions require extended searches, perhaps
over several hours, or days and sometimes even
longer periods, possibly involving several
members of the reference staff concyrrently.
Answering such questions takes enormous time
because it requires using a number of reference
sources because of the nature of information
28

sought. Hence such service is also known as
long range reference service. This service
includes retrospective searches also on a given
topic. Such queries are very common in DS1
where users are researchers, scientists and
decision makers. They must be provided the
required information irrespective of the form or
place from where it may be sought.
In long range service, the search starts with
ready reference sources of information and is
continued into books, periodicals, reports,
non-book materials, etc. In case, information is
not located in the library, then search may be
continued into resourtes of other libraries
located locally as well as outside. Although such
searches take long time, here also time is a
crucial factor as DSL serves a special category
of usen. Reference librarian is expected to
provide information quickly and efficiently and
required to work even under pressure without
compromising with the quality of the work.
In handling such long range reference
queries effectively and timely, a proper
understanding of the reference process is
required.

4.

REFERENCE PROCESS

Reference process is "the process of
answering questions". It might be defined even
more generally as the process of satisfying
specific, recurrent information needs.
Performing reference work requires more
than learning a limited number of reference
sources. No reference librarian can remember
all the reference sources, that could satisfy a
specific query, nor keep up with the constant
flow of new materials. But with the aid of a
systematic approach for satisfying information
requests the reference person can apply certain
basic principles to locate an answer, regardless
of the nature of the query asked.
This approach, involves interaction between
the librarian, the library user, and the.libraryls
resources in order to satisfy the user's
information need. With an understanding of the
reference process, a reference librarian is not
restricted to a limited number of reference
sources but can apply general principles when
answering unique or difficult requests.
DESIDOC Bulktin of Inf Techno/, 1999,19(4 815)

Time is another vital factor, especially in
environment like that of DSL, which plays a
decisive role in providing reference service.
Providing correct information is of no use to the
user until it is given in time. Correct and timely
information only carries weight and forms the
base of an effective reference service.
Although each reference librarian develops
his/her own techniques and approaches to
answer reference queries, the basic process of
satisfying specific needs remains essentially the
same. A systematic common approach to
handle reference queries is worked out on the
basis of practices followed at DSL, as this helps
in achieving the very basic objectives of
reference service,
i.e.,
providing right
information in the right time.
The complete reference process, i.e., from
the receipt of an information request to
communication of an answer to the user can be
broken down into a series of decision-making
steps. A working model of the reference
process is shown in Figure 1.

e clarify the question in terms of itself
(i.e., what it really means, rather than
how it is expressed), and in terms of
translating it into query statement
words or phrases.
ascertain the amount, level and
difficulty of the materials which will
answer that question.
ascertain the time and resources
required to answer the query.
This technique demands the highest
communication & articulation skills to elicit the
exact nature of the user's need for assistance
and research support. If the librarian begins the
search with an inaccurate understanding of
what is really wanted, the information
generated will be of 'no use to the user. This
wastes time for both, and may discourage the
user from seeking reference service again.

Steps involved in the reference process as
shown in Figure 1 may be analysed as follows.

To have a better understanding of the actual
information need, DSL is making use of the
search request forms. To get maximum
information from user in relation to a particular
query, apart ?rod verbal discussions, the users
are requested tb fill these search request forms
which helps a lot to ascertain the actual
information need of the user.

Step 1

Step 3

The first step in the reference process is the
identification of the essential information in
the request of a iibrary user. At this initial
stage, the reference librarian analyses the
query to determine the subject of the request
and to identify the type of information
needed. The query may be for exhaustive
search or only a fact finding type.

Step 2
The next step is t6 determine whether any
clarification or amplification of the query' is
required. This process is called reference
interview. Reference interview is the most
important step of the whole reference
process, which requires discussion with the
user about the request in order to gain a more
complete understanding of the actual
information need. The basic purpose of the
reference interview, no matter how brief or
how long, is to:
ascertain what information the user
wants for his particular question or
problem. Depth of knowledge on the
subject of query requested.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 1999,19(4 & 5 )

Once the actual information need has been
clarified, the next step is to refine the
statement of the user and transform the query
statement o f the user into subject
descriptors/keywords i.e. translating query
words into language of answer providing
tools. Transforming the query statement into
search terms is not merely a translation of
query words into search terms but it is much
more than this. The step involves the
selection of search terms from various
sources and standardisirig these selected
search terms with the help of thesauri, such
as, Spine, Inspec, Thesaurus of Engineering
and Scientific Terms.

Step 4
The fourth step is to formulate a search
strategy. Search strategy is the line of action
formulated for searching .the information.
This step is very important as formulation of
search itatement involves ghe grouping of
selected search terms into search subsets
using Boolean logic. For example, all
synonyms, related teims form a search subset

I

I

~

~

T'

u

9

I

~

using 'OR' and final answer is the result of
combining the different subsets with IAND'
operator. The terms which should not make
the part of searched information may be
excluded using 'NOT' operator.

ability of reference librarian to complete a
query in most successful way. '

Step 7
This step involves location of an answer
within 'the pages of the specific title(s)/
database(s) selected. This is accomplished by
selecting search headings which will provide
access to information reference source.

'

Step 5

'

Once the line of action for searching
information is chalked out, the reference
librarian can mentally identify categories of
reference tools likely to contain the type of
information needed. Any reference query, no
matter how basic, needs to have access to a
variety of information resources. The
amazing developments in information
technology have revolutionised the process
of information storage and retrieval. Apart
from conventional paper media and
traditional online searching, a large number
of reference sources are now available in the
form of CD-ROM databases. Furher Internetbased services are playing a vital role in
providing ready reference as well as
exhaustive literature search services in
today's scenario. It is in this Step that the
reference librarian determines whether to
search the answer from the conventional or
electronic resources including internet. The
various reference tools available at DSL may
be grouped under following two major
categories.

4 Paper Media: It includes well known
conventional varieties of reference
books-encyclopedias,
dictionaries,
handbooks, yearbooks etc. .
4 Non-paper Media: It includes:
(a) Microforms

(b) Electronic Media, and
(c) Audio-visual Material

A list of some of the important reference
tools belonging to above mentioned categories
are listed as Appendix-A. These resources are
used extensively at DSL to handle most of the
reference queries related to defence science
and technology discipline.

Step 6

r

The above step is followed by the selection of
a specific title in which to begin searching for
an answer to the query as matchingthe query
with appropriate reference source is the real

Step 8
The final step is selection of an answer. This
step ,is crucial because the information
identified in this step must be accurate,
complete and useful to the user.
The process is completed only if that
information proves to be satisfactory to the
user. Otherwise the query. is renegotiated, and
the individual steps in the decision-making
process are repeated.
Providing coniplete and correct answer to
an information request is dependent on the
decisions made in each of the steps of the
reference process. .Errors at any of the
decisionmaking stage would result in an
incorrect or inadequate answer. If the reference
librarian misunderstands the message of the
query, he or she will end up searching for the
wrong information. Correctness and. timeliness
are the two basic components of a satisfactory
answer.

5.

CONCLUSION

Reference service plays an important role in
satisfying the user needs and helps to maximise
the use of a library. It can greatly help in
meeting the objectives of a library as well as the
laws of library science. The success of reference
service depends greatly upon the approach and
skills, with which the reference librarian handles
reference queries. A systematic logical
approach in handling queries helps in, better
understanding of query, formulating search
strategy, selection of appropriate tools and
finally providing timely information with an
utmost accuracy and relevancy. A reference
librarian is supposed to use value judgement to
evaluate the quality of information or
documents as well asgecide upon as to how
much information would meet the information
needs of the user, and what is the level of the

information required? Reference tools available
at DSL are in general capable of fulfilling most
of the ready reference information requirements
of the usen from vari6s micro fields of S&T
information inhouse only. Howwer for
exhaustive literature search requests the
reference librarian has to make use of the
resources of other special libraries, within and
outside country. DSL has developed a rich
collection of various information sources in the
subject areas like laser, electronics, military
science, communications, management and
computer science, which provide a base for
exhaustive literature search services. However,
there is still a scope to build, up to the mark
collection in many other subject areas like
explosives, fire sciences, materials science,
military technology and naval sciences and fill
the gaps. As an ongoing continuous activity
library is developing a balanced and livs
collection both in paper as well as electronic

media to fill the gaps and keeping in view ready
reference as well as exhaustive literature search
requirements of its users.

REFERENCES
1. Krishan Kumar. Reference service. 5th rev.
ed., Vikas, New Delhi, 1996,447~.
2. Kurnar, PSG. Fundamentals of information
science. S Chand, New Delhi, 1998,363~.
3. Lambert, J and Lambert, PA. How to find
information in science and technology?2nd.
ed., Library Association, London, 1991,
108p.
4. Ranganathan, SR. Reference sewich. 2nd.
ed., Sarda Ranganathan Endowment for
Library Science, Bangalore,1989,432p.
Following are some of the vital resources,
which are used extensively at DSL to handle
most of the reference queries related to
Defence Science and ~6chnolo~y.

Smt Sumati S h a m is Scientist at Defence Scientific Inhrmation & Documentation Centm
Metcalfe Hwse Lklhi 110 054.

-

APPENDIX-A

Key Reference Sources on Defence Science and Technology
Paper Media
Encyclopedias
1. Encyclopedia o f Arms Control and
Disarmament. 3 Vol. Set.
2. Encyclopedia of Military Biography.
3. Encyclopedia of Modern war.
4. Encyclopedia of the U.S. Military.
5. Encyclopedia of World War 11.
6. IllustratedEncyclopedia of Military Insignia.
7. International M i l i t a r y and Defence
Encyclopedia, 6 Vol. Set.
8. jane's Encyclopedia of Aviation (5 Vol. Set).
9. Military small arms of the 20th Century.

i

Yearbooks
1. Brassey's Defence Yearbook.
2. Conversion Survey.
3. lndian Defence Yearbook.
4. Jane's Yearbooks on various topics of
Defence Science & Technology,
5. Military Balance.
6. SIPRI Yearbook.
7. SP's Military Yearbook.
Review
1. Asian Strategic Review.
2. Jane's Aviation Review.
3. Jane's Military Review.
4. Jane's Naval Review.
Handbooks
1. Complete war-games handbook.
2. Handbook of fire arms and Ballistics :
Examining and interpreting forensic
evidence.
3. Handbook of Model Rocketry.
4. Handbook on the peaceful settlement of
disputes between states.
5. India's highest gallantry awards & the men
who won them 1947-1995.
6. Nuclear norr-proliferation : a reference
handbook.
7. Quest for excellence : Training the Indian
Army.

Index
1. Royal Military lndex.
Series Publication
1. Brassey's series of publication on various
topics of Defence and Military Science.
Non-Paper Media
Microforms
1. Selective Research' in Microfiche (SRIM)
Services.
2. Defence Science Library is subscribing
currently 18 categories of SRlM series in the
field of Defence and military science.

Electronic Media
CD-ROM databases
AIAA Meeting Papers on Disc (1999+)
Aerospace Database (1989+).
CNS Data (PNS, ENSP, IIMP, & CISNP)
(1994+)
DOD standards (1994-98)
FMM Middle East & Africa Forecast
(1999+)
FMM NATO & Europe Forecast
(1999+)
FMM Asia, Australia & Pacific Rim
(1999+)
Global Defence Information (GDI)
(1987+)
Historical Standards Specifications
(199498)
IEEE/IEE Electronic Library (1989+)
Jane's Defence Equipment Library
(1999+)
Jane's Geopolitical Library (1998+)
Jane's Market Intelligence Library
(1998+)
Jane's Unmanned Vehicles & Targets
(1998+)
Land & Sea-Based Electronics Forecast
(1999+)
J NTIS Database (1983+)
Patent View (Derwent) (1996+)
Risk Report (1997+)
Space Systems Forecast (1999+)
Unmanned Vehicles Forecast (1999+)

,

US Patent Images (1995+)
Warships Forecast (1999+)
World wide Standards (199498)

Internet Sites

Aerospace database
http://www.aiaa.org/pu blications/database/
aerospace database.html
/
AlAA journals
http://www.aiaa.org/publications/journals
Armed Forces journal International
http://www.afji.com/
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, USA
http://www.acda.gov/
Arms Control Today
http://www.armscontrol.org/ATC/acthtml
Aviation Week Online
http://www aviationweekcom/
Aviation Weel & Space Technology
http://www.awstonline.com/
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists
http://www.bullatomsci.org/
Bureau of Export Administration (US Deptt of
Commerce)
http://www.bxa.doc.gov
Defence & Aerospace Directory
http://www.defence-directory.com/index.htm
Defence Dail .
http://www. efencedaily.com

d'

Defence News
http://www.defencenews.com
Defence Research & Development
Organisation (India)
http:f/www.drdo.com

Federation of American Scientists
http://www.fas.org/
Frank Case'publishers
http://www.frankcss.com

Jane's Internet Defence Glossary
htt ://www.janes.com/defence/resources/
dePes-gloss.html
Megaterms :Military Terms and Acronyms
http://www.vitrex.net/+ndorm/megaterm/
megaterrn.htm
Military Aircraft Database
ht ://www.csd.uwo.ca/-pettypi/eIevon/gustinmgary
Military Ranks
htt ://www.luther.bc.ca/+/cnv/military/
mi$ry.html
Ministry of Defence
http://www.govt.nz/ps/min/defence/
National Aerospace Lab '
http://www.nrl.nl
National Technical Informal Service, USA (NTIS)
http://www,fedworld.gov
Office of Defence Trade Control
http://www.pmdtc.org
Research and Development, USA
http://www.rand.org
Royal Military College
http://www.vuse.vanderbilt.edu/-abdulgai/rmc.
htm
The export Administration Regulations of the
EAR
http://www.bxa.doc.gov/EAR webpg.htm
Treaties, pacts, and Agreements
http://www.dir.yahoo.com/Government/

Defence Standards lnformation Centre
http://www.dstan.mod.uk/info/htm
Defence Technical lnformation Centre
http://www.dtic.mil
DejaNews
http://www.search.dejanews.com
Federal Aviation Administration
http://www.faa.gov/
Federal Register
http://www.nara.gov/nara/fed reg/ddh/dd
hout.html

UK Ministry of Defence
http://www.mod.uk
United States lnformationAgency
http://www.usia.gov/
US Department of Def. Satellite Navigation
System
http://www.ustexas.edu/dept/grg/gcraft/n
gps/gps=j.html

DESIDOC Bulletin d l n f T k b o l , 1999,19(4 & 5)

