DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 17, No.1, January 1997, pp. 25-31  
1997, DES1DOC 
Collection Development in the Context of Electronic  Publications and Networking: Problems and Prospects 
BS Maheswarappa*  and PC Tadasad** 
Abstract 
This article critically examines the issues in development of collection for  libraries in the context of electronic publication and networking with special  reference to formulation of policies, users, formats, storage, mode of access,  selection,  acquisition,  bibliographical  control, finance, evaluation,-and  manpower. It concludes that developing a need-based, relevant and cost- effective collection, consisting of  electronic and other publications  in  document form, requires systematic planning, and effective implementation. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Technology has dominated all the spheres  of human activity. The libraries are  not  exception to to this and it is very well reflected  in the present day libraries. Thanks to  technology, various media could appear after  the invention of printing  technology  like  magnetic tapes, microforms, compact discs, etc.  All these storage media have found their places  in libraries and are playing an important role in  storage and dissemination of information. Thus,  libraries have traversed  a long way. Far from  being dusty store houses,  the  world's great  libraries are both the pilots and the lifeboats, of  the new information age.1 
* Professor and Chairman 
Department of Library & Information Science Gulbarga University 
Gulbarga-585 106, 
** Lecturer 
Department of Library & Information Science Gulbarga University 
Gulbarga - 585 106. 
DESIOOC Bulletin of Inf Tec, 1997,17(1) 
The developments that emerged during the  present  century  have provided many  opportunities and challenges for the libraries.  Interdisciplinary nature of research, information  explosion, production and availability of sources  of information in multimedia, automation of  library systems, physical deterioration of  documentary sources, the changing concept  from  ownership to access,  networks, financial  constraints, etc., are  some of the issues,  affecting library services. 
Perhaps the most important issues or  realities  are electronic publishing and  networking of libraries, changing concept from  ownership  to access, and  commercial  availability of databases, etc. These realities  have  a direct impact on libraries.  Hence,  libraries must cope up with these realities to  varying degrees. 
It  is a well recognised fact that, library  collection is the sum total of library materials  that make up the holding of particular library.  Planned and systematic selection and  acquisition of these, keeping in view the current 

========1========

and future needs of an institution  constitutes collection development, which is  one of the prerequisites for any kind of  library. Collection development, is thus an  important function and can be defined as 'a  process of making certain the information  needs of the people using the collection are  met in a timely and economic manner, using  information resources produced both inside  and outside the organisation'. 
Hence, the libraries bear the primary  responsibility  for  acquiring information and  organising or storing it in such a way that the  users can make the best and effective use of it  The  process of recording information has  changed over the years, which is reflected in the  growth in number and variety of sources, in an  effort  to keep pace with  these  developments.  This has had a tremendous and significant  impact on libraries in general and collection  development in particular. One of the ways, in  which libraries can respond, is  to incorporate  these in collection development program. This  paper examines the problems and prospects of  collection development in the context of  electronic publications and networking. 
2. ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING 
Electronic Publishing (EP) is  a process for  production  of  typeset-quality documents  containing text, graphics, pictures, tables,  equations, etc, In general, it is used to mean  any information source published in electronic  form.  Electronic publication can  also  be  represented as: 
EP - Electronic Technology + Computer  Technology + Communication Technology •*•  Publishing 
Electronic publication includes  sources like  magnetic tapes, videodiscs and databases.  Depending on the contents of a source, it can  be either full-text or bibliographic or directory or  numeric, or image. The concept EP is just 11  years old, and the first electronic book was  published in Germany in 1985.  Since then,  there has been a steady growth in the number  of  electronic publications. Slowly, serials were  published  via electronic networks called as  electronic journals. The third edition of Michael  Strangelove 'Directory of Electronic Serials' lists 
224 electronic journals on the network.4 There  are hundreds of  full-text electronic journals  available online. The number of  full-text  databases has grown from 532 in 1985 to 3077  in 1993.5 
There were only 53 CD-ROM titles in 1986,  which rose to 230 in 1988, 5000 in 1993 and  expected to reach 8500 by 1994. Further, there  were 4422 CD titles available commercially in  1993 consisting of 1070 titles in science and  technology, 931 general works and 2119 in  social  sciences,  humanities  ,  and  arts.6  Lancaster's prediction in 1981 indicated that  25% of reference books will be in electronic  form by 1990, 50% of the abstracting services  wilt be available only on electronic form by the  year 2000 and 25% of the periodicals in science  and technology, social sciences and humanities  will not reach this conversion level until after the  year 2000.7 
The products of electronic publishing are  mostly reference materials, secondary sources  such as abstracting and indexing sources and  the primary periodicals such as full-text  electronic journals, are slowly replacing the print  on-paper sources. Libraries have already started  using computers for information  activities  and  acquiring publications in electronic media. 
3. NETWORKING 
No  library  is self sufficient and therefore  resource sharing among libraries is a necessity,  which ensures optimum utilisation of available  information resources and thereby helps in  providing better services. The services like e- mail,  ftp, telnet, http, on-line catalog, e- newsletter, e-bulletin, etc., available-on various  networks, enable the libraries to provide  massive access to global information, thus  maximising the access to the world information. 
Nearly about 200 universities (including  deemed), more than 10,000 colleges and  number of scientific and research institutions are  there in India, which  depend for their  information resources on their libraries.  The  concept of library  network  is slowly gaining  momentum in India, with NICNET, ERNET,  DESINET, SIRNET, BTISNET, CALIBNET, DELNET,  BOMNET, MALIBNET, HYDLIBNET already 
DESIDOC Bulletin of  Inf Technol 1997,17(1) 

========2========

functioning and INFLIBNET under progress and  BL-NET under proposal stage. 
The Internet, the world's first digital utility, an  all purpose network, now is accessible in India.  Some areas have been identified, wherein  Internet will help the Indian network system,  viz. 
•  Establishing      e-mail      facilities      for  
communication;  
•  Conducting user education; 
• Constituting   expert   committee   to   evolve  
standards;  
•  Acquiring and installing necessary hardware  
and software, and; 
•  Providing aid in sharing the information among  
the Internet user's community. 
Inspite of these technological advancements,  the primary purpose of a library has remained  the same being 'to meet the challenges of  providing its clienteles with increased access to  knowledge base that is growing at accelerated  pace'.8  But,  one has to find answers to the  following: 
(!)   How    to   deal   with    the    technological  
advancements?, and 
(ii) What  are   the  factors  that   need  to  be  
considered in collection development? 
4. ISSUES IN COLLECTION  
DEVELOPMENT 
4.1    Collection  Development Policy 
Collection development has to be constantly  guided by the requirements of the institution. In  this information age, it is not practicably  possible  for  any library to satisfy  all  the  information needs of all its users all the time.  The libraries are  still predominantly document  oriented, and it is only in recent  years  publications in electronic media have become  available. It is important here, to note that many  of the fundamental changes in libraries will  occur more in the process than in the product  Hence, the collection development policy has  to be devised as a guide to assist the library in  exercising its collection development 
DESIOOC Bulletin of Inf Tec, 1997,17(1) 
responsibilities, subjecting to changes, shifting  functions, and reflecting the environment in  which it exists. 
The collection development policy  committee of the collection development and  evaluation section, RACD, views CDP as an  indispensable antecedent to competent  selection, that explains the library to defend it  from its patrons and giving conceptual  framework for budget requests.1 
In  the  changed  scenario, 'flexible  descriptions that encompass all formats of  information and resources both local and  remote  will  require continuous adjustment as  each fields, methods and materials evolve.  Libraries  will  therefore have to focus  continuously on user's priorities  and needs;  strategies for acquisition will follow and derive  from these general analyses'. The CD policy  has  to incorporate all the formats in which  relevant information is available. 
4.2    User Studies 
The literature on user studies indicated that  students, scholars and scientists rely on various  sources of information both formal and informal,  documentary  and  non-documentary, publications in electronic media such as online  databases, CD-ROM, - full-text journals,  multimedia and others.  The  attitude  of users  towards the new media in the initial years will  be either resignation or hostility. The reasons  are obvious—lack of  portability, difficulties in  browsing, different searching patterns, wailing in  line  due to a  limited number of terminals,  irritatingly slow processing rate, primitive quality  of  equipment, etc. In view of the tremendous  storage and retrieval capacity of the new media,  the ease with which the information can be  searched and retrieved, there is no other  alternative  for libraries except incorporating  them in collection, and imparting user  education. 
4.3    Format War 
In view of the availability of information in  different formats, a complete evaluation of new  and alternative products and services  is  essential. New electronic formats are making 

========3========

selection process in collection development  program  more  complex. But, libraries have to  adapt themselves to the changes in format  because of their very nature—their service  nature.1  When considering format shifts,  Kreamer's five commandments can be made  use of.13  They are 'aesthetics', 'audience',  'compatibility', 'costs', and 'copyright'. Further  he adds inal 'knowing the current market place,  interpreted in to the language of true patron  demand and the potential for its wise use, is the  key to successfully winning the format war"! 4.  Franklin has discussed on how to incorporate  a library's primary goals and resources  limitations in to library specific format selection  guidelines and given criteria which help- the  selectors to choose the appropriate forn at for  specific resources. 
4.4   Storage 
One of the most critical and important issue  to be tackled is how and where, should these  electronic formats be stored? Whether the  library or the institution, has the needed  appropriate environment? The library buildings  that are constructed  keeping in view of  providing access to books, periodicals and other  objects  need  modifications or renovations to  have in way for electronic information. 
There is a need for 'a more flexible approach  to library design and points and flexible storage  provision'.16  Further,  the decision as to whether  the mainframe or mini or PC-based LAN or  WAN is appropriate for a given situation or not.  This decision has to be taken at the local level  taking into account variety of factors, viz.,  capacity of the system, familiarity of users with  procedures for transferring,  requirements of  downloading and printing of files, maintenance  and data storage costs and the possibility of  having to archival backup. Accordingly, a shift is  needed in providing infrastructural facilities. 
4.5    Mode of Access 
Every reader his or her information, says the  Second Law of library science. So, information  should be easily accessible to all the users. This  can  be facilitated by  integrating  electronic  publications in to the library services menu by  developing campuswide network, with 
   
28 
adequate number of terminals. Hence, the  traditional mode of access has to be transferred  to deliver services in non-traditional approach. 4.6   Selection 
Webb17  predicted that 'the collection  development activator of the year 2000 will deal  with a world in which there is more of  everything, more books and journals, more  specialisation, more inflation, more use of  microformals, more access to everything.' This  prediction has come true. The emphasis in  collection building has shifted from 'ownership  to access. Librarians are being asked, what is the  minimum that must be provided locally with  material beyond this minimum supplied by  other libraries. Reality used to require that to be  of service to our users we own all the material  we can afford. 
The current reality, taking into account  money and the increased power of electronic  resources, emphasises identifying and buying  only the essential and the unique.18  This  situation  will demand decision about  which  format (electronic/print) should be selected, and  made  available as part of the collection. The  criteria  applied in selecting print titles should  apply  while  selecting the electronic titles and  there has to be a 'loosely coupled  relationship'1 between the decision makers  while selecting a particular title as the titles are  selected ultimately for the end users. 
4.7   Acquisition 
Despite the non-traditional format,  traditional, routine principles and practices of  procurement  apply to the acquisition of  electronic titles. But, the  librarian  must  increasingly become an 'educated consumer to  make intelligent purchasing decisions'.21  Wiggins has given two ground rules that must  be accepted before order can be achieved, viz., Rule-1: 
Buy no. material for any  programme/Department until the priority  in the institutions plan, is clearly defined.  This must be clearly and openly stated by  the highest- levels of the academic  administration. 
DESIOOC Bulletin of Inf Tec, 1997,17(1) 

========4========

Rule-2: 
Invest the resources available for collection  development (including access) in a manner  which reflects the long term priorities of the  academic institution. 
The  availability of free and subscription  based titles have  to be checked in first. A  careful monitoring of standing orders is required  in  order to ensure timely receipt of  materials,  continued services and acquisition schedule for  updates23 is required. Barker24  and  Propas  and  Reich25 were of the opinion that in the changed  context workflow has to be redesigned by  integrating acquisitions. 
4.8    Bibliographical Control 
Electronic publications have to be integrated in  the library's collection, through cataloguing.  Such cataloguing needs format standards and  access instructions at the international  level.  Woodward26 observed that 'at the macrolevel,  the whole question of national and international  bibliographical control remains a vexed one  which is unlikely to be resolved in the near  future. However, he further adds that, al the  I level, bibliographical control can be  achieved  easily'.  Thornburn27  has already  demonstrated  how  to catalogue remote  electronic journals and databases. 
4.9    Finance 
Finance  is the sine  qua  non  of all the library  operations. It is important to see whether the  electronic  publications are economical in  relation to print version. It costs heavily in the  initial stages and even as librarian stand at the  brink  of powerful communication and  information  revolution, there are limitations on  how much hardware and software can be  ired to take full advantage of these tronic  services'.28  Regardless of whether such  
4.10 Evaluation 
Perhaps nothing is more  important and  crucial than evaluating information in electronic  format. The very nature  of it, adds to the  problems. Each service and product has to be  evaluated  and  its performance has to be  quantified in terms  of accountability,  accessibility, competency, availability, browsability, searching pattern, user-friendliness,  cost, time frame, etc. Such studies are now  being reported in  journals like JASIS,  IPR,  Online, Database etc.,  and the methodology  followed there could also be made use of. 
4.11 Manpower 
The availability of information in electronic  formal has implications on part of the library  staff. As the electronic information systems  expand, the staff needs to adapt to new  technologies and have to possess skills to  handle them efficiently and effectively. The  manpower needs to perform several new  assignments concerned with collection  development. 
5. CONCLUSION 
Electronic publishing has come of age. It has  certain advantages and disadvantages. Each of  these constraints may be overcome as such  innovations provide better services to users,  these have to be accommodated. But, at the  same time we have to realise that these can be  used as complementary technology and but not  as replacement technology. To be successful,  'we have to be as knowledgeable about  electronic services and products as we are  about printed resources. At the same time we  need to build upon the co-operative  collection development arrangements and  explore new possibilities for sharing resources  
change is necessary, collection  as widely and economically as possible'. 
development  must focus its energy toward  relevant  collections within the budgetary  framework. 'Proportional use of statistics' 9  will  have to be made use of before allocating the  financial resources. 
DESIOOC Bulletin of Inf Tec, 1997,17(1) 
Hence, the challenge of this new direction in  collection  development is indeed an  opportunity to better serve the user community  by developing a need based, relevant and cost  effective collection sometimes without owning  but providing access to  information through  networking. 

========5========

6.  REFERENCES 
1. The world's great libraries.   The Economist  
23 December, 1989,41. 
2.  Evans,  C  Edward.  Developing library and  
information    centre    collection.     Ed.    2.  
Libraries Unlimited, Colorado, 1987, 13. 
3.  Gurnsey,  John.   Electronic  publishing:     A  
state-of-the-art  review.    Information Media  
and Technology, 1992,18(3), 101-04.  
4.  Strangelove, M. Directory of E-Seriats. Ed. 3.  
ARL, Washington, DC, 1993.  
5.  Woodward, Hazel. The impact of electronic  
information     on     serials     collection  
management.   IFLA   loumal,   1994,   20(1),  
35-45.  
6.  Chakraborthi,     AK,     et     al.     CD-ROM.  
Electronics Information and Planning, 1994,  
22(2), 106-12.  
7.  Lancaster, FW.   The future of the library in  
the     age     of    telecommunication.     In  
Telecommunication and libraries: A primer  
for  librarians  and  information     managers.  
DW King et al.   Knowledge Industry, White  
Plains, 1981.  
8.  Gopinath,     MA.     Keynote     Address:  
Librarianship in library management.  IASLIC  
Bulletin, 1990, 35(4), 135-42.  
9.  Massman, Virgil F. Changes that wifl affect  
college library collection  development.  In  
Academic libraries by the year 2000, Edited  
by Herbert Poole.   RR Sowker, New York,  
1977, 152-64. 
10. Collection development policies committee  
of    the    collection     development    and  
evaluation section. RASD. The relevance of  
collection development policies: Definition,  
necessity    and    applications.     Reference  
Quarterly, 1993,33,65-74. 
11.Hazen, Dan C. Collection development  
policies in the information age. College and  
Research Libraries, 1995, 29, 131. 
12.  Kreamer,  Jean.  The  format  war.     Wilson  
Library Bulletin, 1992, 67(3), 38-40.  
13. loc.cit  
   
30 
14. loc.cit 
15. Franklin,  Jonathan  A.  One  piece of the  
collection  development  puzzle:  Issues  in  
drafting format selection guidelines. Revised  
version of winning entry in the 1994.  AALL  
Call for Papers Competition. 1994, 753-80. 
16.  Library   association   working   party,      The  
impact of new technology on libraries and  
information centres. LAF London, 1982, 36. 17. Webb, William H. Collection development  
for the university and large research library:  
More  and  more  versus  less  and  less.  In  
Academic Libraries by the year 2000. Edited  
by Herbert Poole.  R R  Bowker, New York,  
1977, 139-51. 
18.  Propas,     Sharon    and     Reich,  Vicky.  
Postmodern        acquisitions.  Library  
acquisitions:   Practice   and   theory,  1995,  
19(1), 43-4  
19.  Chu,   Felix  T.   Collaboration   in   a  loosely  
coupled systems: Librarian—Faculty relations  
in  collection  development.     Library   and  
Information   Science   Research,   1995,   17,  
135-50.  
20.  McKechan, Nancy C, Smith, Nanoy j and  
Boggan,   Delores.   Research   databases:   A  
new  direction  in  collection  development.  
Bulletin   of   Medical   Library   Association,  
1989, 77(3), 252-55.  
21.  Mount, Ellis (Ed.).  The impact of technology  
in law libraries. In Basics of law librarianship,  
Vol 2, Haworth, London. 1990.  
22.  Wiggins, Gary. Collection development Vs  
access   in      academic   science   libraries.  
Science Technology Libraries of the Future,  
1992,13(1), 57-71.  
23.  Melechon., Op. Or., p 254.  
24.  Barker, Joseph W. Integrating acquisitions:  
Reorganisation        at    the    University    of  
California,    Berkely.      Library Acquisitions:  
Practice and Theory, 1992,16,355-60.  
25.  Propas., Op. Ot,  
26. Woodward., Op. C/t.  
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Tec ,1997,17(1) 

========6========

27.  Thornburn,    C.    Cataloging    of    remote  
electronic journals  and databases.   Serials  
Librarian, 1992, 23(1/2), 11-23.  
28. Goehner, Donna M. Steady as she goes  
moving from  Print to electronic forms of  
information with budget reduction,   journal  
of Academic Librarianship, 1992,18, 9-10. 
29.  Carrigan,  Dennis  P.  Improving return on  
investment:  A proposal for allocating  the  
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Tech, 1997,17(1) 
book     budget,    lournal    of    Academic  Librarianship, 1992,18(3), 292-297. 
30. Maheswarappa, BS; loshi, Anupama N; and  
Tadasad,   PC.      Human   relations   in   the  
context  of library automation,  In  Human  
relations  in  librarianship.     Edited by PSC  
Kumar and CP Vashishth. ILA, Dethi, 1996,  
351-59. 
31.  Goehner., Op. Cit.  

========7========

