DESlDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 20, Nos. 1 &2, January & March 2000, pp. 13-1 9
0 2000, DESlDOC

Intellectual Property Rights and lnternet
R Saha
Technology lnformation Forecasting and Assessment Council (TIFAC)

ABSTRACT
This paper describes the relationship between Intellectual Property
Rights and lnternet operations, including e-commerce. The new issues
opened due to the advent of digital technologies for storing and
transmitting information are discussed along with types of IPR issues
applicable to Internet.

1. INTRODUCTION

(b) Product life cycle is becoming shorter,

A spurt in the interest in intellectual
property rights (IPRs) has been visible in the
country for the last five years, even though the
legal and other regimes to deal with IPR have
been in place since independence and earlier.
The recent interest started with a curiosity and
sometimes with an element of apprehension,
has now graduated to a need-based compulsion
and desire to play a new game introduced with
the formation of World Trade Organisation
(WTO). With the opening up of trade in goods
and services, the lPRs have become more
susceptible to infringement without adequate
return to the creator of knowledge. There has
been a quantum jump in the R&D costs with an
associated jump in investments required for
putting a new technology in the marketplace.
The stakes of the developers of technology have
become very high and hence, the need to
protect the knowledge from unlawful use has
become expedient, at least for a period, that
would ensure recovery of R&D and other
associated costs and adequate profits for
continuous investments in R&D.

(c) Investments on R&D, production, marketing
are very high,

lnformation technology (IT) requires a
strong IPR protection system for many reasons;
the important ones are:
(a) It changes rapidly,

(d) It is a multidisciplinary area requiring high
level of skills,
(e) It is unaffected by geographical boundaries,
(f) It is a great equaliser and unifying factor for
the human society,
(g) It is now highly software driven, and
(h) The industry is very competitive. Therefore,
one expects a large number of patents being
granted in the IT sector all over the world,
including India.

*

In a recent study conducted by the Patent
Facilitating Centre (PFC) of the Technology
lnformation Forecasting and Assessment
Council (TIFAC), it was found that electronics is
the second most important area after
chemicals, in which a large number of patent
applications are being filed in India. O f the
2678
applications
considered,
most
applications were related to areas such as:
encoding and decoding (1 14), optical fibre (97),
cellular telephony ( 7 8 ) ) antennas (63), data
transfer (45)) CDMA (38), TDMA (19)) display
devices (96), chips (48), computer network
(23), and lnternet and e-commerce (23). The
bulk of these applications (95 per cent) have

--

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

13

been filed by foreign companies and
individuals, indicating their strong interest in
India. Many applications appear to be linked to
software and databases that are not patentable
in India. These applications need to be tracked.
Similarly, applications related to lnternet and
e-commerce may also be tracked.
lnternet has introduced many new features
in sharing of information and knowledge and
there is a general feeling that some special
protection regimes may be called for. The
matter is being discussed globally by
international
organisations
like
World
Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) and
WTO. So far no recommendations have
emerged,
which
could
be
considered
acceptable to all. However, there is one
common understanding that new rights of
intellectual property should be avoided and no
greater protection to intellectual property need
be provided in the cyber space than that exists
elsewhere.

2. INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
RIGHTS
Intellectual property rights as a collective
term includes several independent intellectual
property rights (IP), namely, patents, copyrights,
trademarks, registered (industrial) design,
protection of IC layout design, geographical
indications and protection of undisclosed
information.
The lPRs are awarded by the member
country and most of the rights are territorial in
nature, except the copyright. A copyright
generated in a member country of the Berne
Convention is automatically protected in all the
member countries, without any need for
registration. However, the rights will not be
automatically available in countries that are not
members of Berne Convention. Like any other
property, IPR can be transferred, sold or gifted.
One of the main underlying principles of IPR is
that protection is not given for what is already
known in the public domain. The lPRs are
meant to benefit creators of work, inventions
and designs. These rights are granted for a
limited period, except for trademark where the
protection
period
could
be
extended
indefinitely by way of renewal. IPRs, which are

the monopoly rights, prohibit unauthorised use
of protected work/invention. In return for such
rights, the state expects that the invention/
original work should be made public 'for use by
others, after the period of rights has expired, or
during the period of protection with proper
authorisation from the right holder. However,
while protecting undisclosed information, the
above principle of disclosure will not apply.
A patent is awarded for an invention which
satisfies the criteria of global novelty,
non-obviousness and industrial application.
Patents can be granted for products and
processes. As per the Indian Patent Act 1970,
electronic equipment, circuits, etc. can be
patented and currently their term of patent is 14
years from the date of filing. It is expected that
this term will be extended to 20 years after the
amendments to the Act take place.
lndia is a signatory to the Berne
Convention and has a very good copyright
legislation, comparable to that of any country.
Copyright is awarded to literary, dramatic,
audio-visual and similar works. Computer
programs and databases are also considered
literary works and hence, are protected by
copyright in India. In fact, these are considered
copyrightable items under the Agreement on
Trade Related aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights (TRIPS). It may be noted that copyright
protection extends to expression of an idea and
not to the idea itself. To get protection, these
works should be in a tangible form, i.e., in a
form capable of either visually or audibly
recreating the representation of the original
work. Works are not copyrightable if they are
merely ideas or sounds or gestures. Therefore,
any information transmitted on lnternet is a
subject matter of copyright.
A trademark is any word, name, symbol, or
device or any combination thereof, used by a
person to distinguish his or her goods, including
a unique product, from those manufactured or
sold by others and to indicate the source of
goods. The purpose is to protect the public so
that it will get the product with certain qualities
if it goes for a product having a particular
trademark. Industrial design is connected with
the protection of external shape, appearance
and configuration of an article. Protection of
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

integrated circuit (IC) layout design is
associated with the mark design in (ICs). At
present, there is no law in the country for
providing this protection but such law is
expected to be available by January 2000, as
stipulated in TRIPS. Protection of undisclosed
information is quite similar to the concept of
trade secret, which includes formula, pattern,
compilation, programme, device, method,
technique or process. The new legislation is
expected to be in force in India by Jan 1, 2000.

telephone conversations were analog in nature.
As a result, it was difficult to transmit different
categories of information through a common
channel. With improvements in the digital
technologies, it became feasible to conceive of
the voice and video content of television, radio
and telephone being digitised, produced and
distributed through digital networks that no
longer will be distinct from the networks used
for text-based information. The different
categories of information have distinct positions
in the law but with this erosion of the
boundaries between categories, a new
challenge for evolving an appropriate law has
become imminent. Further, the information can
be replicated with a very high speed and each
copy is as good as the original. Digital
representation also allows random access to
parts of a document or message rather that
requiring review of an entire new record, from
the beginning to the end.

3. NEW ISSUES OPENED BY DIGITAL

TECHNOLOGY
The move from analog to digital
technologies for storing and transmitting
information is a major shift in IT. New
paradigms of economics and law, including the
IP laws will have to be evolved to solve new
problems not experienced so far. IP laws have,
in the past, responded to new developments in
science and technology, but with a time lag. For
example, copyright was evolved as a response
to the development of printing press. In the 1 7Ih
century, the right to copy was equivalent to a
right to vend because it was cheaper to buy an
authorised original of the work than to copy it.
Basic concepts of copyright protection must
shift as the relative costs of events affecting the
creator's market position change. lnternet has
posed many questions related to copyrights,
trademark and patents; countries are even
thinking of evolving new protection regime to
protect commercial interests through protection
of creators' works.

Some
basic issues influencing the
application of existing lPRs in the internet
environment have emerged and call for a shift
in the conceptual framework, operational and
execution strategies and legal premises. Firstly, a
truly intangible and an ephemeral property in
cyber space is being dealt, which does not exist
at any particular location as one understands,
but seems to float in space. All lPRs are
territorially limited, in the sense that the laws of
the country, where the alleged infringement is
supposed to have taken place, will decide
whether an infringement has actually taken
place or not.

The growing power and ever diminishing
costs of computers in the last 50 years have
brought about some important convergence
among technologies through which information
has been produced and distributed. Office
automation,
especially
wordprocessing,
computerisation of newspaper publishing and
the availability of low-cost open architecture
computer networks have been responsible for
moving away from purely paper and ink-based
technologies. The PC revolution and access to
digital communications have made it attractive
to disseminate information electronically. Much
of the information produced and distributed
through broadcast and television, radio and

The traditional notion of infringement
needs to be re-appraised as it may sometimes
be difficult to locate the infringer, and
sometimes, the place of infringement may not
have proper IPR laws, particularly copyright
laws. People involved with IPRs, like authors will
have to review their position, especially in the
light of the potential for exploitation, and adopt
new market and investment strategies. It is likely
that novel methods will be developed by
investing large sums of money to stop
unauthorised use of copyrighted material along
with other systems, using high technologies.
This may limit the total number of service
providers on lnternet and these players will then

.

-

DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

15

dictate the future use of Internet. This may not
allow open trading in IP. Further, the
technological convergence puts pressure on
traditional institutional arrangements for selling
things, collecting money, and preventing piracy.
Basic legal concepts need to be developed.
There has been a rapid growth of Internet;
the number of users has grown from about
1 million in 1990 to more than 70 million in
1997. The e-commerce grew from US$ 2.6
billion in 1996 to US$ 20 billion in 1998. This
figure is expected to run to hundredsvof billions
of dollars in the early years of the next
millennium. As the number of users increases,
the chances of infringement of copyrighted
material also goes up. The IP framework
acknowledges that some free riding is inevitable
in any publishing activity; the important
question about protecting IP is whether
large-scale piracy could be reduced to almost
zero level. India's stakes in the entertainment
market are quite high and there is a need for a
close-to-airtight mechanism for protecting the
rights of creators, and therefore, there is an
urgent need to have a close look at transacting
Indian music and pictures, etc. over the
Internet.

4. TYPES OF IPR APPLICABLE TO
INTERNET
Generally speaking, the enforcement
aspects rather than the protection aspects of
IPR are occupying people's minds and the
people are, perhaps, more concerned about the
non-IPR issues, such as levying duty o n
accessing information on lnternet and doing
e-commerce through the Internet. While dealing
with IPR the Internet, one is predominantly
concerned with copyrights: trademarks, patents,
registered design and protection of IC layout
design and undisclosed information. Each of the
rights mentioned above provide a different kind
and degree of protection. The strictest regime is
the one provided by patents.

5. COPYRIGHT
Protection of copyright appears to be the
most obvious and important subject matter.
Once a material is published anywhere in
member countries of the Berne Convention, it

becomes copyrighted material and no separate
registration is required. Therefore, any
information which is transmitted on lnternet is a
subject matter of copyright, as it is available in
public domain. In addition, many pieces of
information transferred and transmitted on
lnternet may already be copyrighted. There are
several players whenever one is dealing with
transaction of information on Internet, namely,
the internet service provider, the content
provider,
the
person downloading the
information, bulletin board service provider,
etc. The cause of infringement may be any of
the players. The situation becomes very
complex when a collection of copyrighted work
is transacted. Take, for example, the case of
multimedia which represents an integrated
whole of computer program, audio-visual work,
text, sound recording and databases. These
components may be separately protected
through copyrights or some other regime. The
question, which arises, independent of the
lnternet is: who is the owner of such a work
and what exactly needs to be protected? As
different components are protected, it may be
felt that it may not be necessary to protect the
multimedia work per se. But, this approach may
not be conducive to new investments for
reaching the benefits of the digital revolution to
a large population.

A deeper analysis would show that a
multimedia work is neither a literary, musical or
dramatic work nor it is a database or a
computer program. However, the potential of
multimedia works is immense and is' proving to
be large revenue generators. Therefore, it
appears that a standalone legal regime may be
considered by the publishers and pushed into
international debates. The main question arises
as to who would be responsible for wrong and
unauthorised use of such information. Secondly,
it is also equally important to ensure that
lnternet does not promote and encourage
unlawful use of any copyrighted material.
There are many court cases dealing with
infringement of the nature mentioned above.
Playboy Enterprise claimed in 1993 that 170
centrefold photographs and other photographs
from its publications appeared on the
bulletin-board service (BBS) run by Mr Frena
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

1

for which he did not have any authorisation
from Playboy Enterprises. The District court
held that Mr Frena was an infringer. Similarly, in
another case, the court granted a restraining
order against the uploading and downloading
of copyrighted computer software of Sega
Entertainment, permitted by a BBS operator.
The court also upheld the seizure of the
computer memory devices, which had been
distributed by BBS operator. At the Diplomatic
Conference of WlPO held o n December 20,
1996, two new obligations have been
introduced on a treaty on copyrights.
The obligations concerning technological
measures demand that each contracting state
shall provide adequate legal protection and
effective
legal
remedies
against
the
circumvention
of
effective
technological
measures that are used by authors in
connection w ~ t hthe exercise of their rights
under this treaty or Berne Convention and that
restrict acts, in respect of their works which are
not authorised by the authors concerned or
permitted by law. This, in other words, means
that the use of decryption devices without the
consent of the authors will not be allowed. It
may therefore lead to a situation that a user
may have to purchase a decryption system
recommended by the authors or their
assignees.
Many developed and member countries
are also allowing patenting of these items.
Copyrights are often thought of as special
territory for artists, composers, writers, and
those connected with the entertainment
industry. People in these activities have long
been aware of the special value of copyright
protection. What is not well-understood is that
copyrights are at least as valuable to the
commercial world, as to government operations
and fields of science and education.

6. DOMAIN NAMES AND
TRADEMARK ISSUES
The estimated number of domain name
registration has increased from 100000 in 1995
to 5 million and is growing at a volume of
70000 new registration, every week. The
domain name is that part of the e-mail address
or the home page address which appears after
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

'@' and 'www', respectively. Domain names are
read from right to left. The first level on the
right, such as '.corn' or 'co.uk' is known as the
top level domain (TLD). The part immediately
to the left of TLD is known as the second level
domain (SLD). It is the SLD which is allotted to
users as the unique identifying element in their
lnternet address and this usually corresponds to
the user's trading name. It is clear that the
lnternet is an effective tool for marketing
internationally and creating more and more
business opportunities. Potential markets are
not limited by geographical boundaries.
For this new communication medium, the
goods or services offered are not available for
instant physical identification, as are goods in a
store. Instead, these goods or services must be
located and accessed by a domain name. It is at
this point that an issue related to trademark
arises. The concern is that an lnternet address
assigned to A would contain words constituting
B's trademark. If A is an entirely different
business from B, there may not be any
trademark infringement problem because there
is no possibility of consumer being confused.
The problem arises when A is in the same
business. It is known that many corporate giants
did not appreciate the hidden potential of
domain names in the early days and others
used their trademarks as domain names. It has
been reported that TATA is being used as a
domain name by someone other than TATA
Sons. There are reported cases where these
corporate houses have bought domain names
at a price. Now, many industries are reserving
domain names of their interest. For example, it
is reported that 1, Craft Foods Inc. has
registered 150 domain names relating to its
product line.
Similarly, Proctor and Gamble has
reportedly
obtained
domain
names
corresponding to trademarks for its products
and has taken additional steps of registering
domain names associated with the use of its
products, such as 'underarm.comf and
'diarrhea.comf.
A domain name is not a legal right as suchunlike patents, trademarks and copyright, there
is no domain name law. It is becoming a
valuable piece of IP in cyber space. It is quite
17

evident that law suits involving trademarks will
emerge. It may be a difficult choice to
determine who the real infringer is, the owner
of the domain name or the NIS or the
service-provider. New guidelines have been
worked out which put heavy responsibilities on
the person applying for a domain name so
much so that heishe has to almost certify that
the proposed domain name does not infringe
any trade name, company name or any other
IPR. Many developing countries are not
members of treaties related to trademarks. Due
to the international nature of Internet, this will
lead to many legal cases, as many applicants
will have very difficulty in accessing the
trademarks and trade names already registered
in other countries. This development makes the
allotment of domain name dependent on a
global search. Further, consideration may be
given to changing format of the domain name
to avoid the trademark issues. No clear-cut
guidelines exist to decide the cases related to
domain and trade names. However, it seems
from a number of judgements in the US that
the trademark laws can be used to settle IPR
issues
related
to
domain
names
vs
trademarksltrade names.

7. PATENTS & OTHER RIGHTS
Patents seem to have occupied a secondary
place while discussing the IPR related issues
regarding Internet. In view of the transcontinental nature of the lnternet operations, it
would be better to minimise infringements by
providing better
protection
mechanisms
through better technologies for encryption and
decryption. In the context of e-commerce, these
technologies play a very important role as they
provide the best solution for avoiding unlawful
access to what is being transacted on the
lnternet between two or more parties. This
secrecy could only be maintained by assigning
special keys (codes) to the players of
e-commerce (EC) having unique identification.
The concept of digital signature is based on
these technologies. The development of digital
technology has permitted huge expansion in
the capacity for encrypted services. However,
at the same time, the sale of unauthorised
decoding devices has had an adverse effect on
the operators of encrypted services. EC has
18

estimated that unauthorised decoding devices
currently represent between 5 and 20 per cent
of the total number of devices in circulation.
This
would
promote
some
lnternet
service-providers and database operators to
monopolise such devices and make the users
dependent on the operators for many other
facilities, which the users themselves can
arrange.
As the sophistication of technologies goes
up with the passage o f , time, developing
countries may face a difficult time, especially in
terms of hardware. The issue becomes complex
due to the fact that such devices are eligible for
patents. Software, encryption and decryption
systems including equipment, assemblies, ICs,
components or software with capability to
maintain secrecy, compression algorithms,
techniques for representing graphical images,
databases and databases retrieval techniques
have become subject matter of patents in
developing countries. For example, US patent
number 4,405,829 (September 1983) deals
with the RSA encryption, 5,396,343 (March
1995) with image compression systems with
optimised data access, 5,428,741 (June 1995)
with high speed image pre-processing system
including a multipurpose buffer for storing
digital image and 5,428,462 (June 1995) with
facsimile apparatus having user name register
with means for receiving image signals.
Whereas in India, software is not patentable per
se as these are considered literary works; in
advanced countries it is now possible to obtain
software patents.
There are two advantages of software
patents, namely, copying of the idea of a patent
is prohibited and a stronger legal protection is
ensured. One of the reasons of starting
software patents is that these are now
developed with substantial investment of
finances and human resources and are
responsible for better functioning machines,
novel performance of microprocessors, and
when transported through discs, it becomes a
tangible product.
Devices being used for decryption are
subject matter of patents. All the ICs can be
protected through a separate regime. There are
strong indications that software developed for
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

masking information or avoiding infringement
through special technique like the watermarking
technology, will be converted into chips and
then multiple protection may be available for
software. The chip could be protected under
the IC layout design or as a component of an
overall hardware. Once hardware are protected
through patents, it would be difficult to by-pass
them. The external shape can be protected
through registered design, and customer
confidence can be achieved by protecting the
product through a trademarkltrade name. It
appears possible that such devices may be
monopolised globally as the business of
lnternet gets into a few hands, which appears to
be a distinct possibility.

8. CONCLUSION
The IPR professionals are faced with a
totally new situation while ensuring that IP
rights are not violated when business is
transacted over the Internet. It would be better
if new IP rights are avoided but at the same
time, the interests of innovators need to be
secured with the existing provisions. Whether a
total governmental control over unauthorised

reproduction and distribution of copyrighted
works over lnternet will work or not, is a
difficult question to answer at this stage. If there
are no controls then are we expecting it to be
driven by market forces alone?
The experience of satellite communication
and international telephone services may be
helpful in solving some of the conflicts arising
out of cross- boundary and simultaneous use of
information.
It appears that
innovative
technologies and industry self-regulation, rather
than policing, may provide some answers. If
there i s a common and clear understanding
about enforcing copyright laws, an effective
awareness campaign may be beneficial for the
end users, content providers and lnternet
access providers. It must dawn upon all that the
society has to recognise the innovative work
and reward the generators of innovations
adequately, and others do not have a legal or
moral right to earn on infringements.
Ultimately, the purpose is to make the
lnternet economically viable for the benefit of
the newly emerging information society, and
this would largely depend on how successfully
one is able to resolve the issues related to IPRs.

Contributor
Shri R Saha is Scientist F at the Department of Science and Technology
and the Director of the Patent Facilitating Centre (PFC), Technology
Information Forecasting and Assessment Council (TIFAC), New Delhi.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

19

