DESlDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 20, Nos. 1842, January& March 2000, pp. 21-28
0 2000, DESlDOC

Information Technology-A Force Multiplier Extraordinary
Dr MS Vijayaraghavan
Technology Interface, Secretariate of Scientific Adviser to Raksha Mantri

ABSTRACT
The paper highlights the role played by information technology (IT) in civil and
military domains in equal measures to place IT in the category of force multiplier par
excellence. It describes the various elements that constitute IT, i.e., sensors (for
generating data), storage media (for preserving the data for further analysis), and
data processing and dissemination of information using various technologies like
advanced semiconductors, advanced high-end computers, fibreaptics, photonics,
cellular technology, satellite technology, advanced networking, digital transmission
and digital compression, etc. It gives an insight into the immense potential IT has as
a force m~~ltiplier
in the battlefield as much as it dominates the social, cultural and
economic fabric of a nation.

1. INTRODUCTION
The call given by the leaders of our freedom
movement in the early part of this century to
get political independence from foreign rule,
had a widespread impact on the population.
People from every walk of life-be it education,
judiciary, industry, print media, science and
technology, trade and commerce, medicine and
politics-responded in full strength to this call.
The result was the birth of best of talents of the
world standard springing all over in the country
in every field of human activity.
The driving force was the motivation to
prove to the world that Indians are second to
none and therefore, they can manage their
affairs without any foreign powers providing
governance. Such was the impact of this call
that it had a cascading effect on every facet of
human life.

2. FORCE MULTIPLIER-AN AGENT
OF CHANCE
It appears that the term force mc~ltiplier
originated in defence with a well-defined
objective. According to TN Dupuy, it is an item,
DESlDOC Rulletir~of Inf Techno!,2000,20(1&2)

collection of items or characteristics (such as
morale or training) that makes an organisation
or ensemble more effective, efficient and
capable in combat or in similar situations,
through synergy. While no authoritative list of
force multipliers exists, the experts frequently
refer to non-military variables, such as
leadership, morale, motivation, etc. Therefore,
ability of an initiative to bring in torrential
changes on its introduction into a system, could
also be referred to as force multiplier.
Froni this perspective, the call for freedom
from foreign rule kindled the latent patriotic
fervor in the people and provided the needed
motivation to have the effect of a force
multiplier.
it
Nothing has impacted a system-be
political, social or scientific-as much as the
technology to bring in a cataclysmic change.
During the last one decade and a half the
world history has witnessed the gargantuan role
played by information technology (IT) in civil
and niilitary domains in equal measures to
place IT in the category of force multiplier par
excellence.
21

3. ELEMENTS OF INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY
To understand the far-reaching implications
of introduction of a force multiplier such as IT, it
would be helpful to know various elements that
constitute IT. Four distinct elements together
represent IT. The first of these is the Sensors
whose role is to generate data in electronic
form from perceivable objects. In view of
diverse objects, there are multiple sensors.
These could be electromechanical, electromagnetic, electrooptical, electro- chemical,
electrothermal etc.,
depending
on
the
application. Likewise, these sensors are located
on the ground in moving or stationary
platforms, in air, in space, on sea or underwater.
The next element is storage media. The data
received from these manifold sensors is
required to be preserved for further analysis.
Data storage devices come in a variety of
forms. From conventional magnetic disc and
tape to semiconductor devices and optical disc
in numerous variations, there is a plethora of
these devices to choose from, depending on
the need and application. Further, these devices
come with different storage capacities, access
times and shapes to suit specific deployment
needs.
Data processing is another element of IT
which is extremely crucial. The data received
from one or many of these sensors and stored
in one or many storage devices, requires to be
converted
into
useful
and
actionable
lniormation at the end of the value-addition
chain. This function of data processing again
requires multiple tools, foremost amongst which
is computer. From laptop to supercomputers,
there are a variety of these equipment catering
to a wide spectrum of data processing
functions.
The ultimate value addition in the
Information chain comes from the capability to
disseminate acquired information to the' point
of use at a remote location. The medium for
such a transfer of information from the source
to the utility point constitutes the fourth
element of IT. This has been possible due to
convergence
oi
communications
and
computers. The field of telecommunication is
p

p

22

--

too welt known to attempt any description.
However, it must be said that there are four
areas of telecommunication which are crucial
for its development. These are: transmission,
reception, distribution, and communication
control.
Transmission,
reception
and
distribution ensure transfer of iniormation from
one point to another, and networking
thereafter, to reach the actual user to meet his
needs. The safety of information at the point of
generation, reception, during transit and its
denial to those not authorised to receive, are
addressed by way of communication control.

4. TECHNOLOGIES OF
INFORMATION REVOLUTION
Late 1980s witnessed the dawn of yet
another revolution-the iniormation revolution.
While the defence spending by nations played a
significant role in bringing about this new
revolution, private companies and individual
entrepreneurs were also a driving force behind
many emerging technologies. Many analysts
predicted that the effects of this new revolution
would dwarf those that had come earlier.
Indeed, it was at this point in history when
many analysts began to describe the rapidly
approaching 21" century as the information
age.
Many technologies are part of the
contemporary information revolution. Among
these, nine stand out as unique. These are:
(i) advanced semiconductors, (ii) advanced
high-end computers, (iii) fiber-optics, (iv) photonics, (v) cellular technology, jvi) satellite
technology,
(vii) advanced
networking,
(viii) improved human-computer interaction,
and (ix) digital transmission and compression.
Semiconductors are arguably the technology
that has contributed the most to our current
ability to store, process and communicate
information.
With
the
invention
of
semiconductors, the rate of advance in a host
of computing capabilities (including expanded
memory, faster speed, improved reliability and
overall performance) increased dramatically,
often approaching exponential growth. Further,
semiconductor
technology
explosively
increased information storage capacity in a
memory chip as well as functional density

-

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2j

achievable on a silicon semiconductor chip.
According to Gordon Moore, the co-founder of
Intel, the logic density of silicon integrated
circuits has closely followed the curve (bits per
square inch) = 2 "(t - 1962) where t is the time
in years. That is, the amount of information
storable on a given amount of silicon has
roughly doubled every year since the
technology was invented. These advances have
simultaneously resulted in decline in the cost of
semiconductor chips to one-hundredth of its
original value in just about a decade.
Enabled through improved and cheaper
microchips and propelled by ever-increasing
functionality of these chips, today's computersthe backbone of the modern information
revolution-coming
under the category of
supercomputers, can not only perform
computing at one trillion mathematical
operations per second, but are also available at
prices unimaginable only a few years ago.
These advances in computers have helped
permit messages, data and information to be
transferred globally in fraction of a second. With
computers also becoming lighter, compact and
cheaper, IT has become truly ubiquitous with
far-reaching impact.
Extremely thin glass fibers carry light pulses
from the sending source to the receiving
destination. These fiber-optics cables can carry
information
1,00,000
times
more than
conventional copper pairs, to enable build
information superhighway which would be
unthinkable
using
existing
telephone
infrastructure. This explosion of bandwidth, as a
consequence of introduction of fiber-optics
technology, has resulted in increased capacity
to transmit information.
To fully harness the potentials unfolded by
fiber-optics, the end devices and systems must
be small and compatible with high speeds
provided by fiber- optics. Here, the photonics
technology plays a significant role. The photonic
devices, such as light emitting diodes (LEDs),
blue lasers, laser diodes, miniature optical
components etc. that have been developed and
are available in the market, have been singularly
responsible for propelling fiber-optic technology
to levels of use that one sees presently. The
future would only see better, efficient and
DESiDOC Bullelin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

cheaper photonic devices to push IT even
further.
Until recently, the locations from where one
could transmit and receive messages were tied
to technology that could be transported only
with diificulty. The advent of cellular technology
is rapidly cutting through the knot that tied
telephones to wires, limiting the flexibility of
communications.
In
essence,
cellular
telephones are mobile radio transmitters and
receivers that look and act like traditional
telephones using radio waves to send and
receive messages from remote non-wired
locations. The shrinking size of these cellular
phones coupled with portable computers and
modems, allow people to exchange information
to and from virtually anywhere in the world in
real time.
Another technology that has revolutionised
the quality of life is satellite technology.
Theoretically, a global satellite communication
network could employ as few as three satellites,
but in fact, many satellites make up the
presentday satellite communication network,
both in geo-synchronous and elliptical orbits.
With rapid developments in communication
technologies, modern communication satellites
allow for both store-and-forward and direct
broadcast services. In a direct broadcast
satellite, often employed by commercial
broadcasters, the information from the
broadcast site is sent to the satellite to be
redirected to the point o i use anywhere in the
world. The store-and-forward satellite allows
information sent to it to be stored before
transmitting the information to authorised
recipients. This type of satellite is often used by
governments who have sensitive data to protect
from unauthorised recipients. As the marriage
of computers, digital and cellular technologies
with satellite communication takes place, a
global seamless information infrastructure that
will significantly enhance the value of the
connectivity, i s provided. This enables satellite
technology to tie the world more closely
together than ever before to truly realise a
global village.
The technological pursuit to enhance
connectivity by scientists and engineers
throughout the world, has resulted in

capabilities that enable various elements of IT
to communicate with each other and to
enhance
the
speed
at
which
these
communications take place. The effort to
progress the reach, variety, utility and
penetration of IT resulted in local area,
metropolitan area and wide area networks
(LAN, MAN and WAN) which finally led to the
birth of the network of networks-Internet.
Though originally developed for military use,
lnternet heralds the advent of cooperative effort
by the world scientific community to build
mother of all networks. Despite the network
providing for bandwidth as large as few tens of
gigabits per second, the reach, spread and
utility of lnternet is already threatening to clog
the superhighway to the extent of mounting
development efforts for next generation
Internet.
While computers no doubt perform a
variety of complex functions at speeds beyond
human capabilities, it is the human-computer
interface technologies that are responsible to
open the world of computing to millions of
people who avoided computers because of real
and imagined barriers associated with the user
interface. Development of better operating
systems and software, such as Macintosh OS
and Windows has reduced the level of this fear.
Today, interface systems and softwares that
utilise voice recognition and handwriting
identification
are
available,
thanks
to
technologies such as neural net. These
advances, in turn, make more people to
exchange, manage, manipulate and use
information.
Finally, the coup the grace to information
proliferation is given by the type o i transmission
used in the transfer of voice, data, graphic, or
picture. The advent of digital compression
technology has facilitated faster, better and
efficient means of information transfer. Digital
signals in binary digits are accurate and form
the language of computers. Using mathematical
approach, digital compression makes possible
immense data files to be drastically reduced in
size, and thereby increasing the amount of
information that can be sent over a line at high
speeds. Furthermore, the integration of voice,
text and video through Integrated Services

Digital Network (ISDN)-possible mainly due to
digital compression technologies-has made the
traditional concepts of time and distance
irrelevant.

5. IT-AN ENGINE FOR SOCIOECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
From the preceding sections, it can be easily
inferred that IT heralds the death o f time and
distance. While transportation technology led
to shrinking of physical distances by orders of
magnitude, telecommunication
technology
made terrestrial distances irrelevant. Thus, IT
brought about revolutionary changes rivalling
those of industrial revolution to culminate in
bringing radical changes to physical, social and
economic infrastructure of a nation. The world
has thus started beginning to feel the power
and potential of IT in every aspect of human
activity. This telling impact of 17' on the
socio-economic development of the country
leaves little doubt on the role of IT as the
numero uno force multiplier that can
metamorphize the nation and galvanise all its
activities towards wealth generation.
Economic development of a nation takes
place due to a number of factors. High
industrial growth, high productivity in industry
and agriculture, increased trade and commerce,
better population control, better heath care and
sanitation, efficient and effective transportation,
reliable and effective communication and mass
media, high growth rate for science and
technolog): and above all, the spread of quality
education all contribute significantly to
economic growth and therefore national
development.
Information technology has changed the
way most companies do business. Innovations
in IT are having such wide-ranging effects across
numerous domains of ;ociety that the policy
makers are acting on issues involving economic
productivity, intellectual property rights, privacy
protection and affordability of access to
information, among other concerns. IT is being
used by industries for many purposes, both
(e.g.,
accounting,
logistics,
operational
scheduling etc.) and strategic (changing
competitive positioning or providing totally new
services). IT has radically changed services,
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/,2000,2011&2)

both in service-sector industries and in-service
activities
that
are
integral
part
of
goods-producing
industries. The
service
industries
are
primarily
transportation,
communications, wholesale and retail trade,
financial services, insurance, real estate, utilities,
personal and professional services.
Telecommunication has been literally built
on IT and is now pervaded by IT. The use of IT
can bring about changes in the boundaries and
definition of an industry. Deregulation and new
technologies have allowed new players to
provide services that were once the exclusive
domain of traditional telephone carriers. Today,
private carriers and value-added carriers handle
voice and data long-distance traffic for paying
customers. IT has been used to alter existing
relationships among wholesalers, retailers,
manufacturers and end users. For example, to
eliminate intermediaries and enable direct sale,
a manufacturer can directly go o n net to
perform retailer function towards spawning a
new business model. Thus, inventory-based
model of doing business has been replaced by
an
information-based
model.
Different
industries are moving into areas untreaded by
them before. For example, insurance companies
are moving ever deeper into the business of
healthcare management and the lines between
the two are already getting blurred. Likewise,
different industries are moving into banking,
thus threatening the traditional understanding of
what constitutes the banking system, primarily
due to opportunities unleashed by IT. For
example, banks will have .to develop
relationship with software developers or risk the
probability that software developers and other
non-financial institutions will come between
banks and their customers.
In airlines, business innovations using IT
have been associated with competitive
leadership and survival as complexity has
increased. Airlines depend on IT within aircraft
and airports, in air traffic control systems, and
for sales, marketing, maintenance and safety
systems as well as for capacity, load
management and logistic planning. IT has
engulfed this industry to such an extent that this
technology has been a part of the
transformation of the industry into one of the
DESfDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/,2000,20(1&2)

largest retailers of perishable goods. Likewise,
news content will not remain the exclusive
domain of traditional news organisations.
Medical informatics is a growing area that deals
with the convergence of information and
medical technologies. Application of IT to bring
medical advice and services directly to the
place a patient is located, without doctor
physically having to move to the place of the
patient, is the realm of teiemedicine. Today, like
teleconference, operations are conducted on
patients under the direct supervision of experts
who are physically thousands o f kilometers
away from the patient, thanks to Internet and
several opportunities let loose by IT. These
advances are bound to enhance healthcare to
levels never realjsed before. Universities play
important role in today's society in providing
education. As space and time are overcome by
the introduction of IT, distance education or
learning will get the much needed philip to
provide alternative configuration to traditional
universities. Concepts such as global university,
virtual library and virtual classrooms are
becoming realities today.
IT may well create entirely new sectors for
business that will encompass a variety of new
and different industries. As IT becomes less
expensive, more portable, better integrated and
interconnected and embedded in a wide
variety of devices offering many types of
messages, new applications in these fields and
whole new industries-such as interactive
multimedia systems for business, home
entertainment and communication purposesare likely to evolve. This would have proiound
effect o n industry structures, employment and
economic growth.
Introduction of IT has influenced strategy,
altered structures, reshaped communication
and learning as well as organisational design.
Thus, the role of this technology has shifted
from one of operational gain to one of strategic
benefit. Investment in IT is often seen as
instrumental in sustaining and achieving
competitive advantage, and therefore is
considered fundamental to enable organisations
achieve their strategic business objectives and
goals. The emphasis now is especially in terms
of productivity due to removing employees
25

repetitive,
time-consuming practices and
replacing them with work of a more supervisory
nature.
New ways of creating, storing and
transmitting information . are transforming
cultural practices besides changing rules of
business. Availability of plethara of information
sources coupled with rapid information flow
brings in enhanced flexibility to increase tempo
locationof
interaction
and
decrease
dependence of information. These advances in
IT would have far-reaching and unioreseen
effects on families, communities, institutions
and democratic processes.
The
social
consequences
of
these
technologies have to be understood by
government, academic and corporates through
studying the socio-technical systems, media and
social science of computing. Impact of IT on
the way the affairs of government are
conducted, is significant. By its very nature of
democratising information through' improved
access, the technology strengthens the
democratic underpinnings of popularly elected
governments.
The greater capacity for information transfer
across the globe leads to greatly enhanced
picture of oneself, the global environment and
partners. It would therefore be difficult to
control freedom of speech and free expression
as IT expands our capabilities to hear and be
heard, to see and be seen and eventually, to
touch and be touched. This would enable
governments to perform better by providing
non-governmental organisations and groups, the
ability to compete against governments in
presenting their viewpoints and perspectives.
Thus across the wide spectrum of
socio-economic activities discussed here, IT has
the effect of a force multiplier element to
significantly alter human activities, life-styles,
actions as well as organisational structures and
practices.

6. IT REVOLUTIONISES MILITARY

TECHNOLOGIES
Beyond their impact o n socio-economic
development leading to wealth generation,
information and communication technologies

have equal and radical impact on military
affairs, towards protecting the wealth generated
by their very introduction. Management and
control of time-critical information is as much a
need for the military as it is to business and
commercial worlds. IT as applied to command
and control-which characterises any military
requirement-is
used
to
access
more
information about the combat situation,
process it rapidly and accurately, manage and
distribute i t more efficiently on near real-time
basis. So much progress has been made in
improving sensor devices that a flood of raw
information i s now becoming available that
needs to be sensibly processed, merged and
correlated quickly. Coupled with the need to
have comprehensive and timely awareness of
the situation so that strategic decision makers
can determine the appropriate response and
implement them, it becomes necessary to
deploy a powerful IT infrastructure. This
includes
communication
links,
highperformance computing, graphic displays and
networking of all elements to provide fused
data in real-time for decision making. The
composite architecture thus emerging out of
this exercise leads to the often-referred
computer command control communication
and intelligence (C7j system. It is obvious that
for full implementation of a C41 system,
enormous amount of data transmission,
processing and storage facilities would be
required at each level. The computer system for
C7 should have flexible and adaptable system
architecture with inter-operability. Managing a
large database for storage and retrieval of data
is a key management tool for commanders,
which is provided by efficient database
management
and
good
communication
software. Advances in the iield of graphics have
improved the
situational awareness of
commanders virtually on a single screen. With
geographical iniormation system providing
digitised satellite maps, coupled with advanced
computer graphics, multimedia technologies
reaching high maturity levels and virtual reality
tools
making
possible
three-dimensional
viewing having high degree of user immersion,
visualisation technologies are in place to
broaden the applications, especially in the area
of simulation and gaming. This would even
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

further propel battle awareness technologies to
provide real-time brilliant decision support
system to aid C41systems. The future battlefield
blending
of
would
therefore . involve
technologies-represented
by
intelligence,
surveillance, reconnaissance, C41and precision
strike-with unified strategy and operational
doctrine, to gain a dominant battlefield
knowledge (DBK). DBK would ensure a
transparent battlefield to our armed forces and
make the battlefield opaque to the adversary.
Thus, it is important that we controlled
information to achieve DBK. Control of
information also ensures protection of
economic infrastructure.

7. INFORMATION AS WEAPON
Information warfare (IW) is the weapon of
the future as it has the range of an ICBM, speed
of a high-power laser and tethality of both. IW
will increasingly augment/replace conventional
warfare for the reasons of low cost, high
damage potential, difficulty of detection and
defending against the highest threat to a
country's national security, and above all, being
bordertess. IW is broadly divided into three
types:
spectrum management, proactive
information strategy and reactive information
strategy. One can monitor traffic and launch
attacks on IT assets from any part of the globe.
The rapid movement towards a networked
environment coupled with the increasing role of
Internet in commerce, as also the inherent
vulnerabilities associated with any network in
architecture, has only accentuated the need for
protecting the national wealth created out of IT
initiatives. As software programmes become
complex, the vulnerabilities associated with
them also grow. As network connectivity grows,
portable programmes lead to vulnerable
services which become the target of attack. In

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

addition, the researched information capability
will increasingly become a negotiating
instrument between nations.
Drastic changes are taking place in military
affairs that combines technological changes
with operational and organisational innovation.
This military doctrine, called as revolution in
military affairs (RMA), is now being extensively
touted by the West as the emerging art of
warfare of the 21" century. This concept is
brought about primarily from the intersection of
precision strike, dominating manoeuvre and
joint operations made possible only by profuse
utilisation of IT. Precision strike will hold an
enemy at a distance and blind and immobilise
him by destroying operationally and strategically
crucial, time-critical targets. Use of IW will deny
an enemy the critical knowledge of both his
own as well as our forces, and turn his fog of
war into a wall of ignorance. Satellite
technologies will enable force projection
overseas to distant locations at dramatically
increased speeds in response to contingencies
while denying the enemy the ability to do
the same.
Thus IT revolution that has swept across the
world during this century is a force multiplier in
the battlefield as much as it dominates the
social, cultural and economic fabric of a nation.
No wonder, people across the world refer
this impact of IT in every facet of human
activity as entry into the 'Information Age'.

REFERENCES
1.

International Military and Defence
Encyclopedia Vol-ll, 1993, edited by TN
Dupuy. Brassey's U.S. Publications, p. 975.

2.

Integrated Strategies, Technologies and
Missions for Comprehensive National
Security.

27

'

Contributor

Dr MS Vijayaraghavan obtained his MSc (Materials Sciencej with
distinction and PhD in Physics from ihe Indian Institute of Technology,
Chennai. He was involved in the development of electronic warfare
technologies, while serving at the Deience Electronics Research Laboratory,
Hvderabad for almost two decades. Presently, he is the Director, Technology
Interface at the Secretariat of Scientific. Adviser to the Raksha Mantri. He is
dealing with the national security issues that have a bearing on technology.
He is also involved in conceptual planning and technology linkages, He has
published more than 24 research papers in national and international
periodicals and holds a few patents. He was awarded Bapu Seetaram
Memorial Cold Medal instituted by the Institution of Electronics and
Telecommunication Engineers (IETE) for his outstanding contribution leading
to production of electronic components.

28

DESlDOC Bulletin of IniTechnol, 2030,20(1&2)

