DESlDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 20, Nos. 1&2, January & March 2000, pp. 29-36

O 2000, DESlDOC

Neural Networks and their Applications in Industry
Dhruba J Sarma
Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi
and

Susmita C Sarma
Triune Projects Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi
ABSTRACT
The article looks at the necessity of artificial intelligence and more specifically
neural computing systems in today's competitive business world. Some
fundamentals of neural network architecture are discussed, followed by advantages
of such networks. The domains of commercial applications of neural technology are
highlighted. The various applications that neural networks have been put to and the
potential possibilities that exist in a variety of civil and military sectors are
tremendous. The national and international scenario and what neural technology
holds for us in the future are also covered.

1. INTRODUCTION

define accurately. Patterns need to be
recognised that are complex and imperfect.
Nature is chaotic and we need something to
decode this chaos.

Over the past few years, technology has
become very dynamic. It is fuelling itself at an
ever increasing rate. Computers are a prime
component of this whole revolution. Computers
that can help fight diseases by designing new
drugs, computers that can design better
computers, computers that simulate reality and
what not! This is a very exciting time for
technology as the traditional boundaries are
now becoming blurred.
We often tend to think that computers can
only decide on whether a statement is true or
false. Such logical statements are then linked
together to form a series of rules. To program a
computer, all that is needed is to precisely
define the problem, write a specification and
use these rules. The program tells the computer,
rule by rule, exactly what to do. But it is difficult
to program a computer for morq '+~bjective'
tasks, like predicting what the weaiher is going
to be, or what the price of gold will be
tomorrow. These tasks are in fact impossible to

A different approach is needed to give
computers
more
'human-like'
abilities,
capability to make judgements, guesses and to
change opinions. We humans learn by example
and do not need to see every examples to
make a guess, a judgement based upon what
we have been taught.

'
'

With the growing emphasis on autonomy,
intelligence and an increased amount of
information required by businesses, traditional
processing technology can only cope through
faster hardware with more complex bespoke
software. With this approach, some of the
questions raised are:

How long is it going to write this software?
0 H o w many different versions for each
variation are required?
Having been written, how safe is it from bugs?
--

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

---

29

The problem growing throughout the 1990s
and into the millennium is that engineers no
longer have the luxury in development to
calculate all the algorithms or identify all the
rules in these complex systems. In fact, most of
these systems are so chaotic that doing so
would be futile and prone to failure.
Given the high stakes and intense
competition within all areas of industry,
intelligent business decisions are more
important than ever. Even more important is the
case for military applications. Data analysis
plays an important role as a critical strategic
weapon in business and operations of the
armed forces (both peace-time and war-time).
The inherent limitations of existing statistical
technology makes normal data analysis a very
tedious and often costly process-requiring
assumptions, rigid rules, force fitting of data, as
well as extensive trial and error experimentation
and programming. Interpreted errors, biases and
mistakes are introduced. Valuable competitive
insights are lost. Technology based on artificial
intelligence (Al) will soon become the only way
to generate such systems economically.

2. WHY ARTIFICIAL
INTELLlGENCE/NEURAL
COMPUTING?
The rapid pace of change and a climate of
competitiveness, in which the profoundly and
speedily informed gain the advantage and
demand a more incisive consideration and
induction of emerging IT than has hitherto been
the case.
There are a range of Al technologies
available now-each with its own strengths and
weaknesses. These are:

n Expert systems

n
n
n
n

Fuzzy logic
Case-based reasoning
Neural networks
Genetic algorithms

3. NEURAL NETWORKS
Neural computers are based on the
biological processes of the brain (human neural
systems). Terms like can learn brain-like,
30

massively parallel, learning machines and
revolutionary have been used to describe
neural computing. And these are true! It is not
surprising that most industries believe that
taking a neural approach will require special,
expensive neural integrated circuits, big parallel
computers, or very high powered computers.
This is not true!
Conventional computers concentrate on
emulating human thought processes, rather
than actually how they are achieved by the
human brain. Neural computers, however, take
an alternative approach in that they directly
model the biological structure of the human
brain and the way it processes information
(although at a much simpler level). This
necessitates a new kind of architecture, which,
like the human brain, consists of a large number
of heavily interconnected processing elements
operating in parallel manner. Such an
architecture is now both technically and
commercially feasible to be deployed on a
standard computer (from the laptop and
desktop to the mainframe) and is certain to
increase in general usage.
Neural computing is a relatively new but
rapidly expanding branch of computing whose
origin dates back to the early 1940s. Though it
has been largely overshadowed since the 1960s
by conventional computing, it has experienced
an upsurge in popularity in the late 1980s as a
result of new developments in the field and
general advances in computer hardware
technology.
Neural networks are mathematical models,
originally inspired by biological processes in the
human brain. They are constructed from a
number of simple processing elements
interconnected by weighted pathways to form
networks. Each element computes its output as
a non-linear function of its weighted inputs.
When
combined
into
networks, these
processing elements can implement arbitrarily
complex non-linear functions which can be
used to solve classification, prediction or
optimisation problems.

3.1 Basic Theory
In this Section, neural networks are
considered from an analytical viewpoint, so as
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Jechnol, 2000,20(1&2)

function with no single circuit topology
applicable to all problems, the same is also true
for neural networks. The easiest to understand
and most used architecture is the globally
connected feed-forward network-sometimes
called multilayer perception (MLP ), which is
generally trained with the backpropagation
of error algorithm, learning vector quantisation, radial bas$ function, Hopfield, and
Kohonen, etc.

to dispel any notions that neural networks are
'magical devices'. In fact, a neural network is
little more than an example of fairly specialised
parallel processing architecture. A point which
should be noted is that neural computing is not
to be viewed as a competitor to conventional
computing, but rather as a complementary
technique. The
most successful neural
computing applications to date have been
those which operate in conjunction with other
computing techniques. For example, using a
neural network to perform a first pass over a set
of incoming data, then passing the results over
to a conventional system for subsequent
processing.

Global interconnectivity means that all the
neuron outputs of one layer connect (through
their weights) to every neuron input in the next
layer and only to these neurons. The inputs to
the neurons on the input layer are from the
external world. Such networks perform
classification and optimisation operations very
well. The neuron output values can be
expressed mathematically, but due to the
built-in non-linear operators, these equations
provide little in the way of an intuitive feel for
how neural networks perform their tasks.

3.2 What is a Neural Network?
Neural networks can be taught to perform
complex tasks and do not require programming
as conventional computers. They are massively
parallel, extremely fast and intrinsically
fault-tolerant. They learn from experience,
generalise from examples, and are able to
extract essential characteristics from noisy data.
They require significantly less development time
and can respond to situations unspecified or
not previously envisaged. They are ideally suited
to real-world applications and can provide
solutions to a hos' of currently impossible or
commercially impractical problems.
In simple terms, a neural network is made
up of a number of processing elements called
neurons, whose interconnections are called
synapses. Each neuron accepts inputs from
eitl~erthe external world or from the outputs of
other neurons. Output signals from all neurons
eventually propagate their effect across the
entire network to the final layer where the
results can be output to the real world. The
synapses have a processing value or weight,
which is learnt during training of the network.
The functionality and power of the network
primarily depends on the number of neurons in
the hetwork, the interconnectivity patterns or
topology, and the value of the weights assigned
to each synapse.

3.3 Classification of Neural Networks
There are a number of art~ficial neural
networks (ANNs). lust
as there are many ways
to connect circuits to pqrftQm,_a specrf19
DESIDOC Bulletrn of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

There are some additional features for this
type of network which generally apply to all
neural networks, regardless of architecture.
Firstly, a neural network tends to be
over-specified, meaning that there are many
more unknowns than equations describing the
system. Secondly, usually there are many weight
sets (perhaps an infinite number) that will solve
the same problem. Lastly, the weight sets are
generated from training algorithms and are not
programmed like conventional algorithms. This
training process relieves the designer of
developing an algorithmic solution for the
problem at hand.

-

Some ANNs are classified as feed-forward
while others are recurrent (i.e., implement
feedback) depending on how data is processed
through the network. Another way of classifying
ANN types is by their method of learning (or
training), as some ANNs employ supervised
training while others are referred to as
unsupervised or self-organising. Supervised
training is analogous to a student guided by an
instructor. Unsupervised algorithms essentially
perform clustering of data into similar groups,
based on the measured attributes or features
servlng as Inputs to the algor~thms. This is
analogousto a student who derives lesson
31

totally on his or her own. ANNs can be
implemented in software or in specialised
hardware.

4. ADVANTAGES O F NEURAL
NETWORKS
As seen already, neural computers have the
ability to learn from experience, to improve
their performance and to adapt their behaviour
to new and changing environment. Unlike
conventional
rule-based
systems,
neural
networks are not programmed to perform a
particular task using rules. Instead, they are
trained on historical data, using a learning
algorithm. The learning algorithm changes the
functionality of the network to suit the problem
by modifying the values of the connection
weights between processing elements. Once
trained, the network interprets new data in a
way that is consistent with the experience
gathered during training.
Neural networks can provide highly accurate
and robust solutions for complex non-linear
tasks, such as fraud detection, business
lapse/churn
analysis,
risk
analysis
and
data-mining. One of their main benefits is that
the method for performing a task need not be
known in advance; instead it is automatically
inferred from the data. Once learned, the
method can be quickly and easily adjusted to
track changes in the business environment.

A further advantage of neural networks over
conventional rule-based systems and fuzzy
systems is that, once trained, they are far more
efficient in their storage requirements and
operation; a single mathematical function can
replace a large number of rules. An added
benefit of this more compact mathematical
representation is that it introduces a natural
form of regularisation or generalisation. This
makes neural systems extremely robust to noisy,
imprecise or incomplete data.
The time needed to develop a neural
application is often less than that in a
conventional approach, since the interaction
between the analyst and the expert is
minimised-there are no algorithms or rules to
define. The scope and accuracy of the finished
application is improved since the neural
32

computer can be exposed to many more
examples than can be assimilated by a single
human.
Early criticisms relating to the lack of
explanatory information on how a neural
network performs its task have now been
largely overcome. Techniques such as sensitivity
analysis can be used to identify which input
variables have the largest effect on a particular
decision or prediction. Furthermore, neural
networks can now be structured to incorporate
prior expert knowledge and present results in a
form that is meaningful to human users.

5. APPLICATIONS OF NEURAL
NETWORKS
Artificial neural networks have become an
accepted information analysis technology in a
variety of disciplines. This has resulted in a
variety of commercial applications (in both
products and services) of neural network
technology (The applications that neural
networks have been put to and the potential
possibilities that exist in a variety of civil and
military sectors are tremendous.)
Given below are domains of commercial
applications of neural network technology.

*

Business
0

*

Marketing
Real Estate

Document & Form Processing
0

Machine printed character recognition
Graphics recognition

0

Hand printed character recognition

o Cursive

handwritten

character

recognition

*

*

Finance Industry

o

Market trading

0

Fraud detection

o

Credit rating

Food lndustry
Odour/aroma analysis
Product development
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

0

*
*

Quality assurance

Energy Industry
0

Electrical load forecasting

o

Hydroelectric dam operation

o

Natural gas

Manufacturing
Process control
0

*

Quality control

Medical & Health Care Industry

o

Image analysis
Drug development

.O

*

Resource allocation

Science & Engineering

o Chemical engineering

o
o

*

Electrical engineering
Weather forecasting

Transportation & Communication
Some applications of naural networks are:

5.1 Forecasting the Behaviour of
Complex Systems
It is a broad application domain for neural
networks. Specific examples include: electric
load forecasting, economic forecasting, and
forecasting natural and physical phenomena.
One of the recent applications being studied
is the river-flow forecasting. It is an important
application that can have significant economic
impact. It can help in predicting agricultural
water supply and potential flood damage,
estimating loads on bridge, etc.

5.2 Signal Processing
Over the past decade or so, neural network
approaches have been successfully combined
with other signal processing techniques to
produce a wide variety of applications. It can
very well be argued that the commercial
success of neural networks has been from its
ready incorporation into other information
processing approaches, such as pattern
recognition and statistical inference, as well as
symbolic processing.
DESIDOC Bulletin of lnf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

5.3 Data Compression
A class of neural networks called the backpropagation network (BPN) is useful in
addressing
diverse
problems
requiring
recognition of complex patterns and performing
non-trivial
mapping
functions.
Data
compression is a common problem in today's
world. Specifically, one would like to find a way
to reduce the data needed to encode and
reproduce accurately a moderately high
resolution video image, so that these images
may be transmitted over low-to-medium
bandwidth
communication
equipment.
Although
there
are
many
algorithmic
approaches to perform data compression, most
of these are designed to deal with static data,
such as ASCII text, or with display images that
are fairly consistent, such as computer graphics.
Because video data rarely contains regular,
well-defined forms (and even less frequently
contain empty space), video data compression
is a difficult problem from an algorithmic
viewpoint. On the other hand, a neural network
approach is ideal for a video data-reduction
application, because BPN can be trained easily
to map a set of patterns from an n-dimensional
space to an m-dimensional space. Since any
video image can be thought of as a matrix of
picture elements (pixels), the image can be
conceptualised as a vector in n-space. If we
limit
the video
to
be encoded
to
monochromatic, images can be represented as
vectors of elements, each representing the gray
scale value of a single pixel.

5.4 Paint Quality Inspection
Visual inspection of painted surfaces, such
as automobile body panels, is currently a very
time consuming and labour-intensive process.
To reduce the amount of time required to
perform this inspection, one of the major US
automobile manufacturers reflects a laser beam
off the painted panel and on to a projection
.screen. Since the light source is a coherent
beam, the amount of scatter observed in the
reflected image of the laser provides an
indication of the quality of the paint finish on
the car. In the past, inspection of scatter-pattern
would have been performed primarily by
humans, because conventional computer

programming techniques that could be used to
automate the observation and scoring process
suffered from a lack of flexibility, and were not
particularly robust.
By using a backpropagation type of neural
network to perform the quality-scoring
operation, a system can be constructed that
captures the expertise of human inspectors, and
is relatively easy to maintain and update. To
improve the performance of the system,
algorithmic techniques can be coupled with the
above approach to simplify the problem.

results into practical applications, be they
industrial, medical or otherwise. A similar
approach needs to be adopted in India also. A
list of major real-world applications for which
neural network solutions have been developed
by the Institute are:
0 Prediction of rainfall based on radar images.
0 Prediction of traffic flow on highways.
0 Contributions to the control of rotary blood

pumps.
0 Identification of coronary artery disease from
stress ECG.

5.5 D N A Sequence Analysis

0 Recognition of hand-written characters.

In the 45 years since the discovery of DNA's
helical structure, scientist have made great
strides in exploring human DNA's structure and
locating human genes. As a part of this effort,
advanced recombinant DNA and gene-mapping
techniques, developed over the last two
decades, have led to an unprecedented effort to
map and sequence the entire human
genome-the collection of 1,00,000 human
genes.

0 Alarm detection in cardiotocograms (CTG)
for foetal monitoring.

The huge amount of data the human
genome project (presently going on in the US
with scientists all over the world participating)
produced will require high performance
computing and more intelligent computer
algorithm for analysis and inference. Recently,
the neural network model has been recognised
as a promising Al technique because such
approaches might well embody important
aspects of intelligence not captured by symbolic
and statistical methods.
These knowledge-based neural networks,
called expert networks in some cases, perform
as well as human experts (and often exhibit
characteristics of a traditional symbolic expert
system).

6. WORLD SCENARIO
Many organisations are carrying out
commendable work in the area. The Neural
Network Group at the Austrian Research
lnstitute for Artificial Intelligence, for example,
has alwavs aimed at turning their research

International Business Machines (IBM) has
integrated neural network and A1 technology
into software applications, such as data mining
packages. Such techniques enable business
users to sift through vast quantities of raw data
to spot hidden trends or anomalies which might
IBM's
business
otherwise
be
missed.
intelligence and data mining software can
mimic human thought when processing
information called the verification model-or go
beyond human logic to discover correlations
and similarities between seemingly disparate
data-called the discovery model.
Before neural networks and artificial
intelligence were used in business intelligence
applications, companies lacked the ability to
leverage information they were collecting in
data warehouses. They were unable to connect
consumer
buying
patterns,
customise
promotions to target a range of customers with
different
needs, or
identify potentially
fraudulent insurance claims based on past
behaviour.
Cadbury's saw its market share of the
chocolate market slip from 33 per cent to 28
per cent, but a business intelligence solution
helped the company focus attention on those
product lines that appealed to customers, and
as a result Cadbury's market share is now much
more.
Neural computing and Al techniques also lie
behind many of the sophisticated search
engines and intelligent agents found on the
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

Internet and corporate intranets. Who can deny
the fact that in business today, the ability to
access the right information at the right time is
absolutely critical! They are used in case-based
reasoning tools such as those developed by
Inference (California, USA) for intelligent
problem solving in the help desk, customer
support and other computer telephony
integration packages.
Other Al and neural intelligence systems are
used for credit scoring and to help pinpoint and
prevent fraud in areas as diverse as equity
trading and cellular telephony networks.

7. NEURAL NETWORKS- INDIAN
.SCENARIO
Lot of opportunities exist in the country for
Al technologies, especially neural computing
applications. Though most of the work is being
done around robotics and expert systems, there
are also people and organisations capable of
developing neural system products. The
potential sectors of application range from
manufacturing, banking and finance, defence,
telecommunications, pharmaceuticals to holiday
industry.
Substantial amount of work is being done at
the Centre for Artificial Intelligence and
Robotics (CAIR, Bangalore) and the Institute for
Robotics and
Intelligent Systems (IRIS,
Bangalore). They have developed a neural
network for optical character recognition. The
project
is
complete
and
awaits
commercialisation. IRIS is working on functional
electrical simulation using neural networks to
simulate the muscles of a handicapped person
and allow him to walk.
Scientists at the Indian Statistical lnstitute
(Machine Intelligence Unit), Calcutta, have
figured out computer simulated models, more
advanced than human brain, for creating
artificial entities more intelligent than present
day systems in performing cognitive tasks. This
project will have far reaching implications on
medical research and robotics.

8. COMPETITIVE EDGE
The progress of neural computing industry
worldwide is limited by a general lack of
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol,2000,20(1&2)

awareness. Commercial companies and their
customers are unaware of the technology. With
any new technology, there is a danger of false
expectations being raised, especially by
breakthroughs in research. When these
expectations are not met, the technology may
become discredited. It can take a long time to
undo this kind of damage. Recovery and
industrial/commerciaI take up will be longer
than) would otherwise have been the case.
Clearly, this is a scenario that must be avoided.
Managers have, for some time, been
subjected to a confusing technological clamour;
OOPS, 4GLs, CASE, OLAP, genetic algorithms,
KBS, virtual reality, etc, all have high current
visibility. The claimed benefits of these
technologies
sometimes
overlap-the
technologies themselves sometimes overlap.
The general market for neural computing
products is still in its infancy. Worldwide sales
of neural computing-based systems were
estimated to be of the order of $1000 m in
1997. The growth in UK alone has been
confirmed by UK DTI findings that 8 out of 10
times about 100 companies are either
investigating neural technology or developing
neural applications.
Pure research does not remain pure
indefinitely. Sooner, it turns up as applied
research, and finally as technology. Theory
becomes
industrial
practice,
knowledge
becomes competitive
power.
Television,
computer technology and biotechnology have
undergone a metamorphosis and emerged as
an industry-changing force.
The neural computing industry now has the
impetus of an expanding market. It is the right
time to encourage it by identifying new
applications and promoting them. There is a
danger, however, that the rate at which the
technology is taken up will be constrained by
inappropriate neural computing technology.
This danger needs to be guarded against by
ensuring that neural computing research is
undertaken in collaboration with business. It
will only be through the implementation of
such research that industry can benefit from the
technology and become world-leaders.

9. CONCLUSION

REFERENCES

Neural computers perform very favourably
in business and military applications. They do
not require explicit programming by an expert
and are robust to noisy, imprecise or
incomplete data. Furthermore, knowledge is
encapsulated in a compact, efficient way that
can easily be adapted to changes in business
environment.

1.

Freeman, James A. & David, M. Neural
networks: Algorithms, applications, and
p r o g r a m m i n g techniques. Skapura
Addison-Wesley Longman, Inc.

2.

Yuhas, Ben P.; Goldstein, Moise, H.;
Sejnowski, Terrence J & Jenkins, Robert E.
Neural network models of sensory
integration for improved vowel recognition.
(Proc. IEEE, October 1990).

3.

Widrow, Bernard & Lehr, Michael, A. Thirty
Years of adaptive neural networks:
Perceptron,
madaline
and
backpropagation. (Proc. IEEE, September
1990).

4.

Amari,
Shun-ichi.
Mathematical
foundations of neurocomputing; (Proc.
IEEE, September 1990).

As with all technologies, there is a window
of opportunity for exploitation-and
that
window is here today. You cannot afford to
ignore the fact that your competitors are
already investigating the opportunities and
realising the significant business benefits that
neural technology brings to a range of
applications.
The reason one should use neural
computing technology is the competition!

Contributors

Shri Dhruba J Sarma is working in the Technology Division
(Technology Information Centre) of the Confederation of Indian Industry
(CII), New Delhi.
Ms Susmita G Sarma is working in the Instrumentation Division of
Triune Projects Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi.

DESIDOCBulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

