DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 20, Nos. 1&2, January& March 2000, pp. 37-51
O 2000, DESIDOC

Progression of Application Software in lndia
V Raghuraman
Confederation of lndian Industry, New Delhi

ABSTRACT
Growth in information technology (IT) in the past decade has changed the
scenario worldwide and there i s hardly any activity, that has not been affected by IT.
It finds use in areas like home, business, public sector, financial services, defence,
etc. A number of IT applications for the lndian Defence sector have been described
in the paper. Several lndian companies have come forward to provide IT solutions
for the lndian Defence. By collaborating with lndian software companies, the lndian
Defence can gain several advantages without jeopardising its security, by taking
appropriate security measures. This, in turn, will help and encourage the lndian
software companies to become global players.

1. INTRODUCTION
The lndian software industry has grown by
leaps and bounds during the 1990s. It has been
a major export revenue earner for lndia and has
established lndia as a major centre for
intellectual capital in the western world. There
are more than hundred software companies in
the Silicon Valley of the US that are owned by
persons of lndian origin. Even software
companies based in India, like Infosys, Ramco,
Wipro and TCS have made a name for
themselves in the US.
It is expected that software industry will
continue to grow exponentially to reach export
revenue of US$ 50 billion by 2008. In such a
scenario, some key issues remain to be
discussed in the lndian context. These are:

tangible business benefits f r o m their
application software solutions?

A Have we leveraged adequately on the
convergence of software and communication
technologies to achieve business benefits?

Q What i s the state-of-the-art in terms of
application software technology and where
does lndia figure in the whole picture?
In this article, these issues are examined.
The evolution of IT in the world at large and
within lndia is kept in perspective. Applications
available and also in use in various industries
are outlined. Recommendations are given for a
variety of businesses, including defence and
government, for areas of application software to
focus on, at the start of the next millennium.

2. EVOLUTION OF COMPUTERS &
A What is the level of deployment of application
software within lndian organisations, both in
private as w e l l as p u b l i c sector and
government?

A Having deployed software solutions, how are
they being used-only for office automation
purposes (like wordprocessing and
spreadsheets), or are organisations deriving
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

IT
Computers have come a long way since
1623, when the German scientist Wilhelm
Schikard invented a machine which could add,
multiply and divide. The difference engine
designed by the British mathematician and
scientist Charles Babbage, was a significant
milestone in the evolution of computers. In fact,
37

the Babbage's analytical engine was the
forerunner of the modern computer. The
evolution of the computer, as we know it today,
really began in the 1970s, with the invention of
microprocessor.
Today,
information
technology
(IT)
comprises three key building blocks, viz.,
hardware, software and networking. (Appendix
1 gives more details of these terms).

3. STAGES O F APPLICATION
SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT
Application software in India has gone
through five developmental stages over the past
30-35 years. (See Appendix 2).

4. IT APPLICATIONS
IT is all pervasive and traverses all types of
businesses, home and even defence. Various
applications of IT in the Country are:

4.1

Home

The applications of IT at home are
essentially aimed at offering education and
entertainment through multimedia CD titles and
CBTs to learn some hands-on software
techniques. A host of educational games CDs
are being targeted at this market. Internet's ease
and hype has caught the fancy of Indian
households and lnternet service providers (ISP)
are finding a niche to address this market.
Further, large MNCs and Indian agencies are
offering user-friendly multimedia computers and
printers for home use with added CD titles.
Digital photography has immense potential
and already there are several companies
targeting homes with digital cameras and
scanners. Web TV, internet-ready television or
the convergence of PC, TV and the lnternet is
being tested with Videocon and BPL having
announced their offerings.

4.2

Education & R&D

Applications in this area are real-time data
acquisition equipment, high-capacity storage
devices, and high-end workstations. The
application software
is generally being
developed in-house. Similarly, pharmaceutical
research organisations and materials research
38

institutions rely heavily on third party
applications in areas like molecular simulation.

4.3 Business & Industry
4.3.1 Maintenance
IT
applications
being
targetted
by
maintenance vendors are routine customer
support,
facility
management,
network
management, IT asset management, site
planning, environmental engineering, structured
cabling, and so on.
But with maintenance and support growing
up both in terms of opportunities as well as
technical challenge, things might be changing
for the better in the near future. The new order
is of maintenance engineers being encouraged
to get certification.

4.3.2 Services Sector
Two important parameters that control the
performance of any service sector industry is
the level of service and the cdresponding cost
incurred. Even small increase in service levels
sometimes warrants disproportionate increase
in the technology infrastructure. Unless
IT-enabled service systems take on the job, it
becomes very difficult to create customer
lock-in. That is why express companies invest in
elaborate networks to track-n-trace packets,
hotels have express check-out, airlines can
accommodate customer preferences, and the
like. A segmentwise insight on IT applications in
the service sector is given below.
Airline & Airports
Use of IT in the airlines industry is moving
beyond the area of passenger reservation and
cargo to yield management functions. Aircraft
maintenance engineering and crew scheduling
are also getting recognised to be important
areas.
Traditionally, the airlines sector worldwide
relies on outsourcing deals with technology
service companies because the service uptime
is very critical. IT applications in airports include
-automated
gate readers, boarding card
readers, etc.
Print & Publishing
Use of IT in the publishing industry has now
gained maturity. Almost all the publishing
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Jechnol, 2000,20(1&2)

majors like Bennett Coleman, Indian Express
group, Living Media, and others now rely on IT
for all their internal and external publishing
functions. Office automation, beyond local area
networking
involving
groupware
and
messaging, is also prevalent. The Times of India
intranet implementation is one of the examples
of intranets in the country.
Hotel Industry
The hospitality sector too is gaining maturity
in IT usage. The Taj Group, the Oberoi Group,
and the Welcomgroup are some of the efficient
users of IT in the hospitality industry. With most
of the back-office and front-office automation in
place, the star-graded hotels are looking at
harnessing IT for emerging applications like
e-commerce and data warehousing to get to the
next level of returns. This includes designing
loyalty programmes and positioning on the
Internet to attract foreign business and tourists.
Service is extremely cost-driven in the
hospitality industry and efficient property
management systems help in reining the costs.
Railways
The Railways which falls under the public
sector, has unfortunately been lagging in terms
of IT usage. After the big move towards
computerised reservations four to five years
back, nothing new has been undertaken. In this
sense, the lndian Railways is only looking at
organic growth and not a quantum one. Freight
management, a big revenue earner for the
Railways, has only rudimentary IT components
in its operations. This area could give the
Railways a couple of hundred crores each year
in savings alone, if proper freight management
systems are adopted.
Manufacturing
Prompting companies to keep their plants
rolling with better integration of business
processes, are mantras like enterprise resource
planning (ERP) and CAD/CAM. The process
manufacturing sector traditionally spends more
on IT because of the larger population of
companies engaged in this activity as well as
their scale of operations. In general, the
business and IT priorities of both process and
discrete
manufacturing
are
the
same:
controlling inventory, production and marketing
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Jechnol, 2000,20(1&2)

cost; improving supplier and delivery channel
relationships on the business front; improving IT
infrastructure; automating internal and external
processes, and better decision-making using IT,
on IT front.
In the pharmaceuticals industry, the WTO
agreement on patents has forced companies to
get patents on their formulations. Clinical trials,
a very data-intensive area, is fast emerging as an
application in the pharma industry.
The major investment heads for a
manufacturing company are: infrastructure
(which
includes
systems,
connectivity,
messaging), design, applications databases,
application
development
and
packaged
application implementation services, consulting
and other services, external connectivity
(connecting to dealers and suppliers), and
e-commerce.
Many
manufacturing
organisations,
especially in the private sector, have messaging
and groupware in place for intra-organisational
communication. Network-centric applications
continue to be developed.
ERP is the watchword in the manufacturing
industry and the term has gained mindshare
more than marketshare in the past 5-6 years in
India. With almost all the global players present
in the country, the stage is set for the launch of
lndian manufacturing sector into the age of
integrated applications. The move to ERP is a
high-investment proposition with accompanying
investments in hardware, connectivity, and
implementation services, apart from a lot of
invisible costs involved in process change,
change management and training.
The process industry's focus is on integrating
business applications with the plant floor. The
major areas under consideration are: finance,
materials, and sales and distribution. Since
production in the case of process industry is
plant-oriented, it falls within the realm of
distributed digital control systems. The most
important area after this is the maintenance
function.
Selection of proper ERP package is based
solely on the business needs and the fit that the
product offers. CAD/CAM is the other major
39

focus area for the manufacturing sector.
Traditionally, the automotive and aerospace
industries are the largest consumers of
CAD/CAM. Increasing design capacity is also a
competitive edge for a company. There is also a
trend towards reverse engineering, especially in
the engineering and appliances industry.
Product data management is another leading
edge CAD/CAM philosophy. For the supplier, it
means enhanced competence and improved
competitiveness. Many of these suppliers with
their improved design capacity and integration
with OEMs have also started exporting. Another
reason which prompts a company to consider
design as an imperative activity is the improved
. alignment
that
many
manufacturing
organisations have acquired due to business
process re-engineering.

4.3.4 Banking & Finance
The investments made by the banking sector
can be broadly characterised by a continuation
of IT automation plans by large public sector
banks, implementation of connectivity and
leading-edge technology solutions by the new
private sector banks, continuing branch
automation and branch connectivity by the old
private banks, and refinements in service using
IT by the cooperative banking sector.
Toward this, the banks invested heavily in
renovation of offices, rendering value-added
service schemes, and moving to card culture by
putting up cash dispensers and ATMs. The
broad direction in IT usage points toward a
continuation of refinements in key application
areas like loan appraisal systems, policy
management, decision-support systems, and
funds
management.
Technologies
like
groupware are now being used by almost
everyone because of the collaborative nature of
work in financial institutions and credit rating
agencies.
While insurance companies like LIC, GIC,
and Oriental Insurance invested in connectivity
and policy management during the year, UTI
invested in production systems. NSE's major
investments were in setting up disaster recovery
systems, dataware housing, market surveillance
and settlement systems. From an applications
point of view, apart from the operational
automation
areas
like
general
ledger,

inter-branch reconciliation, and bank-wide MIS,
the main ITcentric applications that are gaining
maturity are cash management and treasury
management. These crucial banking functions
are now actively being addressed using
technology.
Retail banking using network applications
like electronic funds transfer (EFT) and any
branch banking caught the attention of many
public and private sector banks. To facilitate
these applications, a shared payment network
system Swadhan was set up last year. Swadhan
is a large network of ATMs spread over Mumbai
and connected to a central host. The services
offered under the network include: cash
withdrawal,
balance
inquiry,
cash/check
deposit, funds transfer, requests for check book,
standing instructions, and accounts statement.
The other network coming up is IDRBT
(Institute for Development and Research in
Banking Technology) network. Its central hub
located in Hyderabad handles data switching,
network monitoring and supporting multiple
user groups. As a VSAT network, it supports
TDM/TDMA and hybrid network structures.
The applications of the IDRBT network would
be: data traffic between banks and Fls, isolated
traffic in virtual bank groups, fax traffic, voice
traffic between banks in mesh network, and
videoconferencing at select sites. Messaging
involves enhancing customer collaboration
using
knowledge
sharing,
information
dissemination, and better service delivery
channels. The key benefit sought is to
strengthen customer relationships.

4.3.5 O i l & Power
Here, large-scale infrastructure upgradation
and systems integration projects which are
addressed by large vendors of national repute,
capable of giving implementation and support
services in a large number of remote locations
are covered. The common line running through
them is the nature of process generation,
transmission, and distribution. The latest
pre-occupation with IT has been more
customer-responsive and competitive. The
unbundling of the SEBs and restructuring of the
power sector is ushering in numerous
applications as asset management, online load
des~atch/control, discrete customer services,
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

1I
1

1i

i

8

1

I

I

etc. In the oil refinery, optimisation of the
processes to ensure maximum safety, maximum
output, minimum wastage and possibility of
upgradation in the future with the eventual
linking of geographically-balanced distribution
processes is feasible. In short, maximising on
production efficiency is the target toward which
oil refineries work. IT plays an important role
here in helping refineries achieve this target as
easily and as productively as possible.
Today, distributed digital control systems
(DDCSs) are common, with refineries taking to
this device of automation in a major way. For
this purpose, major refineries are now either
installing or upgrading DDCSs and also
integrating the outputs of the refinery MIS to
that of the central corporate MIS of the
company. One very significant area that is
being looked in the refineries today is an Al
system. It is a system that will enable a business
model-based prediction for refinery processes
that are currently being addressed by DDCS.
This will have a higher level of computer control
whereby the entire refinery processes could be
designed for the future.
An important area of automation, and one
where a considerable ground has been covered
is the MIS. With MIS systems in place, there
have been considerable benefits. In the area of
product dispatch, the manual system has been
changed to an electronic one and security
checks have now been reduced to a minimum.
One more area of gain is in the reduction of
wastage due to delays.

4.3.6 Telecom
Business imperatives do drive IT acquisition
in this segment, but not from a competitive
standpoint. Application of IT in telecom are:
customer acquisition and retention; Market
segmentation and prospect identification;
targeted campaign and promotion; customer
schemes and tariff plans; total customer
management facility; Churn prediction and
prevention;
analysis
of
connections,
disconnections, and reconnections; dealer
analysis and monitoring; revenue enhancement;
profitability analysis; aging analysis of accounts
receivable; products sales analysis; and bill
assurance, economic modelling,
network
utilisation and capacity planning.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

In an industry like telecom, the winners will
be those who can quickly adapt to new market
opportunities. In this backdrop, telecom
providers need mission-critical informational
technology solutions that can combine
performance and scalability with flexibility and
modularity.

5. INDIA: ERP CASE STUDIES

5.1

Coats lndia

Coats lndia is the undisputed leader in the
business of cotton, synthetic and core spun
threads in India. With manufacturing operations
in six different locations, the company faces a
daunting task of servicing the needs of 25,000
direct and 2,00,000 indirect customers through
its 20 sales offices spread across the country.
Coats selected Ramco to implement an ERP
solution that would meet its generic
requirement as also fulfill its specific needs as a
threads company. Dynamic re-scheduling of
production orders, lntranet report publishing of
key material consumption are some of the
highlights of ERP implementation.
Besides fine-tuning business processes,
Coats i s well on its way to achieving other key
business objectives like reducing inventory,
compressed lead times
and
increased
conformance to promised delivery dates.

5.2

Global Tele-Systems Ltd

To retain its competitive advantage in the
face of emerging challenges, Global, the largest
private telecom company in India, felt the need
to restructure all its processes using a
distributed ERP solution.
Today, after implementing, Global is
experiencing not just ease of accessibility and
availability of vital information, but also tangible
increase in productivity and decrease in order
processing time by over ten times.

'5.3

Bharat Earth Movers Ltd. (BEML)

In 1997, Bharat Earth Movers Ltd. (BEML)
created history of sorts by becoming the first
public sector enterprise (PSE) to implement an
ERP solution.
Dispelling the notion that it is difficult-if not
impossible-to bring about changes in a public
41

sector environment, BEML looked to I ERP as a
tool to bring about change management. Also,
it wanted to bring about transparency in
operations, data integration and online
information for considered decision making.
Some of the key applications computerised
include: vendor management, planning and
control of materials and purchasing process.
A notable feature of the implementation is that
BEML's ERP is a clear winner with both its
management and employees.

5.4

EIH Ltd. (Oberoi Group of
Hotels)

Being in the hospitality business, a strong
people-oriented approach in every facet of its
activities has been the hallmark of EIH's
success. To help integrate the HR processes,
EIH selected and implemented HR and payroll
solution.
With
implementations
having
been
completed at five sites in different cities, EIH
has an up-to-date database on people, their
performance, skills and training records. The
integration with payroll reflects transactions
such as leave, loans and changing roles of
employees.
(Case studies: Courtesy-Armco Systems)

6. IT APPLICATIONS FOR DEFENCE
The Indian Defence sector comprises Army,
Navy, Air Force, Ordnance Factories and
Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. Defence has a large
pool of resources be it men, material, machine
or money. Army has a strength of about ten
lakh. As in other organisations, one of the
applications of IT in defence was the
computerisation of functions, such as accounts,
personnel
management
and
inventory
management. These applications,
initially
written in FORTRAN or COBOL and running on
mainframe/supermini computers, have now
been ported on to relational database
management system (RDBMS) platforms like
SQL Server, Oracle and lngres on NT or
Unix-based PC servers.
Defence can specifically gain from the
convergence of IT and communications.
Inventory of equipment, weapons and their
42

spares is maintained at various depots all over
the country. Individual software packages at
each depot, where present, give status of
(availability/nonavailability) of items. However,
a
very
pressing
requirement
for
a
command-centre-based organisation like the
Army is a decision-support system (DSS) which
will provide online information at the command
headquarters regarding exact quantity of a
particular item available all across the
command territory. If a critical spare is not
available at one location, it is crucial to find out,
its availability at other locations, so that it can
be transported from one location to the other.
An integrated materials management system
across the entire Army, connecting all depots
through wide area network links, like leased
lines or VSATs would be extremely useful in
setting up this DSS.
Weapons are a key asset to any defence
organisation. Uptime of weapon is of
paramount importance. Asset management
products like enterprise asset management help
track the asset (i.e. weapon) through its lifetime,
including details like uptime, cost, availability of
spares, etc.
Satellite remote sensing provides more
accurate terrain mapping, which can improve
the efficiency of air sorties.
IT solutions can also be used to integrate
tank electronics with other logistics systems in
defence. Computerised automated testing
systems based on dedicated computers and
programming facilities are in use at central
repair depots/agencies.

7. IT OFFERINGS FROM INDIAN
COMPANIES
Enterprise applications and the media
interest, in its potential in transforming
businesses into efficient and successful entities,
is an area which is expected to grow by 74 per
cent by the turn of the next millennium. Some
of
the
applications
include:
financial
management
systems,
human
resource
management systems, materials management,
sales management, and manufacturing.
Now, the focus is moving from traditionally
manufacturing industry solutions to retail,
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno}, 2000,20(1&2)

1

utilities, defence, financial services, healthcare
and public sector. ERP is a high-impact area
because it leads to a bottom-up change in the
organisation. That is, it is by no means an
incremental
technology.
While
many
companies do not even understand the full
implications of using an ERP, they are
nevertheless enchanted by the concept of
integrated applications. Further, functional
simulation solutions allow the optimisation of
product
performance
by
providing
a
fundamental understanding of how a design will
perform in its real-world environment. This
understanding provides the necessary insight
for creating the best possible product.
Fu.nctional simulation solutions enable users to
utilise common engineering terms, in place of
numerical analysis language, through an
interface created with design engineers in mind.
As the simulation progresses, the system
automatically refines the mesh to ensure
accurate results.
Traditionally, ERP software has been
developed and marketed by European
companies like SAP and BaaN. Even an
advanced IT country like the US came into
picture quite late. So far, Ramco Systems is the
only lndian company to have developed a
world-class ERP product (Ramco Marshal)
which is in use at several countries worldwide.
Specifically, for the defence sector, there are
lndian software solutions available in the
following areas:

+

+
+

+
+

Integrated solutions for the enterprise, with or
without ERP products-integrated operations,
logistics and technical functions and if
required, human resource management
Decision-support systems
Equipment and aircraft simulators-refurbish/
modernise/upgrade existing simulators, and
development of new simulators
C o o p e r a t i o n w i t h d e f e n c e t o evolve
indigenous IT warfare strategy and components, and to combat hostile IT warfare
methods
Development of indigenous operating system
and ruggedised computers immune to
deliberate radiation or electronic attacks

+ Operational

task planning and wargaming

systems
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

+
+

Enhanced visualisation using virtual reality
techniques for better decision-making
Network engineering and solutions, including
setting up inter- and intranets, and integration
of voice, data and video over the networks

+ Data warehousing solutions for specific
organisations
+ Computer-based training and methods to
implement distance educationltraining
+ Knowledge management
+ General purpose software development on
non-proprietary platforms.

8. EVALUATING IT SOLUTIONS FOR
DEFENCE
Proposals from the industry should be
sought against firm and clearly drawn
qualitative requirements. If the concerned
defence organisation requires to explore
solutions before drawing up the qualitative
requirements, it could circulate a concept paper
to potential companies and request them for
technical solution with approximate indication
of costs. For complex/large projects which
could have non-uniform solutions from the
vendors,
technical
presentations
and
discussions should be held with shortlisted
vendors. The vendor should be allowed to
submit his final commercial proposal at this
point of time. The total procurement cycle,
from enquiry to order placing, would typically
not exceed four to five months.
Defence
could
facilitate
prototype
development/concept proving and ensure that
it is commercially viable to the vendor.
Preference could be given to lndian products.

A broad checklist (general & technical
requirements) for evaluating purchase of IT
solutions for the lndian Defence is given in
Appendix 3.

9. ROLE O F INDIAN SOFTWARE
COMPANIES
lndian IT strength in solutions and
applications software is an acknowledged fact.
In the past, in the name of security, most of the
IT applications required by Defence sector,
were attempted to be developed in-house or
through Defence labs and PSUs. While these
43

concerns still hold true, it is also true that the
present requirements of Defence sector in IT
have become very high. While Defence labs
and PSUs have excellent capabilities to provide
IT solutions, they cannot add manpower, to an
unlimited extent, to take care of Defence's
growing requirements.
Our country is not unfamiliar to control
regimes and sanctions. In the present
geo-political scenario, with a single global
superpower, any attempt by lndia to utilise
foreign technology to the hilt will not only be
thwarted but also subverted. Systems software
and hardware and networking used in IT
applications are prone to external subversion
through viruses, trojans, and cyber-bombs,
which could be programmed and timed in their
activity.
O n the other hand, these problems are not
prevalent in the solutions offered by lndian
software companies, who are responsible
corporate citizens of the country. These
companies have a commitment to building an
equity, not only for themselves, but also for the
country (India) as a whole, in the global
scenario.
Moreover, the cost of an lndian solution or
product would be significantly lower than that
compared to a similar one from abroad. Costs
of IT solutions have to be viewed at from two
perspectives. One is the capital cost, where
there may not be significant difference between
an lndian solution and an overseas one.
However, the second cost is the total cost of
ownership (TCO), which includes all costs over
the lifetime of the IT solution. For example,
hardware costs, maintenance costs, manpower
training costs, costs of building extensions and
customisations at a later date, and networking
bandwidth costs are some key components of
TCO. lndian companies can surely provide a
significantly lower TCO as compared to foreign
companies.

10.ADVANTAGES OF INDIGENOUS
IT SOLUTIONS
lndian IT vendors provide the following
advantages to the lndian Defence:
44

The solution itself can be evolved through
very close interaction between the vendor
and the customer. It avoids project teams
located abroad and interfacing difficulties
between the end user and the vendor.

o

Availability of source programs of these
applications which can be easily ported to
other platforms once they are developed
using quality systems.

o Protection from deliberate information

o
o

j

1

1

i
,

I

warfare tactics/sources.

I

Less security hazard since the employees of
the vendor will be lndian citizens subject to
Official Secrets Act.

1

Cost advantage.

When
one
talks
of
application/
computerisation, the user-Defence, needs to
share its operational requirements with the
vendor, e.g. organisational aspects, number of
tanks, type and location and all these become
known to outsiders (especially, foreign vendors).
This information is vital for the security of the
country. IT war is going to be the new age war,
and thus, knowing what information is kept at
which place could provide a lead to the hackers
who can access this information.
Defence always held the opinion that
information with only Defence personnel is safe
and so they were not even open to private
lndian industry. But lately, with increasing
collaboration between Defence establishments
and the lndian private sector, this opinion is
wearing off and Defence now seeks active
participation of the private sector.

11. SUMMARY
Information technology in the worldwide
scenario has evolved tremendously in the past
decade and has affected day-to-day life. IT
usage in lndia has also gained considerable
ground and now state-of-the-art products and
solutions are available in India, almost
concurrently with their global release. The role
of IT is going to increase further in the next
millennium. IT finds use in the various areas like
home, business, public sector, financial services,
and defence. There are a number of IT
applications for the lndian Defence. A number
of lndian companies have focussed on
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

;

providing IT solutions for the Indian Defence.
Defence can gain several advantages by
collaborating with Indian software companies,
while at the same time, ensuring that security

considerations are taken care of. By
collaborating with Indian software companies,
the Indian Defence can also encourage and
enable them to become global players.

Contributor

Shri V Raghuraman i s presently Senior Adviser, Confederation of
lndian Industry (CII), New Delhi. Formerly, he was Secretary General,
ASSOCHAM.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

45

