DESIDOC Bulletin of lnformation Technology, Vol. 20, Nos. 1 & 2, January& March 2000, pp. 53-59

0 2000, DESIDOC

lnformation Technology-A Tool for Rural
Community Development
Dr N Vijayaditya
Planning Commission, National Informatics Centre, New Delhi-7 70 003
"Idea of Community project i s something which i s basically revolutionary, if it
works well....... We have not given enough attention to such rural areas in the past
and unless we bring them up to a certain level we shall always be weighed down by
them.

- Pandit JawaharlalNehru
1. INTRODUCTION

IT is already an integral part of our daily life.
It is providing useful tools and services at our
homes and offices. The production of goods as
well as services is becoming more and more
information-based. IT is creating a society based
on information.

Rural community development is the
process of allocating for resources in to rural
areas so as to optimally utilise the existing local
resources and raise standard of living of rural
folk. There are various kinds of resources which
could be provided to achieve this objective.
Most of these inputs are being applied, in some
form or the other, in most of the rural areas and
yet the problem of time and space continues to
block the pace of development. These inputs
that are guided by sectoral approaches, do not
synchronise with each other, and thus do not
deliver the compound benefit to rural people.

Let us look at some of the developments in
IT. Hardware-wise, the systems have become
faster and compact in size. The processing has
doubled every eighteen months. For the first
time, standard hardware combined with
standard software created economies of scale
that make powerful computing solutions
available at affordable prices.

Information technology (IT) could be an
enabler
which
could
synchronise
the
investment made so far and trigger the
multiplier effect in the areas of rural community
development.

2. IT DEVELOPMENTS
We are living through a historic period of
technological change. This was brought about
by the development and widening application
of
information
and
communication
technologies. These technologies are different
from and faster than, anything one has seen
before. They have a huge potential for
opportunity creation, higher standards of living
and better services.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

.

The software technology has also made
tremendous progress, from machine-dependent
languages to almost machine-independent
languages. Over the last few years, we have
seen PCs offering not only more processing
power at less cost but also many choices. The
fastest system of the future will offer in addition
to the high performance, more realistic 3-D
graphics, flawless video and image processing.
The network computers (NC) would
become a part of the day-to-day life. Though
some of these systems will look like today's
laptop, some will be hidden in devices, such as
telephone, television, refrigerator, etc. An NC
will have compliance to standards, low cost and

1

homes, controlling security, lighting, and energy
from central locations. When the cellular
service will migrate to new digital standard that
allows data to be transferred at 48 kbps, the
situation
will
improve. There will be
tremendous opportunities available in the next
millennium to improve ones standard of living
and also make the world a knowledge-based
society.

easy administration. Over the next few years,
the NC will also have options for some class of
users for data entry, form processing etc.
However, PCs will still be the choice for
processor-hungry applications, like 3-D graphic
and video. The next generation of home
television may have built-in network computer
to provide video mail, v ~ d e oconferencing and
other allied activities. The telev~sionwill take the
shape of NC. Some of the organisations have
already developed set top devices to facilitate
Internet access and e-mail through TV.

3. RURAL COMMUNITIES
One of the notable features of rural
communities is the closeness of their settlement
location to the nature. Though It has some
advantages, it also brings quite a few problems.
The inter-village distance, over-dependence on
natural
cycles,
lack of employment
opportunities beyond primary sector and
illiteracy etc. act as a trap of incessant poverty
to individuals.

Merging of television with PC will need
some compromises both in technology and
standards. In a few years time, a set top
computing could be powerful enough to
replace some of the existing PCs. This will result
in aligning of forces from multiple industries in
digital broadcasting, media computing and
video games. At the centre of TV-PC
convergence, we expect a lot of mutimedia
developments are expected. These will be
based on the broadcasting standard and
optimum-utilisation of bandwidth. The new chip
design for multimedia process may adopt
HDTV technology at the cost of pentium chips.
Undoubtedly, the web standdrd will prevail to
enrich the existing broadcasting environment.
The need for wireless communication and
handwriting recognition will grow along with
the mobile computer systems. The hand-held
devices we may be carrying around the turn of
the century, may look like ones we carry every
day in our pocket or briefcase. However, they
would not act the same. Regardless of the
operating system, they would use less power,
cost less and would have more features,
including connection to computer. Towards this,
the companies are working on integrated chips.
Some companies already have the technology
that integrate data and voice. Using this
capability, the PCs of the future can be used for
talking as well as for processing. Reliable
handwriting recognition is necessary to make
the hand-held computing device a really
user-fr~endlysystem. But this technology may
take a little longer than the wireless. Optical
read only memory (ROM) could also boost the
storage capacity of the hand-held device. The
PCs that run businesses today will soon run the

O n the systematic analyses of the
aforestated
problems
faced
by
rural
communities, one observes that these problems
center around the issue of marginality from the
main stream, resulting in inaccessibility to the
information.
There are numerous examples and case
studies available, establishing that good
transport and communication systems are a
prerequisite to initiate the development process
in a given region. There are cases where mere
introduction of telephone network in the rural
areas has changed the rural economy scenario
effectively.

3.1 The Strategy

'

A pro-active strategy is essential for enabling
the
rural
communities
to
face
the
unprecedented challenges brought about by
the
fast
changing
global
economy,
environmental degradation and demographic
scenario. Transparency and access to relevant
IT opens up a variety of channels of
communication that are not restricted by time,
space, languages and cultures. This accessibility
would in turn create a chain sequence of
actions for faster development. It highlights the
importance of bridging the gap between
cultivators, agriculture producers, developmental agencies, scientists and the consumers
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

through initiation of interaction and dialogue. It
facilitates the bottom-up articulation and
sharing of the information o n needs and the
gaps.
Active participation of the all concerned
agencies and the rural population would enable
to pass on the benefits directly to whom these
are intended. In this process, there would be an
increasing efficiency of the developmental
resources, less duplication of activities, and
reduced
cost
of
communication
and
coordination among the developing agencies. It
should be noted that IT is an enabling
technology. It is the people who have to realise
the need for working together to make the most
of the decentralised and accessible IT tools.
By improving the communication between
government
agencies,
non-governmental
organisations, private sector entities and
educational institutions, enormous benefits
could be drawn by sharing information in the
areas of cultivation, forestry, health, nutrition
education, etc. IT facilitates sharing experiences
in a more transparent manner through lessons
learned and by observing the best practices
which were evolved over time for successful
development by various communities. In
addition to the vertical information exchange
the system will also enable horizontal
information exchange, between agencies
involved in the development of a particular
locality or community. This mesh of vertical
and horizontal communication for rural
development would greatly benefit the rural
communities to choose and'implement relevant
technologies in agriculture production, health,
nutrition and other social welfare programmes.
Today's technology offers tools to overcome
the language barrier. The rural community can
create their own discussion group and web sites
to communicate their problems and progresses
to seek guidance and assistance from national
and international agencies through the Internet.
This will facilitate faster progress.
To attain sustainability and success, IT
applications should focus on the needs of the
local community and for the requirement of the
rural community. It requires an approach that
catalyses
local
participation,
support
information
and
communication
needs
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

assessment, and create awareness among the
potential users, help build communities of users
and local management. Simultaneously, one
needs to develop and strengthen intermediators
and agencies that serve rural community so that
it can make the most appropriate use of
Internet tools.
The extension of IT to communities at village
level will stir and strengthen rural economy. The
exposure to Internet and the delivery of
information, at village level, would create
, several opportunities and also check the labour
migration to urban areas. The IT potentials are
unlimited.

The concept of telekiosk could be an
affordable solution for extending IT revolution
to rural areas. This infrastructure could lead to a
more aware, well-equipped, economically
vibrant, and transformed rural society.
This typically consists of a personal
computer, printer/scanner, modem, telephone
and an assistant. The objective of these
telekiosks is to provide the basic information
services to the communities in the villages and
also provide means of communication with the
rest of the world. These kiosks could play an
important role in facilitating the socio-economic
development in the villages.
The importance of Telekiosk lies in the fact
that the local people would initially gain
experience and benefit by the use of this
technology, and subsequently graduate to
having their own facility. This demand
stimulation can act as a mean of bringing about
general provision of higher quality computer
communications. These kiosks also facilitate in
reducing several disadvantages that the rural
communities may have, with regard to
telecommunication and IT. By sharing the
equipment and the infrastructure, the cost can
be reduced drastically thus making it viable for
thP villagers to use it. Otherwise, it would be
prohibitantly expensive and not cost-effective
for the villagers to invest in these infrastructure.
These kiosks will also provide opportunity for
the villagers to acquire skills in using the
technology so that they can perform the task
with
the knowledge available in the
55

communities. It would also facilitate in
improving their skills through interactions with
diverse skills and knowledge
available
elsewhere through this network. These
telekiosks could be easily created in most of the
rural areas/villages with a small investment.
Today, most of the villages have access to a
post office which is manned by the postal
department. These post offices have the basic
infrastructure wrt space, power, etc. By
converting these postal infrastructure into
telekiosk, one could provide an integrated
information service to the villagers. Some of
the services that could be provided by this
telekiosk are:
0 Sharing of computer and communication

resources
0 e-mail/communication

0 Information access
0 Interaction with Government bodies
0 Formal and informal training

0 Business support services.

5. WIRED VILLAGE-A PILOT
PROJECT
Having recognised the importance of IT for
socio-economic development, IT Task Force set
up by the Prime Minister has recommended
cooperative implementation through the use of
state-of-the-art IT. This is the genesis of
wired-village project.
The primary objective of this project was to
demonstrate the effective contribution of IT
infrastructure in the accelerated socio-economic
development of a cluster of 70 contiguous
villages around Warana Nagar in the Kolhapur
and Sangli districts of Maharashtra.
The project aims to:
Utilise IT t o increase the efficiency/
productivity of the existing cooperative '
enterprise by setting up a state-of-the-art
computer communication network and the
latest database technology.

o Provide agricultural, medical and educational
information to villagers at facilitation booths
in their own villages.
-

56

0

Provide communication facilities at these
b o o t h s , l i n k i n g t h e m t o the Warana
Cooperative Complex.

o

Bring the world knowledge at the doorstep of
the villagers through Internet via NICNET.
Create a database of villagers on various
socio-economic aspects.

o

Provide tele-education to both primary and
higher educational institutes by developing IT
centres.

o Establish a geographic information system of
the surrounding 70 villages leading to greater
transparency in administration, especially in
the matters related to land.

5.1 The Project Partners
The Warana project is jointly carried out by
the National Informatics Centre (on behalf of
the Central Government), the Government of
Maharashtra and the Warana Vibhag Shikshan
Mandal,
to
create an appropriate
IT
infrastructure for the 70 villages around Warana
Nagar.
The estimated cost of the project is around
Rs 250 lakh. Out of the total project cost, 50
per cent is being borne by the Central
Government, 40 per cent by the Government
of Maharashtra and the remaining 10 per cent
by the Warana Vibhag Shikshan Mandal. The
project was to be implemented by December
1998.

5.2 Wired Warana-the Infrastructure
With a view to provide complete
connectivity to 70 villages in the Warana
region, a three-tier structure has been
implemented. The Sugar Administrative Building
and the Engineering College form the main hub
centres, the first tier. The six Business Centres
and six IT Centres form the second tier and 70
Facilitation Booths form the third tier and take
the connectivity down to the village level.

5.3 Hub Centres
The Sugar Administrative Building (SAB),
being the backbone of the business, has been
chosen as the hub for the Business Centres. The
Facilitation Booths could access the SAB and
the Business Centres through dial-up network.

-

DESIDOC Bulletin of lnf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

To provide a stable, rugged and reliable
network, a high speed wireless LAN is provided
at the Business Centres. The roof top of SAB
has been chosen for the installation of both the
VSAT and the mast for omnidirectional antenna
of the wireless LAN. A high speed IPA VSAT i s
installed on the roof top which is connected to
a hub for Internet access. A mast of approx. 30
feet is constructed on the roof top of the
building for installation of an omnidirectional
antenna for a wireless LAN with a bandwidth of
2 Mbps. The radio modem of the wireless LAN
is connected to the hub. The wireless LAN
technology has been used to provide reliable
Intranetllnternet connectivity to the Business
Centres. .
All existing machines are integrated in a LAN
environment with two additional NT servers
and four Win-95 clients. A proxy server is also
installed which acts as a firewall.
The Engineering College is chosen as the
hub for the intranet of all village booths. A high
speed IPA VSAT is installed on the roof top of
the college building which i s connected to a
hub. The Warana web-server is installed at the
college. It hosts the web-based applications. A
bank of 10 dial-up lines with modems is
interfaced through a router to provide SLIP/PPP
connectivity. All existing machines are
integrated in the LAN environment, and a proxy
server is installed which acts as a firewall to the
Internet. The same server also functions as an
e-mail server. The e-mail accounts are created in
this server, for all users at the Facilitation
~ o o t k IT
, centres and Business Centres.
The Business Centres access the wireless
LAN via a unidirectional antenna installed on
the roof top of each of the centres. A wireless
LAN is set up at the centres which can
communicate with the central VSAT installed on
the SAB. The bank is also connected to the
networks through a unidirectional antenna
located on the roof top of the main branch.

*
*
*
*

The Business Centres sites covered are:
Dairy
Warana bazaar
WAGPCOS
Mahatma Gandhi Hospital

DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/,2000,20(1&2)

*

Warana Cooperative Bank

Six villages have been identified for setting
up IT centres. These villages are nearly 10 km
from Warana Nagar. The idea is to provide IT
facilities as close to the villages as possible. The
computers are set up in a room of 20'x 20'.
At each Centre, six clients are installed in a
LAN environment using structured cabling, with
a receive-only VSAT (DirecPC) and a dial-up
link. Eudora e-mail client is configured for SMTP
mail service. The operating system on the
computers is Windows-95. An HTML browser is
installed for accessing web-server. Currently, the
following villages have been identified for
setting up IT centers:

*
*
*
*
*
*

Mangale (West)
Pargaon (South)
Dhole (East)
Nagaon (North)
Satwe
Kodoli
The Centres provide the following facilities:

+@ Computer-based education.
.$

Open University access (IGNOU)

4+ Imaging (one of the centre)
Facilitation Booths are being set up in 70
villages (more than 30 booths are currently
operational). They have dial-up facility for
linking to the central hub located at SAB.
Facilities such as remote health service
(tele-medicine), public grievances and redressal
will be provided through this booth. Each booth
has a Win-95 multimedia computer equipped
with a modem (33.6 kbps) for a dial-up link. It is
configured for SLIP/PPP. The computer has
multimedia facility, a hand-held scanner, a
bar-code reader and a 132 column printer. An
HTML browser is installed for web-access.
Eudora e-mail client is configured for SMTP mail
service.
The intranet set up in Warana Nagar forms
a close user group over NICNET.

5.4 Software Applications
An M o U was signed between NIC, G O M
and WVSM on 10 June 1998 to operationalise
the network and have the applications in place
within six months. NIC immediately started
interaction with Warana users. From the
requirement analysis carried out by the NIC
team, 15 applications were identified for
implementation. These can be grouped into
web-based and network-based clientlserver
applications.

5.4.1 Web-Based Applications
These six applications can be accessed by
the villagers from the Facilitation Booths. They
provide information about employment and
agricultural schemes, government procedures
information providing assistance in preparing
applications for government certificates like
ration cards, birth and death certificates, crop
information, village information consisting of
bus, railway, medical and hospital facilities,
water supply details, etc. From the booth, the
villager can
interact with the Warana
management to register his/her grievance and
seek
redressal.
Agricultural
marketing
information is available from the Warana
web-server, giving market arrival and rates of
various regulated commodities on a daily basis.
It is possible for students to seek vocational
guidance from the booths by accessing
educational
and
vocational
information
compiled by MSCERT. The URL of Warana webseryer is http://warana.mah.nic.in/warana.

5.4.2

Other Applications

The sugar factory is the first and the largest
cooperative business venture of the Warana
Complex.

5.4.3 Cultivation, Cutting, Testing
Transport Activities
These activities entail information exchange
between the factory and the farmers, which are
highly
manpower-intensive.
The
wired
management
of
sugarcane
cultivation
developed by NIC leads to a speedy, accurate
and effective data exchange between the
factory and the farmers, using the Facilitation
Booth at the village.
58

The land records computerisation permits
the villagers to view, print 7/12 extracts using
data from compact disc, or from the tehsil
site, right at their village booth. The super user
can compile, update and process data at the
tehsil site.
The dairy sector is the mainstay of the
Warana Complex. The computerisation of the
dairy activities will permit milk collection and
analysed data to be made available to the
villagers at the booth as soon as it is generated.
The Warana Bazaar (Warana Grahak
Mandal) is a cooperative with the largest
departmental store in Warana with an annual
turnover of 31 crore. It has an inventory of
40,000 items. The Bazaar has 29 retail outlets
catering to a large number of villages around
Warana Nagar. The maintenance of the
inventory is a major activity. A computerised
inventory system with a bar-code-based item
code is being developed for the Bazaar.
A geographical information system (GIs) is
put in place for the Warana project. It includes
making a base map of the neighbouring 70
villages, layering of socio-economic information
like schools, population, land under cultivation
etc. and linking cadestral maps and 7/12
extracts in Marathi to CIS.
The IT centres have been set up with a view
to provide computer-based education facilities
to the village children. AUTNIC, a computerbased self-learning and testing aid is provided at
the IT centres to support the course curriculum
of the school children. The Warana Vibhag
Shikshan Mandal plans to prepare a
multiple-choice question bank for all school
grades for each subject using AUTNIC. This
question bank will help the students in gaining a
deeper insight into their courseware with a
better understanding of the concepts covered.

5.5 Implementation
'To comply with the time schedule of six
months to establish the network, NIC had
deployed professionals round-the-clock. Twenty
engineers were put in over a full man-month,
each in Warana, over an elapsed time of five
months, to make the sites at the business and IT
centres and the village facilitation booths
o~erationaland ~ uthe
t network in lace.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

I

i

1

The software professionals had been in
action
in parallel. Over 50 software
professionals were involved full-time, in
application development since June 1998. Each
team handling an application had been
constantly in dialogue with their Warana
counterparts,
visiting
the Warana
site,
discussing and finalising the specifications, the
implementation strategy and delivering, as per
the approved strategy signed and agreed upon
by the user, at Warana/GOM representative.
Detailed discussions had been undertaken with
the users. On the basis of the specifications
drawn up, prototypes of the applications were
built, demonstrated at the user site and then
further modified. All the applications had been
installed at Warana, only after approval and
acceptance of the users.
The software developed for Warana is the
single largest set of applications developed in
the client-server/Web-based environment in
Marathi. The software was delivered complete
with detailed operational manuals in Marathi for
the use of the local Warana users.

5.6 Human Resource Development
Extensive training on the applications and
the administration of the network has been
imparted to the Warana users on site as well as
at Pune. Selected teaching staff members from
engineering college were trained on managing
the network.

The training imparted was sought to create
an awareness in the villagers regarding the
utility and benefits of the state-of-art equipment
made available at Warana. It had also provided
the required skill levels to the operators to
handle the machines and to assist the villagers.
The operating level staff at the hub centres had
been given sufficient training, on site as well as
at NIC, to confidently manage the network set
up at Warana.
This project has proved immensely helpful in
generating employment ' opportunities for the
local population. The Facilitation Booths in each
of the 70 villages would employ an operator
each. Also, the five Business Centres would
have two qualified computer experts each to
manage
Web,
e-mail
administration,
Windows-NT administration and database
administration. Apart from this, each of the six
IT centres would be providing employment to
two skilled computer operators.
Fifteen operators have already been
recruited for the IT centres and village booths to
assist the users in using e-mail, data transfer and
the other applications loaded.
The Warana project is the forerunner to
many such rural development projects
envisaged by the IT Task Force. It would enable
the villagers to benefit through the access to
global knowledge sources. The applications
installed and further planned are expected to
provide transparency in administration.

Contributor
Dr N Vijayaditya
is Deputy Director General at the Planning
Commission, National Informatics Centre, New Delhi.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

59

