DESlDOC ~ulletinof Information Technology, Vol. 20, Nos. 1&2, January& March 2000, pp. 61-71
O 2000, DESlDOC

IT Training Requirements for the
Year 2000 and Beyond
Cmde Premchand and Praveen M Jabali
Weapons and Electronics Systems Engineering Establishment (WESEE)
ABSTRACT
The paper examines a wide spectrum of training needs to enable lndia to
participate and compete in the development of future technologies, products and
services and suggests a training framework for their development and management.

1. INTRODUCTION
In India, the National Task Force on
lnformation
Technology
and
Software
Development is in the process of evolving a
framework which should enable the country to
translate its objective of becoming an IT super
power into a reality. One of the significant
components of this framework would be to
create a section of IT-literate population, which
should
possess
world-class
expertise,
competence and understanding of technology
issues. This would necessitate requisite training
curriculum, infrastructure and expertise.
In the emerging cyber environment, the
capacity, capability and reach of an adversary
to wage information warfare (IW) would
emanate out of its native IT base. While the
most wired and IT capable nations are
vulnerable to I W attacks, they would be equally
agile and capable of defending themselves. In
this direction, the US has already created a
single point agency to assure the availability of
critical NII to the nation under all conditions of
war
and
peace. This
would
require
unprecedented efforts and investments in the
development of skills and technology.
This paper examines a wide spectrum of
training needs, which would enable lndia to
participate and compete in the development of
future IT technologies, products and services for
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

civil and military use. It presents an overview of
key technologies, products and sciences that
would be relevant in the near future and
suggests a training framework to prepare the
nation for their development and management.
This paper is not intended to cover basic
awareness, school or lower level curriculum for
penetration of basic IT in the country.

2. FACTORS & ASSUMPTIONS
The training needs for any field would
primarily on the following factors and
assumptions:
(a) The skills learnt and information acquired will
be useful over a reasonable period of time.
(b) The economic and strategic gains from
training must justify the training costs.
(c) It would be necessary to provide periodic
updates to the knowledge acquired.
(d) Most significantly, if the nation is to surge
ahead as a super power in IT and software
development, the skills of its people would
. have to be honed adequately in this direction
to the requisite level of competence.
(e) In the field of knowledge, the worthiness of
indigenous companies, organisations or even
the nation would depend upon the quality of
human resources and the quickness with
which the organisations and the nation can
61

absorb and retain a large chunk of workforce
with the latest knowledge.
Keeping these assumptions in view, a large
number of training related issues have been
examined for consideration of the IT Task Force
in general, and Services, in particular, while
formulating a strategy for the training needs.

3. KEY CONSIDERATIONS
(a) It is assumed that to be a super power in IT,
lndia has to master leading edge technologies
and be cost competitive.
(b) lndia should be recognised for its strengths in
value-added areas of IT and in pushing the
barriers in leading edge technologies to
global level.
(c) To know what to do and how to quickly make
a beginning, is of utmost importance; more
so in the field of IT where the changes are
measured in terms of days and months, unlike
in mature industries where these are
measured in terms of years and decades.
(d) Emerging technology trends need to be
examined and analysed to find out the fields
to concentrate on. From this, the skill sets that
the people of lndia are to be equipped with,
would be identified.
(e) Once these aspects are clear, infrastructure
and technologies needed to assist the same
would be identified.
(f) Policy and bureaucratic changes need to be
examined for introduction of IT knowledge in
radical ways.
(g) A focussed programme with mission- specific
development is needed.

4. EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES TO
WATCH
The ten emerging technologies receiving
attention worldwide, which would have a
significant impact on IT-related areas during the
next few years, have been examined by experts
to identify where one lacks in training. The
ability of the nation to capitalise on emerging
technologies stakes high and time-sensitive
issue. jumping onto a new technological
bandwagon too early could be a costly mistake
62

but missing the right opportunities could be
just as costly. Therefore, steps are to be taken
with utmost care and in the right direction.

4.1

Product-Related Technologies

The survey of technology assessment and
forecasting reports reveal that the following ten
areas would gain prominence. These are
equally important to military and the civil
sectors.

4.1.1 Biometries
In computing, the ability of a system to
recognise an individual according to one or
more unique physiological characteristics like a
fingerprint, facial features, voice, or even the
iris of an eye. This area has potential in IT
security-related applications.

4.1.2 Desktop Video Conferencing
It is the ability of two or more
geographically separated users to meet via
their personal computers (PC). A typical
system involves a PC, a monitor-mounted
camera, a network connection, and a special
software that facilitates exchange of video and
audio streams. This field would have
tremendous applications in command and
control as well as decision- support
applications.

4.1.3 Data Mining
It is the process of discovering meaningful
correlation, patterns, or trends by sifting
through large amounts of stored data using
pattern recognition technologies as well
as statistical and mathematical techniques.
This would have direct bearing on the reaction
times in peace and war.

4.1.4 Document Imaging
Document imaging is the conversion
(digitising of paper documents into electronic
documents) using a scanner or similar device,
and the subsequent storage and management
of those electronic images. This would be of
immense value to organise and present
comprehensive picture for decision support.

4.1.5 Electronic Cash
Electronic cash is digital money, typically in
the form of downloadable 'digital coins' that
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

'

can be stored in an online bank account, the
user's PC, or o n a smart card. This would
enable user to be current with the rest of the
world and would also increase the business
transactions manifold.

4.1.6 Network Computer
Network computer is simplified, low cost
desktop computer designed to take advantage
of a network. Network computers access
applications and data from the network to
minimise storage requirements of the desktop
thereby reducing cost of the computer. This
would be the lynchpin of operations during
peace and war.

4.1 .7 Personal Digital Assistant
Personal digital assistant is a computer that
can be held in the palm of a hand and that
processes information for an individual.
,Common functions include a directory of
names, addresses and telephone numbers along
with a calculator, to-do list, and note pad. This
would enhance users mobility and capacity to
organise.

4.1.8 Push Technology
Push technology is the software that
automates the delivery of information to
individuals. In contrast, the world wide web is a
'pull' environment where users go to the web
for information. In a 'push' environment,
information is sent to the user through a web
browser, e-mail, or even voice mail or a pager.
These technologies would form the foundation
of our CY SR infrastructure.

4.1.9 Smart Card
Similar in look and size to a credit card, a
smart card has an embedded microprocessor or
memory chip, or both, instead of magnetic strip
commor;ly found on credit and debit cards. This
technology will have several applications in
identification, authentication, access control,
healthcare, finance, administration, etc.

4.1.1 0 Speech Recognition
Speech recognition pertains to a computer's
ability to 'hear' the user. Special software takes
the sound of a user's voice, digitises it and then
compares it to a library of waveforms. When
matches are found, the computer can use user's
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

words just as if they had been typed through a
keyboard. This has extremely large potential in
military applications.

5. WHEN WILL THESE
TECHNOLOGIES BE READY FOR
BUSINESS?
The emerging technologies typically follow a
pattern of hype, disillusionment, enlightenment
and
productivity.
Understanding
this
predictable pattern of new technologies helps
to make intelligent decisions about when to
implement these technologies.
Initially, the market expectations of a new
technology are greater than its real world
contribution. However, specific industries can
benefit by adopting technologies at the height
of market enthusiasm. Banking, insurance and
media organisations should adopt push
technology in the early stages of development.
Moreover, governments will find relevant uses
for biometrics. Consumer-packaged goods;
government and higher education will find
productive use for electronic cash during the
next five years.

6. APPLICATION-SPECIFIC IT
TRENDS
A brief overview of worldwide trends in
application-specific IT and their relevance to
India is presented. The aim is to focus on areas
which can help the country to identify its
training needs and to create expertise of
requisite level so that goals of becoming IT
super power as well as military needs are
fulfilled.

6.1

Input/Output Technologies

(a) Basic input devices, such as keyboards and
mouse are becoming more complex as de
facto standards become outdated.
(b) Specialised input/output devices, namely,
touch screens and speech recognition are
being used in specialised applications like
kiosks, which can be useful for less literate
communities in India.
(c) Image capture devices, such as scanners and
video and digital cameras, are moving from
expensive, specialised uses such as graphics,

arts and video conferencing systems into
mainstream.

service providers will play a significant role as
suppliers of new lnternet services.

(d) CD devices are expected to make inroads
into the cathode-ray tube market, replacing
the bulky power-hungry picture tubes of
today.

(c) Distributed model for indexing the Web will
emerge, enabling a more systematic access
to information and sites.

6.2

(d) Demand for multimedia and video content
will rise sharply giving a lot of opportunity in
multimedia for content generation.

Intelligent Cards & Systems

7. OPERATING SYSTEMS
ENVIRONMENT

The trend towards intelligent cards or smart
cards and systems would continue. This means
a lot of opportunity in designing applicationspecific integrated chips (ASICs) to service a
large number of applications would exist.

6.3

7.1

(a) 32-bit OS and 64-bit OS

Transmission Media

(b) Specialised devices like cellular phones and
set-top boxes w i l l increasingly use
Microsoft's Windows CE, Sun Java 0 s .

Worldwide, copper has an edge because of
lower cost of enabling technology vis-a-vis
optical fibre, which is predominantly used in
long haul carriers by telecom companies.
Wireless offers an opportunity in Asia and parts
of the world to cut down costs associated with
wireline infrastructure. This has significant
potential in the Indian context.

6.4

(c) User interfaces will move beyond the
desktop filelfolder metaphor and will gain
tighter integration into the OS. Voice
recognition systems will also get integrated
into the OS.

7.2

Telecommunications

(b) Optional support for enterprise security
standards will be widely available for all major
departmental server operating systems.

(b) Growth in lnternet use will increase the
demand for high-speed remote access
networks, like ISDN, ADSLIHDSL. Data
traffic will increasingly become a much
higher market than voice.

(b) Web commerce will also take off in
technology sawy, high-income groups to
begin with. Traditional network vendors and
64

7.3

UNlX Server

UNlX will remain popular for deploying
high- end web-servers and mission-critical
databases.

lnternets & lntranets

(a) The growth in lnternets and lntranets is
expected to be high. The lnternet is still'in the
infancy stage and offers a lot of opportunities
in creation of web pages, enabling businessto-business connectivity and organisation-toorganisation connectivity. Since most of
these activities are client-specific, there will
be a requirement for a lot of Internet-specific
professionals, with knowledge of technology
as well as creation of the content that goes
with it.

Departmental Server

(a) Optional electronic commerce software that
goes beyond basic web server would be
available by 1998.

(a) The trend is towards transmission of both
voice and video on the same lines as well as
development of personal communication
services and cell phones.

6.5

Desktop Operating Systems

7.4

Windows NT Server

Microsoft will continue to target specific
markets like, large enterprises, small businesses
and departmental networks.
'

This will remain popular for file and print
services.

7.6

Enterprise Server Operating
System

(a) Enterprise server operating systems,
particularly MVS will continue to anchor
DESIDOC Bulletin oflnf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

large corporate networks because of
scalability, reliability and security.
(b) More Internet, lntranet and client/server
applications will be run on them.

(c) The drive behind workflow would be
governed by the need to move information
from the application suites to desktops, both
inside and outside the organisation.

Message-Oriented Middleware
TP Monitors

(a) Message-Oriented Middleware ( M O M ) and
TP monitors will see increasing convergence
of their features: TP monitors are already
providing pure communications capability
associated with M O M . M O M is enhancing its
offerings
to
provide
more
transaction-oriented features.
(b) The CORBA-oriented programming will be
increasingly adopted by enterprises for
distributed computing infrastructure but its
usage in India may not gather momentum.
(c) Microsoft's D C O M will remain popular in
desktop applications.
(d) ActiveX and JavaBeans will become
important drivers for distributed computing.

8.2

Computing Platforms

(a) Computer systems mainly divided into two
categories (i.e., clients and servers), will
dominate the environment.
(b) The market will
mainframes.

grow

modestly

(b) Low-end products will be web-based and
offer real-time chat in addition to Internet
mail and threaded discussion capabilities.

8. SOFTWARE COMPONENT
ARCHITECTURE
8.1

workers t o overcome constraints of
geographic location, time and personal
locations.

for

(d) Workflow will accelerate transition onto
Internet. This is expected to break corporate
barriers within and outside the government.
(e) Document management systems (DMS) will
more tightly integrate workflow as part of the
core software.
(f) DMS will address all types, from text to
images, audio and video. The cycle of
document publishing will be shortened
dramatically as a result of this.
(g) Active agents in the form of autonomous
processes capable of taking independent
actions on behalf of individual users and
business teams promise to simplify,
personalise and customise access to online
information. These tools will help manage
knowledge across business networks.
(h) Organisation that can develop unique
approaches to manage their access to the
intellectual resources of their customers,
suppliers, products and business staffs will
have a distinct competitive advantage in the
marketplace.

(c) Mid-range servers will focus on increasing
system bus speeds, memory bandwidth, and
I/O throughput of their products to support
high volume transaction processing
applications.

9.2

(d) PCs will increasingly capture the workstation
market.

(a) The use of data warehousing will increase
significantly.

9. GROUPWARE, WORKFLOW,
DOCUMENT & KNOWLEDGE
MANAGEMENT

9.1

Groupware

(a) Groupware will continue to play a major role
in developing virtual offices that allow
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

Data Warehousing

(b) Web-enabled data warehouses will open to
more users and, therefore, increase the
importance of scalability and performance
issues.
(c) The market for application-specific data
warehouse products will emerge, while ERP
vendors, such as ORACLE and SAP would
develop data warehousing solutions that
would sit o n top of their core applications.
65

(d) Companies will increase their use of
consulting partners when implementing data
warehousing solutions.

9.3

Corporate Applications

(a) Large-scale ERP packages, such as ORACLE,
SAB, MARSHAL, PeopleSoft, etc will become
easier to implement and use. ERP would
move into an object-oriented domain.
(b) Packaged applications will increasingly
improve workflow capabilities in the
organisations.
(c) Best of the breed approach will be adapted
while implementing, which will result in
vertical-specific and industry-specific
solutions.

10. IT INDUSTRY IN I N D I A
Hitherto, the IT industry in India has been
characterised by focus on immediate gains,
especially where the companies have a cost
advantage. In the past few years, the Indian
industry had focused on the 42K bug. However,
with the realisation that this would last not
more than a couple of years, some of them
already started looking at the opportunities
offered by the European Monetary Union. This
is one example where skills need to be
retrained to focus on different markets and
geographies. However remunerative this may
be to the companies in the short and medium
term, it would be more in the interest of the
country to pursue industry to create
value-added products and services with a
long-term focus. It would be extremely
necessary to develop core competencies to
compete globally.

11. SKILL SETS & EXPERTISE
The requirements of the IT field have been
briefly covered. The skill sets required for
competing at global level are those that involve
above-mentioned areas. These have been briefly
classified below as distinctly separable areas.
Basic programming skills like C++, Java,
ActiveX etc

o CASE tools to build and operate scalable
environments viz., software engineering
environment (SEE) using functional as well
66

as
object-oriented
approaches
promoted on a large scale.
Computer-aided
environments

engineering

be
(CAE)

Knowledge engineering environment (KEE)
Concurrent engineering environment (CEE)
A large spectrum of electronic design
automation (EDA) tools
System engineering
Skills to evolve and/or customise standards
for software engineering, quality assurance,
configuration management, reviews and
audits, testing, validation, verification,
reverse engineering, metrics, costing etc
Skills to prepare and implement process
models in consonance with existing and
evolving standards/models viz., MIL/DOD/
CMM/ISO etc
Skills to provide consuitancy services in
high-end areas of network engineering,
application engineering, estimation, costing,
management, etc.
Expertise in assessment,
forecasting,
development,
acquisition,
transfer,
absorption and management of technology
Expertise to bring into focus and integrate
domain knowledge with IT applications and
tool development in different areas
Skills in cyber laws in consonance with
constitutional and sovereign rights of
citizens
IT security technologies, viz., encryption,
firewalls,
signature
management,
identification,
authentication,
access
control, network surveillance, control,
monitoring,
computer virus
countermeasures, hacking, security audits, disaster
control and recovery, security modelling,
security planning and administration
management etc.
Skills
in
evolving,
planning
and
implementation of strategies for protection
of critical information infrastructure
Skills in design and implementation of a
system of systems (very large and
interwoven information infrastructure)
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Jechnol, 2000,20(1&2)

o

lnternet and lntranet technologies

o Skills in transitioning

m-commerce

to

e-commerce.

o

Information warfare (IW) technologies and
techniques

o

Business application
package
skillsORACLE, SAP, MARSHAL, Peoplesoft, etc.

o

Document and spreadsheet tools like
Microsoft Word, Excel, PowerPoint, etc.

o

Database and LAN/WAN administration
skills
Coding skills in assembly language and
other low-level languages

o

Project management skills in software
development and implementation

o

System integration
management skills

skills

and

change

Knowledge management skills
0

Multimedia skills and content generation
capability

0

Management of technology

0

Software metrics

0

Software contracting

12. INFRASTRUCTURE,
TECHNOLOGY &
METHODOLOGIES
The strides made in the area of
communications with the introduction of the
world wide web, or the lnternet has enabled
the developed countries to use this technology
to leapfrog the way in which the masses are
educated. The time factor too has been greatly
compressed in learning even complex subjects
by several degrees through the use of
multimedia
and
interactive
learning
methodologies as well as the NET. The
implementation of these enablers will be useful
not only in the area of IT learning but also in
numerous other areas, right from school
subjects to graduate and postgraduate subjects.
The path to enable delivery of better training
skills at a large scale is discussed further in the
succeeding paragraphs.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

13. WEB-BASED IMPARTATION OF
KNOWLEDGE
(a) Develop/acquire content for training, both in
interactive as well as passive mode.
(b) Develop and acquire a massive library of
computer based training (CBT) material and
enable these to be used on the web.
(c) Enable the massive proliferation of lSPs and
lnternet users to enable access at nominal
rates, as encouraged in countries like
Malaysia, which have equally ambitious ITrelated programmes.
(d) Provide dynamism and competition by
inviting and actively soliciting leading
companies worldover to participate in this
programme.
(e) Telecommunication infrastructure needs to
be improved significantly to take care of the
greater requirement in bandwidth and data
communication. Unless this is corrected, it
will be one of the biggest stumbling blocks in
realising this goal.
(f) The penetration of telephones and the rate of
increase in new subscribers in India, i s low
and as of now, highly inadequate for
becoming an IT super power. The quality of
the lines and their reliability is another big
factor in this regard.
(g) Allow knowledge management tools and
technologies to be used widely for getting the
greatest benefit in a more scientific way.
(h) Develop and encourage regional universities
to impart web-based interactive learning
centres. Since time is an important factor
these regional institutes could act as nodal
agencies and tie up with content and CBTbased training organisations to enable the
same.
(i) 'Open, encourage and enable information
kiosks in business centers where mere,
photocopying, faxing, STD/ISD are provided
as of today. (Fig. 4)

67

14. PREPARING INSTITUTES/
INDUSTRIES FOR TRAINING

work in cooperation with the local industries
should be encouraged.

Here are some suggestions to prepare
educational and research institutes and
industries for training.

(f) Have more optional subjects in IT offered at
the colleges, which can be taken up by the
interested students, while not being a burden
on the less inclined ones.

(a) Network institutes should enable sharing of
data, research as well as computer facilities
throughout the country. This is being done
presently to some extent using ERNET.

(g) Induct more people from the science and
engineering into the IAS and state
administrative services to enable IT-oriented
culture.

(b) Encourage
educational
institutions
(engineering and science colleges) impart
computer education to the general public
and their own students on a commercial
basis. This is being done but the content and
quality needs to be improved.

(h) Industries and public sector companies may
be encouraged to open their computer
facilities to be accessed by students on
holidays and after office hours. An appointee
of the students could help in the LANIWAN
maintenance on these holidays.These are the
practices prevalent in most advanced
countries. Once the mindset is developed,
security issues can be tackled.

(c) Though the curriculum of private IT training
institutes as well as engineering colleges
abroad are changed and reviewed every year,
the same does not happen in the engineering
colleges in India. These are bogged down by
resistance from less capable colleges,
incapable of incorporating fast changes
required by the IT world. Allowing
engineering institutes greater freedom in
formulating their courses and to be
unrestricted from university system and
regulations would enable our engineering
institutes to constantly improve their
curriculum and overhaul it every year,
independently, without being bogged down
by laggard institutes. These forerunning
institutes then can act as role models for
other institutes to follow.

(d) Encourage

educational
and
research
institutions to keep their infrastructure
facilities open for 24 hours a day. A method
may be evolved where students and
institutions could participate in the efforts
made to enable students acquire knowledge.
This could be done by encouraging students
to pay more for the computing facilities they
use, and by looking after the LANs
themselves, as is being done in select premier
institutes like the IIMs, etc.

(e) Encourage research institutes to take up more
work of practical significance than of mere
academic importance. Towards this end,
more developmental work as well as R&D

15. ENTERPRISE-WIDE LEARNING
SYSTEM
The following tool-based model illustrates
enterprise-wide learning system that can be
particularly used by institutes and government
agencies, both at the state and central level.

15.1 Learning Management
Information Systems
The Learning Management lnformation
Systems (LMIS) offers a comprehensive,
web-based knowledge management solution.
LMlS components provide capabilities to
manage competencies,
assessments and
training logistics. Additionally, LMlS can launch,
track
and
manage
all
varieties
of
technology-based training. LMlS comprises a set
of integrated modules to help focus learning
activities toward achieving training objectives.
These are:
Training Management Sys tem

This module maintains an electronic
catalogue of an organisation's learning
activities.
It
manages
enrolments,
confirmations, classroom and instructor
assignments, course materials, departmental
charge-backs
and
invoicing,
course
completion certificates and learner profiles.
DESiDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

Competency Management System

This module maintains a comprehensive
database of an organisation's work force
skills. It highlights skill gaps for an
organisation, a department or an individual to
show where additional learning is needed;
and i t can generate reports for budget
forecasting, career planning, and skill
charting. The system can
automatically
generate a curriculum of learning events
for any person or group that needs to acquire
skills based on the organisation's roles and
learning objectives.
Assessment Management System

This module offers the management an
opportunity to administer online tests and
surveys for immediate feedback on
workhorse skills. The system is tied into all
learning activities to upgrade learner
transcripts as new skills are successfully
acquired. Whether a student takes an
instructor-led course, a CBT course or attends
a seminar, the student can use the
assessment system for objective or subjective
measurements to gain the skills critical for
success.

Planning an IT Project

It teaches IT managers how to scope out a
project prepare a project plan and schedule,
assess and manage risks, and estimate project
costs.
Collaboration with IT Professionals

Educates IT managers on the importance of
being able to interpret others' behaviour,
recognising the differences in individual's
perceptions and working with business
partners.
Lack of management and leadership skills
can inhibit an IT professional's job performance.
More than 87 per cent of IT users have
recognised the need to provide ongoing soft
skills training to their MIS staff.

Management

17. REAL-TIME TECHNOLOGY- BASED
TRAINING

Technology-based training with open,
independent software platform provides a
full training solution. To facilitate an
organisational wide learning, coordinated by
IT, the above-mentioned concepts are
explored.

The enterprise learning centres (ELC) are
Intranet-based resources for IT professionals
and end users to gain and maintain critical IT
technical and desktop skills. The ELC enables
enterprises to deliver training directly o n the
desktop while eliminating lnternet security,
bandwidth and data confidentiality concerns.

Enterprise
Software

Knowledge

LMIS can help relate courseware and
curriculum options to individual's needs. LMlS
can also help maintain a learning relationship
with a student.

16.

of non-technical,
soft
skills. Streaming
technologies are being used to allow video and
audio to be streamed over enterprise networks
at low bandwidth. Skills beyond technical
subjects, such as system administration or
programming are critical to the overall success
of today's IT professionals. These are:

COURSES TO PROVIDE SKILLS
BEYOND TECHNICAL TOPICS

IT business skills
courses,
targeted
specifically for IT professionals, are briefly
examined. These courses are delivered over
LANs. This new curriculum features multimedia
components to enhance the learning process
and increase skill retention. Studies show that
the incorporation of multimedia elements is
instrumental for effective instructional delivery
DESIDOC Bulletin oflnf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

Additionally, the ELC provides tools for skill
management,
course
and
organisation
administration, and performance support
through robust testing, tracking, reporting,
course catalog, organisation management and
full-text search functions.
ELC can offer skill management resources
for IT professionals and end users on a wide
variety of subjects, including Lotus Notes,
Microsoft Office 97, Oracle, Sybase, Informix,
client/serverf Unix, Java and SAP R13.
The ELC is another stride in the overall
strategy to leverage lnternet technologies to
provide
cost-effective, value-added skills

management solutions to organisations. The
ELC is installed on a web server behind an end
user's firewall. Like the lnternet learning centre,
the ELC offers distinguishable features, such as
no downloading or waiting, no special
configuration or memory requirements, as well
as increased functionality and ease of
enterprise-wide installations without requiring
access to, or reliance on the lnternet.
The ELC should offer tracking, administrative
tools and testing. The additional features are:

Reporting
Allows administrators to monitor course
usage, evaluate user process, track costs and
measure return on investment by generating
reports at the user organisation and
department levels.

Searching
Users can conduct full-text searches, across
all courses, within the ELC'library. Students
can then link to specific screens of instruction
that match their needs. This provides
performance, support and true 'just enough,'
'just-intime' learning.

Personal Home Page
It is generated when students enroll in their
first course, this feature creates a 'personal
catalog' of courses in which the student is
enrolled. The personal home page contains
links to the course menu, course test and
course bookmark.

Bookmarking
Allows a user to mark a specific page or
location within a course to enable later
reference to that page, thus providing greater
flexibility in accessing only the training that is
needed and when it is most convenient.

18. PROGRAMMES FOR 21"CENTURY
The high-tech boom began with the PC
explosion in the early 1980s. However, due to
this boom, lndia is grappling with a skill
shortage for 17 years. One major reason is lack
of training and knowledge at universities and
college campuses. With a view to compete in
the global market, the quality and competence
of human resource need to be of very high
caliber. To achieve this ojective, it would be
70

necessary to deploy strategic IT training
programmes in colleges and universities. The
goal is to help alleviate the IT skilled-labour
shortage facing Indian employer in both private
and public sectors.
To achieve this goal, it is proposed that
suitable IT depots or skill learning libraries,
training material banks should be created,
which can act as nodal repositories of CBT's
and training materials for use through various
institutions and organisations. The state and
central governments could own these IT depots.
The aim is to augment and support the private
sector with material or content required for
training as well as to kick-off the initiative. With
this initiative, higher-learning institutions can
have access to IT depots research and materials
for all faculty members and students.
Universities and institutions all over lndia can
then be encouraged to take up initiative to use
the knowledge wealth created by IT depots and
cater to their students.

19. INTERACTIVE LEARNING
CENTRES
As organisations worldwide gear up to
spend billions of dollars during the year 2000 to
address the digital challenges of the new
millennium, the skilled-labour shortage will
become more pronounced. To cater to this
demand, interactive learning centres (ILC) in the
Business Centres or STPs could be set up. Each
ILC can house 15 to 20 computer workstations,
and members can select training titles of their
choice for a predetermined price.
There is no reason why lndia cannot and
should not grab the US technological edge as
Japan did with the auto industry in the 1970s.
The National Task Force on IT and Software
Development must sound a wake-up call for all
major companies and the lndian govt. to invest
in the future of our education system and our
high technology industries.

20. CONCLUSION
N o meaningful IT penetration can take place
unless our human resource becomes IT sawy.
Once this foundation becomes firm, our efforts
would be to develop ITS, devices, products,
systems and services which would enable us to
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

sustain our economic, political, social and
military prowess in the global terms. This can
only become possible if we look beyond
today's needs and prepare our human resource
in such a way that it can join the international
mainstream of IT professionals. This would
require training initiatives o n unprecedented
scale in terms of cost, complexity and
technology.

In keeping with the above-mentioned needs
and objectives, this document brings out the
level and areas of training to be addressed as
well as the underlying technology and
management needs. The National Task Force on

Information
Technology
and
Software
Development as well as the HRD Ministry
would need to address this issue in right
earnest.
The military, on its own, has always played
its part in addressing formal and informal
training issues to very high standards. It i s also
making serious attempts to create IT skill sets
for its future needs. However, there are certain
areas that are beyond their generic needs but
are critical from the point of self-reliance. These
would have to be addressed by the other
national agencies.

Contributors

Cmde Premchand is working at the Weapons and Electronics
Systems Engineering Establishment (WESEE), Ministry of Defence.
Praveen M Jabali is also working at the Weapons and Electronics
Systems Engineering Establishment (WESEE), Ministry of Defence.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

71

