DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 20, No. 3, May 2000, pp. 3-13
0 2000, DESIDOC

A Conceptual Model of Biomedical Network in DRDO
R. Chandra, D.C. Tiwari and R.K. Sharma
I

ABSTRACT
Easy and timely availability of comprehensive information catered to the
specific needs of the user is the blood of R&D activities in biomedical field. For the
successful accomplishment of the highly specialised, multidisciplinary programme,
the necessity of having an advanced IT-oriented infrastructure is indisputable. The
need to access current and relevant information transcends the boundaries of the
libraries/technical information resource centres (TIRCs). Though many
computer-assisted communication technologies are available, their provisioning
requires a substantial commitment of resources in terms of staff expertise, computer
hardware (H/W) and software (S/W) and training, which may not be adequately
available at all TIRCs. Recognising the criticality of the need to access current
biomedical information, the authors have conceptualised the establishment of an
advanced informatics centre for biotechnology under 'Microbiology 2000'
programme of the Defence Research & Development Organisation (DRDO). The
proposed facility is planned to be established with the technical and professional
help from librarians, information technologists and subject specialists from life
sciences laboratories of DRDO. The facility is visualised as a technology group that
will perform the dual role of being the facility centre as well as the design centre. In
the second phase of the proposal, the facility may be thrown open for commercial
exploitation. Institute of Nuclear Medicine & Allied Sciences (INMAS) can play a
pivotal role in this cooperative effort for creation of this facility, which is expected to
tremendously improve capabilities in information handling and customised services
specially in the field of telemedicine.

1. INTRODUCTION
Resource sharing has a long and noble
tradition. Recently, it has become a focus of
interest to the librarians and information
professionals. This can be seen from statements,
such as 'pride in collection has got to be
supplanted by pride in patronage', 'libraries
should think materials as comm'unity resources',
'local ownership to collective access', etcl.
Further, the terms like consortium, network, and
cooperatives have been used to label the
organisational arrangements for achieving a
variety of resource sharing objectives.
In recent times, networking has transcended
from cooperation
among libraries and
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol,2000,20(3)

information centres to cooperation with the
book trade2. This has stimulated e-mailing
within the context of document delivery
services. As data and information transfer is
increasingly becoming easier and common due
to the upsurge of network facilities and
capability, network users can conveniently
choose any one or more available routes to
access any document. Similarly, cooperation
among biomedical libraries and information
centres has received further boost with
advances in computer and information
telecommunica:ion
technologies3.
The
technology, . particularly
the
satellite
communication, has technically compressed
space and time. The gradual shift from analog
'3

,
to digital in contrast to analog links facilitates
the integration of 'all forms of information
communication within network environment.
These links serve to maximise access and
utilisation of materials and services of the
participating libraries and information centres in
a coordinated network environment at local,
zonal, regional, national and international Iwels.
Literature survey on library cooperation and
networking reveals that the US Library of
Congress (LC) is on the top in the list of success
records and Online Computer Library Centre
(OCLC) and other libraries and technical
information centres follow later. The UK ranks
second with the success achieved by BNB,
BLOMP, LASER, etc. In India, Calibnet, Delnet,
Bomnet, Malibnet, Adinet, Punenet, Balnet,
Mylibnet, and lnflibnet library networks are the
existing attempts in this direction4.

2. NEED FOR AUTOMATED LIBRARY
& INFORMATION SERVICE

NETWORK SYSTEMS
Advancement in science and technology has
given rise to proliferation of scientific literature
and information and the same holds good for
biomedical and allied sciences, including areas
like toxicology, food technologies, agriculture,
materials,
biomedical
devices
and
instrumentation. No library or information
centre is self-sufficient by itself. Therefore,
resource sharing among libraries is a necessity.
Cooperation
among
libraries
and
information centres is largely necessitated
because of the following reasons:

(a) Type of special services to be offered by the
network. These may include electronic mail
and CD-ROM product utilisation
(b) Capability of the network systems to
accommodate new developments
(c) Whether the facilities offered by the network
can be integrated with other information
technoiogy appliances in the library
(d) Reliability of the network services including
those of the central and zonal/regional
computer facilities
(e) Cost of membership participation versus
anticipated benefits

(f) Number and type of libraries participatingin
the network and the extent of overlapping in
the strength of their collections and services
to support record and resource sharing
(g) Security of the data,on the net and access to
only authorised persons.

3. IT REQUIREMENTS FOR

BIOMEDICAL SCIENCES &
TECHNOLOGIES IN DEFENCE
Re-emergence of infectious diseases,
availability of biological and chemical weapon!
as cheap deterrents, terrorist activities, nuclear
capabilities of hostile neighbouring countries
and the high cost of imported biotechnologia
has prompted the Defence Research and
Development Organisation (DRDO) to take,up
an integrated programme for the developmenl
of latest biotechnologies in a big way.

In response to these demands, libraries and
information centres are engaged in cooperative
ventures of all forms, such as interlibrary loan,
exchange, cooperative acquisition, processing
and storage, etcs.

To cater to the bioinformatics requiremen!
of the scientists, it is planned to share the
scarce and costly information resources. Ar
advanced bioinformatics centre is planned ta
be established at the Institute of Nuclear
Medicine & Allied Sciences (INMAS). The prime
objective of the proposed Biomednet is to sel
up a secure biomedical network connecting life
sciences laboratories of DRDO and decision
makers in DRDO HQrs. Also, sharing resourca
with few non-DRDO information centres 01
repute is envisaged.

Library's decision on adopting a network
and choosing appropriate type of networking
systems is a function of several parameters as
mentioned below:

DRDO is setting up a nationwide network 01
its laboratories and HQrs called DRDO's rapid
online network access (DRONA) system. This
internal corporate network is based on

(a) Continued information explosion

(b) Rising demand for information access
(c) Gradual decline in the provision of financial,
human and material resources.

4

integrated systems digitised network (ISDN)
services provided by the Department of
Telecommunication (DOT). AlternatiVe services
like Dialup/lNET/VSAT will be used where
ISDN services are not available.
,

Since DRONA will operate behind firewalls,
it will be possible to access the Internet while
protecting
organisation's
data
from
unauthorised non-DRDO personnel. Major
benefits of such a network include powerful
data management, ease of use, cost efficiency
and dynamic workgroup exchange6.
Network requirements of DRDO life
sciences laboratories can be summarised as
follows:
(a) Provision of resources for the biomedical
databases-this comprises bibtiographic/blC
text databases on CD-ROMs/DVDs and
, other existing online databases, besides
generationof databases of defence interests

(b) Resource sharing through databases
(c) Providing easy access to these databases

netwcrk for the
through DRDO's
laboratories located in Delhi and at distant
geographical locations, maintaining network
security
(d) Supporting all existing computer hardware
and software
(e) Implementing data archiving and disaster
recovery

(f)

Increasing the speed at which information
can be shared by users

(g) Supporting
collaboration
groupware and email.

through

Appropriate databases will be created for
answering various queries in specialised
disciplines.

3.1 Technical Features of Data to be
Transmitted
Besides data in textual form, images files
e.g, X-ray, CT, nuclear scintigrams and MR
images will be transmitted across DRDO's
biomedical network. Electronic transmission of
these radiological images from one location to
the other will be desirable for secondary
consultations. Users at different locations may

simultaneously view images. Appropriately
utlised, this tekhnque can improve access to
quality radiological interpretations and thus
significantly improve patient care. This may
allow even more timely interpretation of
radiological images and give greater access to
secondary consultations and improvement in
continuing education.
Many service providers deliver their services
using satellite technology and through public
telephone lines. ISDN is similar to the current
public telephone lines. However, ISDN is
digitally coded which allows for more varied
use. For exampld, through the public telephone
network, though the voice, facsimile and data
transmission services are available, yet these
services are limited by speed and signal
complexity.
In ISDN services,
signal
compression occurs that allows for voice, data
transmission, video, and facsimiles to operate
simultaneously. Thus, one call can replace
several calls for the same service. Besides, ISDN
lines are faster and more efficient than the
currently available public phone network.
However, in near future, we may see phone
companies upgrading their systems to allow for
the ISDN because this service can be easily
installed without phone companies having to
replace their entire system. Rather replacing all
their phone lines, all they have to do is to buy
and install new switching equipment and
interface devices that connect the customer on
a telecommunication network with video
channels having the capacity to send signals
'upstream' to a cable company or whosoever is
disseminating the programmes. Unlike the
current cable service, this system will be of the
quality of a 35 mm movie film and it can
simultaneously provide mixes of voice, text,
graphics, and moving image displays that
qualifies it as multimedia.

4. PROPOSED BIOMEDNET

INFORMATION SYSTEM
4.1 Architecture of Biomednet
Schematic network configuration of the
metropolitan area network (MAN) of
Biomednet is shown in Fig. 1. The overall
architecture of Biomednet may be viewed as
involving two types of networks7,'.
5

Table 1. Software solutions available
Product
Novell's NetWare
4.1

Features
Fastest file server, stable operating system (0s)
Provides sophisticated directory and security services and true multi-sekr
support
Though there are many graphical tools for administrating the network, the
server console is command line interface
Cannot execute programs on the server that are not specifically designed for
NetWare. Runs programs written only for NetWare

Microsoft Windows
NT 4.0

The OS is designed not only for Intel-based computers but also for computers
using RlSC microprocessors, such as Power PC, MIPS, Digital Alpha, etc. It is
a platformindependent OS
Pervasive security mechanisms
Provides fault tolerant environment for execution of programs and services
Supports most client OS such as DOS, Windows, OS/2, and the Apple
Macintosh. Provides network file services for Unix computers, which are not
classified as clients
Graphic sewer console interface
Server can be used for running applications

Banyan Vines

Runs on top of a host OS such as SCO Unix. The host OS performs the
functions of controlling the hard disk drives, memory and the network
interface. Banyan Vines implements the protocol by which client computers
are granted access to the file storage provided by the host 0s.
First PC-basednetwork environment to provide sophisticated directory
services with true multiple-server support

Unix

It is not a single OS but rather a name for a family of related OSs from various
companies that have a common heritage and functionality. Like Windows NT,
the various versions of Unix are complete OS, they can run applications as
well as network services. Unix does not differentiate between clients and
servers. Unix can also be a server to other client OSs such as Windows 95,
DOS, Mac and NT
Most versions of Unix like NetWare present a command line interface.
However, with X-Windows, which is similar to Microsoft GUI, one can have
as many command line interfaces as one wants

(a) INMAS local area network (LAN) providing
computer-generated communication within
INMAS campus, and
(b) DRONA providing biomedical communi*
cation to the life sciences laboratories of
DRDO across the nation.

The software and hardware solutions
available are shown in Tables 1 and 2,
respectively.

4.2 Security of Biomednet
In the post-Pokhran II scenario, 'electronic
molestation' of the network of Bhabha Atomic
Research Centre, country's premier atomic
energy establishment came as a shock to all.
DRDO cannot afford similar act performed by
hackers guided by either a spirit of adventure or
as an attempt to steal or alter data. The form of
attack may also include introduction of
macrovirus or 'deniak>fservicef, resulting in

Table 2. Hardware requirements for lnternet server
Suggested configuration

Comments

Intel 233 MHz processor lnternet servers are almost never CPU-bound. Routing to low bandwidth
connections is also not very taxing
RAM 128 MB

Minimum 64 MB, 128 MB is recommended for lntranet server

HDD 2 GB

Web sites are rarely very large. Sufficient for Windows NT 4.0 server and
lntranetics 97 (designed to enable small and mediumsized organisations
to enjoy the benefits of a large company intranet)

MO 2.1 GB

For backup hard disks

Network adapter

Fast Ethernet for lntranet servers

CD-ROM 24X

For loading software

Special hardware

Web sewer will be leased line constant connections to the Internet with
T-1 interface

overtaxing of the system resources. Therefore,
some precautions need to be taken and
appropriate measures have to be'devised to
secure the network against hacking, to prqvent
unauthorised use of computer and networking
system and access to vulnerable and highly
sensitive data. This will prevent serious
monetary and image losses. The security for the
network has to be reliable. The role of the user
of the network is to observe certain
netetiquette like not to communicate with
dubious people, not to open unidentified mails
with vague messages, choose less-obvious
passwords and avoid installing unauthorised
software. Strong encryption technologies,
virtual private networks and firewalls are
expected to improve the overall security of
network systems. Suggested configuration of
firewall is given in Section 4.3.3.

4.3 INMAS as a Nodal Point for
43.1

Local Area Network

The conceptual model of Biomednet is
INMAS'S LAN is based on the following
hardware and software. Windows NT 4.0 server
is used mainly duk to its platform-independent
OS and the fact that it can be used for running

t

Sewer: lntel P-ll 300 MHz, RAM 64 MB, HDD
3.1 GB, fast Ethernet adapter, Microsoft
Backoffice (Windows NT 4.0 server, Microsoft
SQL server, Microsoft exchange server, lnternet
information sewer, IIS, Systems management
sewer)
Workstations: lntel P-ll 233 MHz, RAM 32 MB,
HDD 2.4 GB, fast Ethernet adapter, Windows NT
workstation 4.0 (5 nodes)
Cabling: Unshielded twisted pair, category-5
Hub: Fast Ethernet
CD-ROM/DVD
Towers: 14/28 bay
CDROM/DVD towers will be used for storage of
multiple diskettes (CDs/DVDs) of routinely used
biomedical databases. All the discs or the
selected discs will be accessible from any
workstation and all the users on the workstations
of the LAN can access the database
simultaneously. The device is Intranet-ready
which enables its accessibility from distant nodes
on the Intranet. These towers off-load traffic from
the file sewer and use familiar commands to
access CDs. C D ROM towers can be monitored
from any network station.The factors affectingthe
performance of a CD-ROM tower are:

0 CD-ROM drive characteristics (double
speed or quad speed, etc.)

0 Controller type (SCSI, ID€, Parallel port
connection)
'7

Figure 1. Architecture of Biomednet at Delhi

0 Amount of RAM available in the workstation
for caching

O Speed
the
CDManager

running the

Peripherals: Printer Laser 5P, Modem 64 kbps,
GB for
scanner for scanning of
images (reflection and transmission)

Mo
4.3.2

Internet Serwr

An lnternet server is the special application
server that will answer hypertext transfer
protocol
'Ie transfer ~~~~~~~l
(FIP), and
(HTTP)l

Gopher requests from the Internet, Interne
servers allow organisations. to publish Wet
pages on the Internet, post information files anc
program* Uniform resource locator addressel
are the addresses to Internet servers.
The IIS package that comes with Window!
NT server 4.0 provides all the functionalit)
necessary to use a Windows NT server as ar
Internet server. It provides secure storage anc
publication of HTTP, FTP and Gophe
information from the Windows NT Server anc
keeps lnternet traffic securely separated from
other information
on the server. However; thl

Table 3. Hardware requirements for firewall

Suggested configuration
Intel P-ll 266 MHz

,

As firewalls are usually attached to slower bandwidth
connections, speed is not a big issue

.

DRAM- 64 MB
HDD-3.2 GB

Comments

No need for large caches on firewall hosts
. .

Sufficient for OS and firewall

Fast Ethernet adapter with 3 RJ 45 interface A network connection for the internal network is
needed
CD-ROM
8

For loading software
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Tedmd, 2000,20(3)

Figure 2. Conceptual model of Biomednet

IIS cannot keep away the hackers from,
penetrating other computers on the network.
Therefore, a firewall is required to be placed
between the Internet sewer and the in-house
network. This means that, for the most part,
secure data should not be stored on the
Internet server.
The lnternet server will be connected to the
lnternet service provider (ISP) through a
dedicated leas&
line
of 64 kbps with a TCP/IP
connection9.

4.3.3

Firewall Configuration

Since networking
is based on ISDN
provided by DOT, it is necessary to provide a
security mechanism for checking unauthorised
accesses- Denial
of access to unauthorised
users will be achieved by access control and
authentication, which is one of the ISDN
services provided by DOT. It ensures that access
to DRDo network cannot normal'^ be made
from telecom lines other than listed.. In addition,
firewalls will be used.
DESIDOCBulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(3)

Firewalls are the security gateways that
protect networks connected to the Internet
from intrusion (called 'attack' in security circles)
by unauthorised parties. A firewall is the only
computer on the internal secure network that is
attached to the external non-secure network
(the Internet). The firewall acts as a proxy for
each client on the internal network, hiding its
identity and exposing only a single IP address
to the Internet.
The firewall
performs many
, other security services, such as checking IP
addresses for permission to access the internal
network and denying access to unlisted
addresses1'.
One shouid never run services other than
services
on a computer
the firewall
as a
firewall. The reason is that hackers may be able
to exploit bugs inones sofware to bypassthe
security functions
of firewalls.
since the
firewalk
be used to perform other
services, they need only be faster than the
fastest network-connections attached to them
and have enough disk space to store the firewall
cantt

' 9

software. Windows NT 4.0 workstation as the
OS platform could be used as the firewall for
accessing 10 simultaneous IP connections.
43.4

4.4 User Workstation Requirements
1. A computer having operating system that can
run a web browser.

Main Roufers & SubRouters

Biomednet will have two levels of
connectivity. Integration plan of the
NI&
of
Biomednet with the nodes of interest in DRDO
network is illustrated in Fig. 3. INMAS will be
the main router centre (MRC) with more ports
for connectivity. The sub-router (SR) will be
connected to the main router (MR) at INMAS
MRC of DRONA via ISDN or Dial-up/lNET/
at each TlRC of the SR
VSAT. The SR
centres connected on Biomednet, will have one .
LAN port, one ISDN port and one wide area
network (WAN) port. :The LAN will be
connected to the SR through the LAN port via a
firewall.

2. A frame-capable browser that supports the
ability to upload files, such as Netscape

Navigator 3 or higher or Microsoft Internet
Explorer 3.02 or higher with file upload
addon.
.

5. CONTEMPLATED ROLE & UTiLlm
OF BlOMEDNET
DRDQS DRONA connecting all the 54
DRDO labs spread over 23 places in the
country, apart from DRDO HQrs at New Delhi
w i l be the WAN for Biomednet as illustrated in
Fig. 3. The data and rkurces available on
network will ,he accessit;le to geographically
seDarate users. INMAS'SLAN will be interfaced
w i h DRONA using t& IP/IPX protocols on a

Figure 3. Integration plan of Biomednet with other dcentres in India using DRONAas the
backbone
10

DESIDOC BuMh dlnf Tcdnd, 22000,20(3)

101100 Base-T Ethernet interface.. ' Once
established, the automated networking under
Biomednet will facilitate' the pro\iisioning of
following sewices:

s lmage compression for

0 Access to the participants' collection, services
and databases through, say, open access
catalogue (OPAC) interfaces
0 Knowing the content of the participants'
catalogue, databases p a r t i c u l a r l j o n
CD-ROM, whenever and wherever i t is
required
0 Library and information service users' access
to other databases available on say, online
hosts, CDROM or via OPAC
o Exchange of indexes and bibliographic
records, particularly using CDROM facilities
Publication and distribution of electronic
documents in different forms and texts
0 Access to journals available in electronic
forms
P Exchange and sharing of documents and
other related library and information services
among the :cooperating merbers, including
sharing expenses and tasks i n v ~ l v e din
creating and sustaining databases
0 Provision of specialist services,. such as
electronic mail (e-mail), file transfer, and
directory services within the frame o f
document delivery services, both in normal
and encrypted modes
o Designing of a virtual database -of defence
related biomedical information
o Timely retrieval of the information of defence
interest.

% Electronic processing of health and medical

5.1 Telemedicine
Telemedicine is combining telecommunication technology with medical expertise for
the delivery of medical care and education
without regard to location. This concept will be
useful for remote medical consultations, as this
will minimise patient's travel to expensive
tertiary care, continuing medical education and
will result in delivery of quality medical care for
the benefit of 'all. Specific applications of
telemedicine include: ,
Electronic management and transport o f
patient information and records for diagnostic
purposes
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/,2000,20(3)

efficient storage and

retrieval of image date
% lmage processing for diagnostic purposes

claims

s Electronic

inventory to support community
healthcare organisation

@

Teleconferencing for professional training,
education, and consultations

% Digital transdission of large 2-0 and 3-0

medical images.
Computerised control of medical equipment
via the national information infrastructure.
DRDO Health Centre can contribute a lot
once this facility is operationalised.

5.2 Teleradiology & Telenuclear
Medicine
Teleradiology is the electronic transmission
of radiological imaging from one location to the
other for the purpose of interpretation and/or
consultation. Teleradiology is the application of
digital technologies of telecommunication and
information management technologies for
electronic
transmission,
display
and
management of radiological images from one
location to the other. Thus, it will be an oncall
facility without onsite support to provide timely
and quality consultative and interpretative
services. There will be greater access to
secondary consultations and this will also
permit simultaneous viewing of images at
different locations thus improving patient care
and continuing education. These services will
be much in demand in view of the excellent
infrastructure in the field of nuclear medicine
and radiological imaging available at INMAS.

6. IMPLEMENTATION PHASES
The Biomednet facility is proposed to be
implemented in two phases. In Phase I, after
linking the TlRCs of life sciences,. food,
agriculture, material and biomedical labs of
DRDO, a strong group of information
specialists and subject specialists will be
constituted. The Biomednet facility is visualised
as a facility centre and a design centre. Timely
information exchange on the Biomednet will be
11

initiated, followed by generation of databases
of DRD0s interest.
In Phase II, the facility will be thrown open
to chemical and pharmaceutical industry and
health services for commercial exploitation.
Faster communication channels (like VSAT links)
are planned besides improving the network
parameters and software.

7. CONCLUSION
It is true that underutilisation of the library
collection is largely due to the users not gming
the information in time. If a reader comes to
know the availability of documents required by
him, and also if he can get access to them
quickly, it would not only optimise the use oif
library collection but also would effectively
contribute to the S&T efforts in the country.
Faster and reliable communication system and
information technology has opened new vistas
for resource sharing between the generators
and users of information. Networks provide a
number of navigational tools and associated
services, which could be used by libraries to
access resources at remote places for browsing,
searching and even downloading. Networking
movement is redefining the concept of
collection,
collection
development and
transforming the selection,
preservation,
communication, and liaison functions in
libraries. A powerful new context for the theory
and practice of collection management and
requiring librarians to develop new skills, accept
new responsibilities, and change their ways of
performing various library operations is fast
emerging.
The proposed Biomednet is expected to
bring immense contribution in information
sharing in DRDO. Once fully operational, the
facility may also be open for commercial
exploitation and interaction with the academics
organisations.

REFERENCES
1.

12

Seetharaman, S. Collection, development/
management i n an information
technology-based environment: Current
initiatives and issues. DESlDOC Bull. Inf.
Technol., 1997, 17(1), 11-20.

2.

Singh, D.V. Local area network: Its
application in library management. I. Lib.
Info. Sci.,1995, 20 (1-2), 8491.

3.

Singh, G & Pal K. Agricultural research
information system (ARIS) of ICAR.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 1998, 18(2),
5-12.

4.

Viswanathan, T. Emerging standards for
library networks. Ann. Lib. Sci. Doc., 1991,
38(3), 70-84.

5.

Schatz, B.R. Information retrieval in digital.
libraries: Bringing search to the Net.
Science, 1997, 275(5298), 327-34.

6.

Egan, G.F. Computers and networks in
healthcare systems. Cornput No. Med.,
1995, 25(3), 355-65.

7.

Charles, Perkins; Matthav, Strebo &
Charlies, James (Editors). MCSE: Network
station study gpide. BPB Pub., New Delhi,
1996.

8.

Matthav, Strebo; Charles, Perkins &
Charlies, James (Editors). MCSE: NT server
4 study guide. BPB Pub., New Delhi, 1997.

9.

Adams, M.D. Biomednet. http://www.
Cityscape.co.uk/users/ag64/1996/bioapr
96.html

10. Meade, M. 2nd Annual OMNl Seminar:
Economics of the Digital Library.
http://omni.ac.uk/general-info/seminar2/
meade.html
11. Arenson, R.L.; Chakroborty, D.P.; Seshadri,
S.B. & Kundel, H.L. The digital imaging
workstation. Radiology.
12. Barnes, G.T.; Morin, R.L. & Stabb, E.V.
infoRAD: Computers for clinical practice
and education in radiology. Teleradiology:
Fundamental Considerations and clinical
applications. Radio Graphics, 13, 673-81.
13. Batnitzky, S.; Rosenthal SJ. & Siegel, E.L.
Teleradiology: An assessment. Radiology,
1990, 177, 11-17.
14. Carey, L.S. Teleradiology: Part of a
comprehensive telehealth system. Radiol.
Clin. North. Am., 1985,23,357-62.
15. Kelsey, C.A., et a/. A guide to teleradiology
systems. American College of Radiology,
Reston, VA., 1993.
DHIDOC 8ulktin of lni,-fn

2000,20(3)

