DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 20, No. 3, May 2000, pp. 15-19
CI 2000, DESlDOC

Barcoding for Faster Library Transactions
V.K.J. Jeevan
ABSTRACT
The utility of barcoding for faster library transactions is time-tested, and more
and more computerised libraries in our country are using this technology. The paper
briefly outlines the applications of this technology for library work. The barcode data
transfer works in perfect harmony with library databases and can be used for faster
and efficient library transactions. Various hardware, software, and symbologies are
explained. A case study on application of barcode technology at the Central Library
of Indian institute of Technology, Kharagpur, is elaborated. The paper also highlights
the future applications of this technology in the information workplace. An indicative
list of local barcode solution providers is also provided.

1. INTRODUCTION

2. BARCODE DATA TRANSFER

The circulation work in an automated library
involves keying in a large amount of data.
Sometimes, the library staff at the counter has
to retype the same information due to error in
data entry. All this results in long queues at the
circulation desk in our libraries. This voluminous
work can be handled in a smooth manner in a
much less time by the application of barcoding,
one of the simplest coding technologies
available in the market. The speed of data
capture is three times faster than the speed at
which a skilled data entry operator can input
data' and also the error rate is negligibly small2.

The information that can be encoded on the
barcodes is rather limited and hence it is up to
the individual libraries to decide what
information they need to barcode for efficient
handling of collection and for better operation
of services. Libraries can use accession
numbers of books, the unique information that
distinguish their collection, as the vital
information entity to barcode their collection.
Similarly, the identification number of a user
stands distinct for each member, which can be
used to barcode the user's cards. Accession
number/borrower number exported from the
database/borrower
database
is
library
converted to a series of black and white lines
by the barcode software. This can be printed by
a dot-matrix/laser printer and pasted on all
books and borrower cards.

The barcode technology originated out of
the need of retail stores and big industries to
track down their inventory errors in a faster way.
Due to the cheap human labour available in our
country, the estimated barcoding market was a
mere 12 crores in 1995-96', out of which
libraries and miscellaneous services accounted
for only 1 crore. Libraries need to adopt this
technology as it helps retrieve and collect data
quickly and efficiently.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol,2000,20(3)

The light beam flashed from the bar.code
scanner on the barcode label undergoes
reflection at the white lines and absorption on
the dark bands. This reflected light is collected
back and is converted into electric pulses by
the photoelectric circuitry of the scanner.
Further, these pulses are converted into binary
information by the interface circuitry of the
15

scanner before they are fed to the computer,
for further processing. So, the information read
from barcode acts as a substitute for the same
information entered through keyboard, to
handle circulation/other routines of the library
database.
The barcode technology is essentially a data
transfer device and hence it works in perfect
harmony with any of the computerised
database systems. Any customisation needed at
the user end can be done either by the in-house
system personnel or by local solution providers.
The barcoding setup includes the barcode
scanner to read the barcoded information, its
interfacing with the library computer (normally
done through a keyboard interface cable), the
software to convert the requisite information to
barcodes, and the printer.
The barcode scanners may be classified into
different groups like (a) as per design (handheld and fixed-mount) and (b) as per light
source (infrared or visible).
Hand-held scanners contain no moving
parts. They are compact, light and cheaper as
compared to fixed-mount models. Hence, they
are of interest to libraries desiring to optimise
their budgetary resources. Infrared scanners can
read mutilated labels; however, they need
special printers. But recent times saw the
dominant categorisation, as per technology, into
CCD and laser scanners.
In CCD scanners, light from the LEDs is used
to read the barcode information, whereas laser
light is used in the latter. Accordingly, laser
scanners have increased scan width and range
(distance from which the labels are scanned),
but they are comparatively expensive. The
vendors used to offer requisite software to
generate barcodes from suggested fields of
library database. Since materials and readers are
added only in prescribed number in a library, it
will be better to avoid commercial printing of
barcode labels. All required lables can b e
printed either on normal paper or on purchased
blank labels on a dot-matrixllaser printer, as per
their availability in the library. While generating
lables, provision may also be made to print
some other fields like author/title/user riame in

normal text to identify the labels easily, as one
is more comfortable with text than numbers like
accession/identification number.
The user cards are normally laminated and
to ensure long life of the labels on books
(defective labels always lead to wrong/no
reading of data), transparent cellotape can be
pasted over these.

3. CODING FORMATS/
SYMBOLOGIES
The different code formats and how the
information is encoded in bars is available in
the literature4. The same information can be
encoded by different schemes; however, at the
user and application level, it doesn't make
much distinction and the user may use any of
the schemes. The same information can be
encoded to and satisfactorily decoded from
more than one scheme without hampering
efficiency or time. orm mall^, limitations are
imposed by the barcoding software one uses,
and it is better to consult the individual
operational manual for such information. Some
of the common formats are:
(a) Universal Product Code (UPC): US standard
to encode only digits, UPC-A to encode 12
digits or UPC-E to encode 6 digits.
(b) European Article Number (EAN): European
code to encode digits, available in two
variations:. EAN-8 to encode 8 digits and
EAN-13 to encode 13 digits.
(c) Interleaved 2 of 5 . (ITF): Supports only
numeric characters but can be used for
variable length.
(d) Code-39:
Encodes capital alphabets,
numerical and few special characters like $, +,
%. Asterisk (*) must be used as the start and
stop character. Lowercase alphabets cannot
be encoded.
(e) Code-1 28: Encodes both the lower and the
upper case letters, numeric and special
characters found on the keyboard.

(f) Codabar: Encodes only numeric and few
special characters and is the most widely
used coding format. Generally, libraries use
this symbology to encode books and
borrower cards.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(3)

4. BARCODING AT THE IIT
KHARACPUR CENTRAL LIBRARY
The Central Library of the Indian Institute of
Technology, Kharagpur, is one of the few
libraries in the country to have a huge database
of their entire collections. Initially, the
computerised issue return of books6 was done
by keying in the accession number of books
and identification number of borrower, but this
mechanism was prone to errors and. also
resulted in long queues at the circulation grant
desk. Out of the project of Rs 10 lakh received
from AlCTE in 1994 for the conversion of the
conventional central library into the electronic
library, the Library procured 5 CCD barcode
scanners (Scanteam-3000 manufactured by
Welch Allyn, USA) and one HP-5Si Mx Laser
Printer. It was decided to barcode books and
hence, the details of books brought for
issue/return were exported from the library
database for generating barcode labels with
accession number as the key field and the
labels were printed on the laser printer using
'Softbar v l ' software supplied by the vendor.
The Library also received a consignment of
'Nashua Laser Labels' in 30 labels per page
format as gift from one of its alumni settled in
US. The system generates three labels for each
book to be pasted on the back of title page,
secret page and last page. To fasten the
process, personnel were given honorarium and
encouraged to work overtime/on holidays to
barcode the entire book collection. Side by
side, new books processed by the technical
processing section were also barcoded before
release. Out of a special operating fund of Rs 1
lakh received from the Institute in 1998, all the
pending old books were also barcoded. Now,
the entire collection of over 2 lakh books is
barcoded.
From the academic year 1998-99, all B.Tech
and M.Tech students were given a laminated
barcoded library identity card (with Roll No. as
the key field), and the practice of issuing
separate borrower cards as per the entitlement
was discontinued. This facility will be further
extended to faculty, researchers, and other staff
in near future. This practice not only resulted in
saving a large amount of stationery for printing
numerous borrower cards but also a total savirig
DESlDoC Bulletin of Inf T i n o / , 2000,20(3)

of staff time which would have otherwise been
spent for filing those cards. The user can have a
book in one third of the pre-barcode issue time.
The faculty, students and the personnel
manning the circulation desk find the barcode
technology user-friendly, efficient and fast.

5. ADOPTION IN OTHER .LIBRARIES
IN I N D I A
Few of the computerised libraries in the
country like American Center, British Council,
other ItTs, some R&D libraries have already
started barcoded circulation.
With an investment of less than a lakh, the
computerised libraries can procure barcode
related hardware and software. A CCD scanner
can be purchased for Rs 15,000 and a laser
scanner for Rs 25,000 (approximate prices in
1998) with comparable costs for relewnt
software. It is always better to have a feedback
from the nearby libraries who use this
technology before procuring one. Also, the
potential vendors may be called to give a
demonstration of this technology. The
procurement may be carried out in one go or
in stages, so that those required for barcoding
active collection may be purchased first and on
completion of that work, more scanners may be
bought. The accrued savings for the first few
years will be more than what has been invested.
Further, it will also improve the status of the
library which will move one step closer to
realise the fourth law of library science.

6. APPLICATIONS O F BARCODING
Barcoding offers a lot of comfort and ease
to handle bulk routine tasks efficiently. The
application of this technology for issue/return of
books is widely identified and practiced in the
developed countries of the world. A few of the
computerised libraries in our country have also
started experiencing the fruits of this
technology. It is important to emphasise that
this technology is not limited to circulation
work. Newnham7 describes the barcoding of
DNA samples in Britain. It is not out of place to
ponder over future barcoding applications in a
library. With the help of a data gathering
device, the barcodes can be used to verify
stock, as libraries have to resort to stock

verification, at intervals. If the provision for
multiple
barcodes
or
multidimensional
barcoding is incorporated to handle call
number information also, wrong shelving of
books can be autodetected which would help
the staff to rectify the same. The individual
journal volumes are handled in a library with
lots of intricacies. Many a time these issues
have to be taken out of the display area for
Xerox work. There are also chances of their
shelving in wrong cabinets. These problems are
tackled by using a control number for the
current journal issues and barcoding them
accordingly. A database of journal issues can
thus be generated so that their management
through cards can be avoided. If the parent
institution also has a computerised accounting
system, all the bills can be routed after
barcoding (use transactionlany other inventory
number as the key field) so that their follow up
and processing are done efficiently.

REFERENCES
1.

Bhaskar Raj, A.S. The barcode technology
and applications. Electronics For You, April
1995, 99-105.

2.

Pradeep, C. & Rama Reddy, E. Applications
of barcode technology for library
operations-experiences at IGM library,
University of Hyderabad. University News,
36(35), 6-9.

3.

Counting the bars. Dataquest, 1-15 March
1995, 95-99.

4.

Newnes communication technology
handbook. Butterworth Hienemann, 1994.

5.

jagajeevan, V.K., et a/. Integrating library
applications/datab'ases w i t h Web.
Proceedings of SIS 98 Conference on
Virtual Libraries. Central Library, IIT,
Kharagpur, 1998, pp. 26-39.

6.

Katna, A.K. O n designing an automated
circulation system for Indian environment.
Program, 30(2), 171-75.

7.

Newnham, John. The world's first DNA
database. Electronics for You, Oct 1995,
46-48.

Barcoding has come a long way and it is
here to stay for faster and efficient library work.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author gratefully acknowledges the
encouragement received from Ms Mita Das
Gupta and Prof S.B. Sinha for writing this paper.

Contributor

18

Shri VKJ Jeevanis working as Assistant Librarian at the Central
Library, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, West Bengal
- 72 1302,
e-mail: vkj(@library.iitkgp.ernet.in

OESIDOC Bullelin of lnf Technol,2000,20(3)

Appendix

Vendors
(This list of vendors is only illustrative, as a lot of companies function in different cities as agents of
international barcode solution providers.)

1.

Great Eastern lmpex Pvt. Ltd.
Pragati Tower,
10th Floor, 26 Rajendra Place,
New Delhi 110 008
Phone: 571 1751
Fax: 5754185

2.

'~fficientData Processing Pvt. Ltd.
4fi2/4D, Shriram Bhuvan,
N.P. Marg, Matunga
Mumbai 400 019
Phone: 4097092,
Fax: 91-22-4096323

3.

Symbol Systems of India
PB No 12002,
Azad Nagar P.O.
Andheri (W),
Mumbai 400 053
Phone: 6237152,
Fax: 91-224239650

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(3)

4.

5.

Mangalam Enterprises
18, Panchu Dhobani Galli (2nd Floor)
Calcutta 700 007
Phone: 2397765,
Fax: 91-33-2322260
Datamatics Ltd.
Unit No. 38/39, SDF II, SEEPZ,
Andheri (E)
Mumbai 400 096
Phone: 832051 1,
Fax: 91-22-8366368

19

