IDESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 20, No. 4, July 2000, pp. 3.9

0 2000, orsrooc

Knowledge Management: A Review

Alka Bansal

1. INTRODUCTION

The knowledge in an enterprise resides in
various places such as: databases, knowledge
bases, filing cabinets and peoples’ heads and is
distributed right across the enterprise. Most

often one part of an enterprise repeats work of

‘ another part simply because it is not possible to

 keep track of, and make use of, knowledge of.

T'other'parts. Enterprises need to know:
0 What their knowledge assets are, and'

D How to manage and make use of these assets
to get maximum returns.

The increasing use Of electronic group
Collaboration tools, such as ‘e-mail, voice mail,
audio and video conferencing, etc. to support
team work has generated interest to develop
the tools and techniques to capture the process
that occurs when people use those tools for
re-use by the others. ’Knowledge management’
(KM), as it is called, is important for enterprises

whose principal currency is knowledge, rather,

than physical or financial resources. These are
enterprises who have always been wholly
devoted to knowledge work, such as
consultancies; a growing number of enterprises
Who discover that knowledge of how to
" produce products is as saleable as the products
themselves; and any enterprise who realises
that its knowledge is an asset to be managed.

I ’. The core issue of KM is to place knowledge
(under management remit to get value from
Tit—to realise intellectual capital. For example,
market value of biotechnOIOgy companies is
' clearly based on their knowledge assets, rather
f'fhan traditional capital. '

  
 
  

5. .While the world of business is experienced
in, managing physical and ﬁnancial, capital,

 

cost-effective solutions to simple practical
questions concerning knowledge, such as:

0 People at one laboratory of an organisation
may be knowing how to solve some problem.

How can other laboratory team at a distance
be helped?

0 Employees with a lifetime’s experience will
leave the organisation. How to capture and
re-use their knowledge later? ' 

El Reasons of success of .a Wei/“project; why
such unique decisions were taken; how did
they deal with the circumstances?

CI How people start learning from their

experiences and help other people stop
repeating mistakes they made?

D How can one get new people into projects to
work speedly and contribute quickly?

While there are no categorical 0r perfect
answers to any of these questions, one of the
electronic collaboration tools used for
distributed group work, is needed as solutions.

2'. DEFINITION

2.1 Knowledge

According to Denham Grey, ’Knowledge is
the full utilisation of information and data,
coupled with the potential of people's skills,
competencies, ideas, intuitions, commitments
and motivations.’ A holistic view considers
knowledge to be present in ideas, judgements,
talents, root causes, relationships, perspectives,
and concepts. Knowledge is stored in the
individual brain or encoded in organisational

processes,

documents, products, services,

facilities, and systems.

in today’s economy, knowledge is people,

 

 

Companies havé difficulty in, finding moneY' learningr fle’dblllty, Power, and
DESlDOCBu/letin orlnlrechnol,2ooo,20(4) A 3
competitive advantage. Knowledge is more knowledge modelling and knoWledge

relevant to sustained business than capital,
labour or land. Nevertheless, it remains the
most neglected asset. It is more than justiﬁed

essential for

adaption.

true belief and is
performance and

action,
Knowledge

provides the ability to respond to novel

situations.

Knowledge is action, focussed innovation,
pooled expertise, special relationships and
alliances. Knowledge is value-added behaviour
and activities. For knowledge to be of value it

must be fOCussed, current, tested and shared.

2.2 Knowledge Management

Knowledge Management (KM) is an audit
of ’intellectual assets’ that highlights unique

sources, critical functions

and potential

bottlenecks which hinder knowledge flow to
the point of, use. It protects intellectual assets
from decay, seeks opportunities to enhance
decisions, services and products through adding
intelligence, increasing value and providing

flexibility.

Maarten Sierhuis defines KM and supporting

concepts as follows:

KM as the word implies, is the ability to
manage ’knowledge’. Every one is familiar with
the term information management. This term

came about when people realised

that

information is a resource that neéds to be
managed to be useful in an organisation. From
this, the ideas of information analysis and
information planning came about. When one
considers knowledge as a resource, one needs
ways for managing the knowledge in an
organisation. One can use techniques and
methods, developed as part of knowledge
technology to analyse knowledge sources in an
organisation. Using these techniques one can

perform knowledge analysis
knowledge planning (KP). ,

(KA)

2.2.1 Knowledge Analysis

and

In KA, knowledge source is analysed in
terms of its usefulness, its weaknesses and its
appropriateness within the organisation. It is a
necessary step for the ability to manage

knowledge. Within knowledge

analysis,

acquisition techniques can be used. _
2.2.2 Knowledge Planning

When an organisation has a grip on its
knowledge (i.e., has performed knowledge
analysis), it will be able to plan well. An
organisation will now be able to develop a
multi-year knowledge plan that‘ defines how the,
organisation will develop its knowledge
resources, either by training its human agents,
or by developing knowledge-based systems to
support the human agents, or by other means
that allow the organisation to stay competitive. ‘

2.2.3 Knowledge Technology

The application of techniques and methods
from the field of artificial intelligence (Al), or
more specifically, the field of. knowledge-based
systems, knowledge technology (KT) has been
around for quite some time, and most people,
know about the application of KT in the form of ,
expert systems and decision support systems.
Techniques and methods to design these kind
of systems are well known. A known
methodology for building knowledge-bas-sd
systems~is CommonKADS (formerly known as
KADS).

2.2.4 Computer Supported Work Systems
(CSWS)

This is a formal and informal (human)
activity system within an organisation where the
(human) agents are supported by computer
systems. The application of KT is very helpful in
such work systems, although definitely not the
only important factor in the analysis and design,
nor in the effectiveness of the activity system.

Given the importance of knowledge in
virtually all areas of daily and commercial life,
two knowledge-related aspects are vital for
viability and success at any level:
2.2.4.1 Knowledge assets—These comprise the

knowledge regarding markets, products,
technologies and organisations that 'a.
business owns or needs to own and,
enable its business processes to generate
profits, add value, etc. Knowledge assets
(to be applied or exploited) must be
nurtured, preserved, and used to the

 

largest extent possible by both individuals
and organisations.

2.2.4.2 Knowledgerelated processes—These
help to create, build, compile, organise,
transform, transfer, pool, apply, and
safeguard knowledge — must be carefully
and explicitly managed in all affected
areas.

KM is not only about managing these
knowledge assets but managing the
processes that act upon the assets. These
processes include: developing
knowledge, preserving knowledge, using
knowledge, and sharing knowledge.
Therefore, KM involves the identification
and analysis of available and required
knowledge assets and knowledge asset
related processes, and the subsequent
planning and control of actions to
develop both the assets and the
processes so as to fulfil organisational
objectives.

Many efforts in KM aim to take implicit
knowledge held by a few people, make it
explicit in suitable contexts, and make it a basis
for informed actions by the whole enterprise.
Several things are needed to bring isolated
packets of valuable knowledge into a useful
common context. First, the people who possess
the knowledge must be persuaded and
convinced that it is in their interest to share it,
and to help to make it explicit. Second, an
understandable way of representing the
knowledge is needed. Third, software that uses

DESIDOC Bulletin ollnf Technol, 2000, 20(4) :

3.2 Analysing How Knowledge Can

Add Value

I What are the opportunities for using the
knowledge asset?

I What would be the effect of its use?

I What are the current obstacles to its use?

I What would be its increased value to the
organisation?

3.3 Specifying What actions are
Necessary to Achieve Better
Usability & Added Value

I How to plan actions to use the
knowledge asset?

I How to enact actions?

I How to monitor actions?

3.4 Reviewing the Use of Knowledge

to Ensure Added Value

I Did the use of knowledge produce the
desired added value?

I How can the knowledge asset he
maintained for this use?

I Did the use create new opportunities?

4. TOOLS FOR KNOWLEDGE

MANAGEMENT

There are very few tools providing a truly

 

integrated set of functions to support the tasks
associated with KM. Some of the tools that
have been used to support various aspects of
managing knowledge are listed here:

the knowledge will often be needed.

3.

KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT
FRAMEWORK

The KM framework, based on work by van

der Spek and de Hoog, covers:
3.1 Identifying What Knowledge
Assets a Company Possesses
I Where is the knowledge asset?
I What does it contain?
I What is its use?
I What form is it in?
I How to access it?

4.1
I PC

Knewledge Capture
Pack—a portable package of
integrated tools for requirements and
knowledge engineering.

I Clementine Data Mining (or Knowledge

Discovery)—a software package from ISL.

I Intelligent Miner—a data mining tool from

IBM.
I The Information Discovery, System
(lDlS)—a data mining tool from

I ART“

lnformation Discovery.

Knowledge Sharing

Enterprise—object-orientecl client/
server tool with case-based retrieval of

 

DESIDOC Bulletin of inf Technol, 2000, 20(4)

both structured and unstructured

information from Brightware.

I GrapeVINE—available in two versions—
one for Lotus Notes and the other for
, Netscape in which users can set up an
interest profile that identiﬁes What is
useful to them and so filter information.

I Knowledge Softvvare——PKM (Personal
Knowledge Manager) and PDP (Personal
Development Plan), both based on Lotus
Notes.

I Knowledgmange—TM Knowledge-

Managem
based system.
5. PRINCIPLES or KNOWLEDGE
MANAGEMENT

The following are the principles of KM given
by Thomas H Davenport:

System—a Lotus Notes-

5.1 KM is Expensive

Knowledge is an asset, but its effective
management-requires investment of money or
labour, for the following essential activities of
KM:

I Knowledge capture, i.e., creation of
documents and storing into computer
systems ' .

I Adding value to knowledge through
editing, packaging, and pruning

I Developing knowledge categorisation

approaches and categorising new
contributions to knowledge ‘
I Developing information technology

infrastructure and applications for the
distribution of knowledge

I Educating employees on the creation,
sharing, and use of knowledge.

5.2 Effective Management of

Knowledge Requires Hybrid
Solutions of People and
Technology

Human beings may be expensive and can
have their own viewpoints, but they are needed
to interpret knowledge within a broader
context, to combine it with other types of
information, or to synthesise various
unstructured forms of knowledge. For‘~these

5

tasks, humans excel and their excellence should
be utilised.

Computers and communications systems
are good for the capture, transformatiOn, and
distribution of highly structured knowledge that
changes rapidly.

5.3 Knowledge Management is
Highly Political

As knowledge is power, knowledge
managers have to acknowledge and cultivate
politics. They will act as, brokers between those
who have knowledge and those who may use
it. At the highest level, they will try shape the:
governance of knowledge for its better
utilisation across the organisation.

5.4 I KM Requires Knowledge
Managers

Knowledge cannot be well-managed until-
some group within an organisation has clear-
responsibility for the job. The group might
perform the tasks of collecting-and categorising
knowledge, establishing a knowledge-oriented
technology infrastructure and monitoring (the
use of knbwledge. -

5.5 KM Benefits More from Maps _
than Models, More from Markets
than from Hierarchies ‘

Most organisations simply map the
knowledge that its consumers seem to require.
The dispersion of knowledge ‘as described in .a
map may be illogical, but is still more helpful to"
a user than a hypothetical knowledge model;
available in the market that is difficult to
understand and rarely fully implemented.
Mapping organisational knowledge is the only
activity mdst likely to yield better access.

5.6 Sharing and Using Knowledge
are Often Unnatural Acts '

An employee in an organisation may feel
that if his knowledge is a valuable resource,
why should he share it? And if his job is to
create-knowledge, why should he put his job at
risk by allowing it to be used by others instead
of its use by him only? The knowledge

6

 natural tendency of employees is to hoard their
fknowledge and look suspiciously upon- that
Ilium others. People in an organisation have to
f be motivated to make them realise that to
undertake 'work of entering their knowledge
into a system and to seek out knowledge from
‘V others is not threatening, but just a plain effort.

: The knowledge manager should adopt the
principle of not taking, sharing and using
knowledge for granted. They should not assume
that making informatiOn available will necessarily
lead to its use. They should realise that sharing
3, and using knowledge have to be motivated
:through time—honoured techniques, such as
performance evaluation, compensation, etc.

There are some firms that are beginning to
evaluate and reward their personnel for
knowledge sharing.

5.7 KM Means Improving Knowledge '
' Work Processes

It is important to address and improve the
generic KM process, but knowledge is being
generated, used, and shared intensively in .a few
Specific knowledge work processes. The
speciﬁc processes may vary within a firm and
industry, but they include market research,
product design and development, and even
mere transactional processes like ‘order
, configuration and pricing. lf real improvements
are to be made in KM, improvements must be '
made in these key processes.

5.8 Knowledge Access is Only the
Beginning

. If knowledge access was sufficient, there
would have been long queues outside the
v nation’s libraries. ACCess is important, but
fSuccessful KM also requires attention and
engagement. It has been said that attention is
the Currency of the information age.

More .active involvement with. knowledge
can be achieved through summarising and
reporting it to others, role-playing and games
based on usage of the knowledge, and
’ receiving the knOWIedge thrOugh close
interaction with kno‘Medge providers. This is
particularly important when the knowledge to
be received is tacit. Some firms have already

“managers do well if they assume that the

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000, 20(4)

begun to help their managers and employees
engage in KM.

5.9 KM Never Ends

KM has no end as new technologies,

' management approaches, regulatory issues, and
customer
Companies

concerns are always emerging.
change their strategies,

organisational structures, and product. and

service
‘ professionals have new.needs for knowledge.

emphases. New managers and

5.10 KM Requires a Knowledge

owns. or

Contract

There needs to be a clarity regarding who

has usage rights to employee

knowledge. Is the knowledge of employees
owned or rented? Is all of the knowledge in

employees’

heads

the property of the

employer? How about the knowledge in file
cabinets or computer disk drives? What about
the knowledge of consultants while they are
consulting? Outsourced employees? Few firms
have policies to deal with these issues.

becoming a
organisations, one can expect to see more

Many organisations have held employee
knowledge—at least that developed between
office hours—to be the property of the
corporation. HOWever, some difficulties are
being faced, as employees move more quickly
to new jobs and- new organisations, the
distinction between work life and home life is
more
contingent workers. ln any case, few firms have
done a good job of extracting and documenting
employee’sknowledge. lf knowledge is really.

ephemeral, and there are more

more valued resource in

attention to the legalities of KM. intellectual
property law is already the fastest-growing field
in the legal profession-and it will still grow

faster.

6. CASE STUDIES

6.1 Knowledge Management at

Hewlett—Packard
Hewlett-Packard (HP) has been a
knowledge-oriented company since , its

inception. KM is exploding at HP. While there
has been no top-down mandate to manage

 

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000, 20(4)

3

this
electronics

knowledge at

computer and firm,

highly decentralised
many

departments are undertaking speciﬁc efforts to
better manage knowledge. Managers of many
companies are attempting to capture and
distribute knowledge resident 'in their own

business units and departments.

The efforts are springing up quickly, and it is
difficult even to identify and track all of them.
The Computer Systems Marketing Organisation,
for example, has put a large amount of
marketing knowledge into a www¢based system

that can be accessed around the world. It'
competitive

contains product information,

intelligence, white papers, and ready-to-deliver
marketing presentations. HP Laboratories are
developing approaches to facilitate access to

both internal and external

knowledge.

Corporate Information System are putting
document-based knowledge of procedures,
personnel, and available information into Web
and Lotus Notes systems. The Computer

5

generation process; the knowledge may come,
from a variety "of functional perspectives,
including marketing, R&D, engineering, and '*
manufacturing. The knowledge going into-
Knowledge Links comes from cotside the KM
group, but group members add ‘value by
identifying, editing, and formatting the
knowledge, and making it easily accessible and
usable.

The PPO’s Knowledge Management group
intends to develop a variety of other services to
PPO and HP. it plans to develop'versions of 1
Knowledge Links for other types of knowledge
fOr internal HP clients. It has developed an
assessment tool to' be used in assessing the
levels. of KM capability in PPO and other HP
groups. It is beginning to map key knowledge ‘
domains within PPO. Finally, within the context
of a Kn0wledge Links, development activity, the,
group consults about how best to create
knowledge-creating and sharing behaviours,
without which the technologyis of little value.

'Systems Marketing [Organisation is also

attempting to- map various sources of

knowledge about information systems 6-2 KnOWIedge Management at

development and management around HP. 1 Maritime Telephone & Telegraph
Perhaps the most fOCUSSEd, lntenSiVe Another example where KM is getting.

approach to KM is in the Product Processes
Organisation (PPO), which provides services
such as information on purchasing, engineering,
market intelligence, change management, and
environmental and safety consulting to HP
product divisions. The organisation has adopted
many approaches to knowledge transfer in the
past, including catalogues of documents, video
and audio tapes of meetings, best practice
databases, and the work innovation network, a
series of meetings and ongoing discussions on
change management topics. However, until

recently, there had been
responsibility for KM in PPO.

no

formal

in 1995, however, PPO formed 3 KM group
within PPO’s Information Systems group. lts
initial charter was to capture and leverage
product generation-oriented knowledge for
managers of the product generation process in
various HP product divisions. The group quickly
developed a prototype of a Web-based KM
system called Knowledge Links. its primary
content is knowledge about the product

started is Maritime Telephone & Telegraph in.
Halifax, Nova Scotia. Recently, the
telecommunication“ provider began using a
knowledge-oriented process for bringing
products to market. Employees were asked to
use the system to store information in an
intranet based repository at‘every step in a:
product's launch. For example, when they
project a product’s revenue, they'll 'use a"
Web-based form not only to enter the
projections, but also to store notes about how»
they arrived at the figures. The information will
be stored in a database that is part of iNet
Developer, a Web development tool from
Pictorius Inc. in Halifax. Managers would be
able to look at projections early in the
marketing process.

References-

1. Davenport, Thomas H. Some principles of
knowledge management: Information
technology management—white paper

 

8

2.. (Sundry, John 8: Metes, George. Team

’ knowledge management: a computer-
mediated approach—A working by wire 5'" ""
white paper. http://www.knowab.co.uk/
wbwteam.htm| -

,3. Hibbard, justin & Carrillo, Karen M.
Knowledge revolution7gening employees to
share what they know is no longer a
technology challenge-it’s a corporate culture
challenge. January 05, 1998,Issue: 663
Section: Hot In ’98:Knowledge Management

4. Wiig, Karl M. Vol.1; Knowledge management
foundations, thinking about thinking, how
people and organisations create, represent
and use knowledge. ISBN 0-9638925-0-9

5. Ibid. Vol 2; Knowledge management: the
central focus for intelligent-acting
organisations. Schema Press, Arlington. ISBN
0-9638925—1-7

Contributor

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, "2000, 20(4)

(bid. Vol. 3; Knowledge management:
_ methods, practical approaches to managing
knowledge. Schema Press, Arlington. ISBN
09638925-2-5

IUCS: special issue on IT for knowledge

management, 1997, 3(8).

Van Der Spek, R. & De Hoog, R. A framework
for knowledge management methodology. ln
knowledge management methods; practical
apprOaches to managing knowledge. Vol. 3
of 3, Schema Press, Arlington, Texas, 1997.
pp. 379-398. ISBN 0-9638925-2-5.

Van Der Spek, R. & Spijkervet, A. Knowledge ‘
management: dealing intelligently with
knowledge. Knowledge Management
Network (ClBlT/CSC). 1997. ISBN
90-75709-02-1 .

lo; Schreiber, A.Th.; Wielinga, 3).; De Hoog, R.

8: Akkermans, l.M. CommonKADS: a
comprehensive methodology for-K85
development. IEEE Expert, 1994, 9(6).

Smt Alka Bansal is Scientist C at DESIDOC, Metcalfe Hause,

Delhi - 110 054. . j. .

 

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000, 20(4)

