DESlDOC Bulletin of lnformatim7echnology, Vol. 20, No. 5, September 2000, pp. 3-20
@ 2000, DESEDOC

Mass Storage Technologies for
Libraries & information Centres
A Lakshmana Moorthy & CR Karisiddappa
Abstract
To overcome growing requirements for additional space and for archival storage
of less used, old and important documents, libraries have been using compact or
dormitory storage and microfilming techniques. Of late, information technologies
have come to their rescue. Many technologies-magnetic as well as optical have
been tried for the past many years for mass storage of information. While magnetic
drum and tape are,heading towards obsolescence, optical' technologies with their
enormous storage capacities are trying to fill the gap.
This paper overviews the various 'technologies available for mass storage in the
library environment. The paper covers the magnetic storage devices including
magnetic tape, magnetic disc, cartridge tape and digital audio tape. The optical disc
storage technologies including read-only, write once read many and erasablelrewriteable media have been described. The role of optical discs in making electronic
publishing a popular technology has also been described. Future trends in the mass
storage technologies like volume holographic technology, electronic trap and
proximal probe technologies, and fluorescent multi-layered technology which are
under various stages of development have also been briefly discussed. Applications
of these technologies in library and information centres.have been listed.

1. INTRODUCTION
Archival storage has been a major problem
for libraries and librarians. As the stock of a
library grows year by year, several problems
arise. Major problems associated with
conventional print media include the need for a
large shelf space, longer retrieval times,
expensive maintenance, durability, and wear
and tear. These problems made some of the
libraries, especially those situated in large cities
where addition of extra space is difficult and
large libraries with huge collections to resort to
either weeding out at regular intervals
documents which are not active or create
dormitory collection to store unused and less
used documents. These factors coupled .with
the everchanging technological advances in the
electronics and computer technology paved the
way for the development of mass storage
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(5)

systems, Advances in these fields have resulted
in the optical data storage devices, which have
a long archival life, high resolution, and
simplicity in handling, and above all, enormous
storage capacity. In, an ever-growing library
environment, mass storage is necessary to meet
the following needs C1):
(a) Providing large-volume digital storage for
archival management;

(b) Providingusers with immediate access to the
rap'idly growing volume of data and
information that is .stored in digital
information systems and is likely to be
distributed on optical media in the future;
(c) Providing users with access to multimedia
information quickly and interactively through
the integration of technologies; and
3

(d) Transferring large volumes of data and/or files
from one system to another.
In addition, mass storage media are needed
for the distribution of bibliographic databases of
library holdings to customers and member
libraries in a wide area network environment.
A number of mass storage media are
available in the market for a long time. Libraries
have been using microfilm, microfiche and
ultra-fiche which help store large volumes of
data in a comparatively lesser space than the
print media. In recent times, computer-based
mass storage technologies have been
developed to address information storage and
retrieval problems faced by libraries and
librarians.
Broadly,
computer
storage
technologies can be grouped into magnetic and
non-magnetic (optical) technologies. This paper
overviews briefly the various magnetic and
optical storage media having applications in the
library environment.

2.

MAGNETIC STORAGE
TECHNOLOGY

The magnetic storage devices came into the
scene simultaneously with the arrival of
microcomputers during the early 1980s. These
include the primary storage hard discs/drives
and the secondary (or auxiliary, removable)
floppy discs. Their capacities have changed with
the advances in technology. There are a variety
of magnetic storage media available for the
users to choose. These include: magnetic drum,
magnetic and cartridge tapes (both analogues),
digital audio tapes (DATs), floppy discs,
magnetosptical discs and removable hard
discs. Whereas the 17 GB hard disc drives are
common with the latest computers, the
5.25-inch (1.2 MB) and 3.5-inch (1.44 MB)
floppy discs became standard drives with
personal computers (PCs). Although the
5.25-inch discs are disappearing slowly, the
3.5-inch version is here to stay for some more
time as the LS120 discs and Imation's Super
Disc (both of 120 MB capacity) are of the same
size and are compatible with these drives.
The oldest primary storage medium in use is
magnetic drum. It facilitates direct random
access of data. Introduced around 1947-48,
these have been in use since 1950s. However,
4

presently their use is rather very limited. These
are typically 8 to 20 inch in diameter, 2 to 4
feet in length and revolve at 1,500 to 4,000
revolutions per minute (rpm). They allow
densities of 4,000 bpi and high access rates up
to 3 million characters per second. Although
they hold condderably less volume of data
compared to magnetic tapes, they allow
random access with typical access times of
5-10 ms.
In the beginning, when the IBM invented
the disc drive in 1956, ferrite heads (U-shaped
magnets) were used for reading and writing
data. During 1970s, the storage capacity of
200 megabits per square inch (Mbpsi) was
thought to be the ultimate capacity of magnetic
storage media. In due course of time, the ferrite
heads gave way to thin-film inductive heads,
which in turn gave way to magneto-resistive
(MR) heads in 1989, and to the giant MR
heads in 1997. By 1989, the new MR
technology made it possible to achieve 1 billion
bpsi (i.e., 1 Gbpsi) storage capacity. This was
followed by 5 Gbpsi by 1996, and 11.6 Gbpsi
by December 1997, an incredible storage
capacity equivalent to 725,000 double-spaced
pages of text, which would stack up higher
than 18-storey building (2). For the past few
years, the number of bits per unit disc surface
area in disc drives has been increasing at a rate
of 60 per cent a year. The super magnetic limit
at a density between 20 and 40 Gbpsi is being
attempted. Currently efforts are on for the
development of a combined
optical and
magnetic technique. The IBM along with 10
other companies has been making efforts to
reach 100 Gbpsi storage capacity using
traditional magnetic storage technologies.

2.1

Magnetic Disc

Magnetic discs replaced the magnetic
drums during 1956-57. RAMAAC 305, the first
hard disc introduced by IBM, used 50 numbers
of two-feet diameter discs to store 5 MB.
During 1970s, several advances in the field
resulted in discs of larger capacities, higher
capabilities and lower costs. Removable disc
packs/drives are also used for large volume^ of
data. Later, the non-removable Winchester
technology overtook the removable disc packs.
The microcomputer started with S MB hard
DESIDOCBulktinof Inf Technd, 2000,20(5)

disc drives in 1980; it
reached 2.5 GB in
1996. Since 1950s, the average capacity of a
new computer's memory has grown 30 per
cent mainly to facilitate storing more data.
Since 1991, the capacity of the magnetic hard
disc drives in the best of the PCs has
accelerated to 60 per cent (3); it has moved
from a few MB to a few GB. Hard disc devices
have faster access time (10-80 ms) and can hold
several gigabytes of data.
There are many magnetic disc storage
devices. IBM developed the conventional
floppy discs (or diskettes) in 1965 for iinternal
use. These became the popular random access
secondary memory for microcomputers and are
available in 3.5; 5.25- and 8-inch sizes in single,
double and high densities. These are
inexpensive and each disc can hold more than
a million characters recording at 3,200 bits per
inch (bpi). The 5.25-inch floppy disc was
introduced in 1976. Its cousin, the 3.5-inch
floppy drive was introduced by Sony in 1984.
These facilitate a data transfer rate of 1.25 to
8 Megabits per second (Mbps) depending on
disc rotation speed and an access time of less
than 20 ms. The floppy disc became an integral
part of the computers right from its
introduction. These became undisputed
standards for removable storage and found
wide acceptance due to their inexpensive price
tag and cheaper transportability for sending
textual data, articles, books, reports, etc. to
distant locations; they still remain unchanged.
The Perfect PC of IBM, launched in 1981 had a
single-sided 160 KB, 5.25-inch floppy disc drive.
The 400-KB 3.5-inch discs with their higher
capacity and hard outer jacket came to be
preferred over the bigger floppy discs. Although
3.5-inch drives of 20 MB capacity and the
LS-120 drives with 120 MB capacity were
introduced, these are expensive and have not
found wide acceptance.

2.2

Magnetic Tape

Magnetic tape is a sequential access storage
medium. It is the slowest mass storage
technology currently in use and i s one of the
cheapest storage media. The low cost per bit of
stored data and large capacity makes it a
popular archival medium. The recording
medium is a thin polyester tape between
DESIDOC Bulletrn of Inf Technol, 2000,20(5)

0.38 and 2.54 cm wide, about 0.25 mm thick
and coated with magnetic particles. The
0.5-inch, 2,400-feet (730 m) tape has been the
industry standard since it was first introduced
commercially in 1953. The 9-track magnetic
tape at 6,250 bpi has a capacity to hold one
billion bits of data depending upon block and
record sizes. It records data at 9 bits per frame,
although18-track (18 bits per frame) high
density cartridge tapes fully enclosed in
5 ~ 4 x-inch
1
cartridge boxes are also available.
Steps are afoot to make, in the next few
years, the magnetic tape more like random
access medium and compatible to magnetic
discs. Tape-It of PGSoft company and Direct
Tape Access (DTA) of Seagate company are two
such efforts in this direction. The DTA, a
software utility, provides quicker access to
tape-based files. It relieves the user from using
dedicated backup software for storing and
retrieving files and is also available on Windows
platform (4). The data stored on a tape is either
longitudinal (fixed-head technology) or helical
(rotary-head technology); the latter allows
higher density of data storage. By using data
compression techniques, the storage capacity
of a tape can be improved. The storage
densities range from as low as 800 to 6,250 bpi,
although 38,000 bpi is also possible with some
newer tapes (5).
Magnetic tapes and cartridges are used to
store very large amounts of data that will not be
used frequently. In a library environment,
magnetic tapes can be used to take backup of
files/databases, online public access catalogue,
in-house developed software, backup of
archival files like circulation and acquisition
data. These may also be used for exchange of
large
databases
between
liharies.
A
comparison of parameters of different magnetic
tapes is provided in Table 1.

2.3

Cartridge Tape

After CD-ROM drives, cassette and cartridge
tapes are the most frequently used devices with
minicomputers and PCs.
These have
undergone many evolutionary changes. The
0.25-inch cartridge tapes are widely used with
workstations, usually to take backup of large
databases/files. These can store up to 5 GB of

Table 1: Comparison of magnetic tapes
Tape O'Pe
4 mm OAT
8 mm DAT

Typical reel

Tape length
60 m
90 m
60 ft
112 m

0.5"X2400 ft

1.3 (2.6)**GB
2 (4)** GB

Helical scan
Helical scan

1,869 tpi
1,869 tpi

Helical scan
10-track
Serpent, 22-track
Serpent, 48-track
9-track
9-track ,
1Etrack
18-track
26-track
26-track
Linear, 18-track
145#

Linear, 9-track

6,250

-

*: Data from sunsite.informatik.rwth-aachen.de/fortran/ch5-7.html& www.cit.ac.nz/smac/hfl00/hfl00m5a.html
**: with compressed software;QlC: quarter inch cartridge tape;
#: group coded recording

data. O f late, 4-mm and 8-mm video tapes are
also being used. These are lowcost and have
longer access time than the floppy discs.
A typical tape cassette can hold u p to 50 M B of
data with a density range of 6,400-10,000 bpi.
In contrast, a mainframe cartridge can store at
38,000 bpi and a 550-feet tape cartridge can
hold one GB data, the same amount as the
2400-feet, 0.5-inch tape (6). Cartridges (of the
same size) with shorter length hold less data;
but they are more reliable because the
influence of one tape winding on other
windings is less due to larger separation of the
magnetic coating.

drive, introduced in 1999, offers 30 GB for
cartridge.
A 50 GB version has also been designed for
computer servers. These cartridges, due to their
inherent slow access time, are not ideal for
digital audio or video users. But they can
facilitate full backup of the largest of the present
day's hard disc drives (7).

2.4

Digital Audio Tape

A standard IBM 3480 magnetic tape
cartridge (5X4X1-inch) can hold 10 GB data.
The Zip cartridge tape drives of lomega
company offered 100 M B each when they were
introduced in 1995. lomega had a base of over
20 million Zip drives and 100 million discs,
when in 1999 it introduced the Zip 250 M B
cartridge discs.

It is the most common device used for
archival storage and retrieval of large volumes
of data. Digital recording on magnetic tape was
developed for use in sound recordings in the
1970s and for the consumer market by the late
1980s. Digital recorders convert audio signals
into digital data on a magnetic tape by means
of a microprocessor (an analogue-todigital
converter) and reconvert the data back into
analogue audio signals (by means. of a
digital-to-analogue converter) for playback with
the amplifier of a conventional stereo sound

The Jazz drives of lomega offered initially
1 GB storage; they are now available with 2 GB
cartridges, which can store up to 4 GB using
compression software. The OnStream cartridge

In digital recording, sound waves are
sampled several thousand times per second and
transformed into a series of pulses that

6

DESIDOC Bulletin of lnf Technol, 2000,20(5)

correspond to patterns of binary numbers that
are recorded on tape (or optical disc). Digital
recordings provide higher-fidelity sound
reproduction-greater
dynamic range and
frequency response and less distortion-than
conventional analogue methods.
The only successful form of DAT recorder
commercially available at present is effectively a
miniature version of a video recorder, with
special metal particlecoated tape, 4 mm wide,
and can be carried in a very small cassette.
Data is recorded using a helical scan diagonally
across the tape's surface. Each cartridge can
hold several GB of data that can be accessed
quickly.
Although intended for ordinary domestic
use, the system has not been successful with
the general public, but it is now widely used for
professional purposes,
including
sound
recording for motion pictures. DAT machines
have also been adapted for the recording of
digital computer data, and to record sound,
which would not be picked up using other
means (8).

3. OPTICAL DISC STORAGE

TECHNOLOGY
With the technological developments in
computers and opto-electronics, optical storage
media have become popular. Although a variety
of technologies like magnetic tapes, cartridge
tapes, digital audio tapes, floppy discs,
removable hard discs, magneto-optical and
optical discs are available for use, users
generally prefer optical media due to their
obvious advantages like accessing time,
versatility,
multimedia
capabilities,
compactness, transportability, etc. The major
features of optical mass storage media include:
high optical as well as mechanical stability, high
optical resolution, easy handling, low recording
energy with high recording sensitivity, rewrite
and/or duplicate, and short recording time.
Other features include relative low cost, ease of
handling, compact size, and high portability.
Table 2 shows the chronology of developments
in the optical disc technology.
The Compact Disc (CD) technology is
around for about 18 Years. The first CD (audio)
was released in the market in 1982. The
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(5)

Compact Disc-Read Only Memory (CD-ROM)
appeared in market in 1985. Many types of
optical media, which flooded the market in the
past few years, met with variable degrees of
success. However, the success of CD-ROM was
phenomenal. Till recently CD-ROM was
synonymous with optical media and electronic
publishing. A wide range of optical devices/
technologies are available to suit every need of
the user. Broadly, the media can be grouped
into three categories, viz., read-only, write
once-read many (WORM), and erasable/
rewritable. y o s t of these are being used in
libraries, publishing, multimedia products, and
software/database distribution.
Read-only media includes analogue and
digital video discs, CD-audio, CD-ROM, hybrid
discs,
LV-ROM,
CD-Interactive
(CDI),
CD-Interactive Video (CD-IV), CD-Video
(CD-V), Digital Video Interactive (CVI), Digital
Video/Versatile Disc (DVD), Photo-CD, Data
and Optical ROM (DROM and OROM), optical
card, optical film and optical tape; the WORM
media include write once-read many discs,
CDRecordable (CD-R), CD-PROM, recordable
videodiscs, digital optical discs (with diametres
of 5.25, 8, 12 and 14 inches), optical card, and
optical paper; and the erasable/rewritable
media include Erasable Programmable Memory
(EPROM) discs, CD-Erasable (CD-El also known
as CD-Rewritable, CD-RW) discs, phase change
and magneto-optic devices (1,9). Most of these
have a typical 650 MB storage capacity
although a few (for example, erasable discs and
DVD) have capacities up to and above 2 GB,
with an exception of optical card, the storage
capacity of which is 2 MB upwards.
Optical discs are nonmagnetic, removable
devices. The various optical recording
techniques include pit forming (ablative), alloy
mode,
bubble forming,
dye polymer,
magneto-optical and phase change. However,
the pit forming technique is widely employed.
In this process, a laser beam is focussed on the
recording layer, which creates enough heat to
melt a spot (pit), where the data is recorded.
The pits thus created are in the range of 0.6 to
1.Imicron wide and 0.1 2 micron d e e ~ .The
spiral tracks created are 1.6 microns apart (from
each other) corresponding to about 16,000
7

Table 2: Evolution of optical media
Year

Product

Remarks

1980

CD-Audio

Standard created for CD digital audio

1982

CD-Player

First CD and CD player introduced

1980s

WORM

Write-once-read-many disc introduced

1984

CD-Player

Portable and first car CD player introduced

1985

CD-ROM

Standard announced

1987

CD-ROM

Single speed (1X) drive introduced

1988

CD-RW

Introduced

1989

CD-I

Standard announced

1989/1990

CD-R

Introduced and becomes success

1990

CD-ROM

Double speed (2X) drive introduced

1992

DVD-ROM

Introduced

1994

CD-ROM

Quad-speed (4X) drive introduced
Drive becomes part of PC configuration

1995

CD-ROM
DVD
CD-E

Hexa-speed(6X) drive introduced
Combined format agreedlreleased
Announced

1996

CD-ROM

8X to 12X speed drives introduced; Prices of drives fall below
US$250
Price fall below US$ 500
Introduced

CD-R drive
CD-RWICD-E
1997

CD-RW/CPE
DVD

I

CD-ROM

Backward compatibility introduced
Consortium of companies was replaced by DVD Forum to
handle future issues
24X drive introduced

1998

DVD-ROM
DVD-RAM/DVD+RW

DSDL DVD introduced
lntroduced

1999

CD-ROM

48X drive introduced

tracks per inch (tpi-in comparison, floppy discs
have up to 94 tpi and Winchester magnetic
discs have less than 1,000 tpi). While reading,
the optical head scans the disc for the presence
or absence of pits with a low power laser beam.
Though erasable and rewritahle optical
systems have been developed, they have not
become affordable to common user and so are
slow in making their entry in the market place.
Most of the existing optical discs are read-only
or recordable type. Once information is
recorded in these discs, it is permanent. This
disadvantage has becodme advantageous in
cases such as distribution of software,
document storage and retrieval, and consumer
applications like games and entertainment.
8

However, given the general failure of CD-I,
CDV, DAT and digital compact cassette, it is
unlikely that all optical media would be highly
successful. One has to wait and see. Some of
the optical media, that have potential
applications in the library and information field,
are briefly dealt in the following sections.

3.1

Read-Only Optical Media

3.1.1 Videodisc
Videodiscs are read-only media used for
distribution and display of analogue video
information. Videodiscs allow random access,
and are aimed at domestic market. However, as
they do not allow recording,
-. they have not yet
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(5)

become as poplar as Video Cassette
Recorders (VCRs) which the videodisc players
were expected to replace. The most commonly
used videodisc system is known as a laser disc
system.
Videodiscs are available in two sizes, in 8and l2-inch diametre, the latter being more
common.
Information is
recorded in
microscopic pits and a l2inch disc contains
about 14 billion pits in about 54,000 spiral
tracks on each side of the disc. In the constant
linear velocity (CLV) recording, the drive speed
ranges from 600 to 1,800 rpm with the
innermost track hdding one frame and outer
most track three frames. In the Constant
Angular Velocity (CAV) recording, each track
holds only one frame and the drive speed is
constant at 1,800 rpm. The CAV discs allow
random access, freeze frame, step frame, and
multi-speed play back. Audio information can
also be recorded along with video (mostly
motion pictures). As the main objective is to
provide maximum play back time, the CLV
mode recording is used, and a 12-inch disc can
hold 60 minutes video on each side. The CAV
discs are used in interactive environments such
as training and education, and how-to-do type
applications (9,lO). Efforts have been made in
examining the use of interactive videodiscs as
publishing medium. These link a videodisc
player with a microcomputer and allow the
interfacing of computer graphics with text and
moving pictures. The potential of such a
technology in the educational field is immense.
Other major types of videodiscs include the
Video High Density- (VHD), Capacitance
Electronic Disc (CED), Optical Memory Disc
Recorder (OMDR) and Direct-Read-After-Write
(DRAW). Each of these differs from the
standard videodisc in some way. DRAW discs
are compatible with the laser disc and are made
by recording directly on a specially prepared
disc.

3.1.2 Compact Disc-Read Only Memory
In recent times, CD-ROM drives have
become a part of the standard configuration of
a PC, be it for corporate, academic, R&D or
home usage. It has become a de facto drive
along with the 3.5-inch floppy disc drive. The
growth
of
multimedia
tides,
names,
DESIDOC Bulktin of Inf T i d , 2000, 20(5)

entertainment and cheap availability of
videodiscs, and the latest trend in software
distribution through CDs made CD-ROM discs
and drives more popular. Also, there is a
gradual increase in the digital information
component in R&D, corporate and academic
libraries, which are moving towards handling
digital information slowly, New libraries are also
joining the stream by slowly introducing
CD-ROM databases. It is the first practical
technology for mass distribution, which is suited
to the developing countries where the
communication infrastructure is rather poor. All
these factors are making CD-ROM more and
more popular for the office as well as home
usage.
The CD-ROM, a 12cm and 1.2-mm thick
disc can hold approximately 650-680 million
characters (650680 MB) equal to about
2,70,000 pages of (A4) plain text or about
60,000 suitably compressed images. The
advantages of CD-ROM are its huge storage
capacity, durability, transportability, light
weight, easy and faster (-200 ms) access to and
noncorruptibility
of stored information,
immunity to magnetic fields and amenability for
parallel searching by multiple users in a Local
Area Network (LAN) or Wide Area Network
(WAN) environment. CDROM, the 'digital'
papyrus, has become synonymous with
electronic publishing. Due to these qualities,
the publishers of scholarly periodicals, reference
books (including encyclopedias, dictionaries,
handbooks, catalogues, etc.),
multimedia
products, and bibliographic databases have
increasingly used it. Almost all software
released in the market is now distributed on
CD-ROM.
The popular applications and pknetration of
CD-ROM in the market can be observed from
the number of CD-ROM discs, drives and
products sold during the last few years. About
1.1 million CDROM discs were pressed in
January 1992 which by December 1992 rose
four-fold to 4.4 million. The number of
CD-ROMs sold during the last quarter of 1993
was more than the total number sold during the
previous three quarters of the year.
The installed base of CD-ROM drives was
2.3 million in 1990 (11) which in 1995 rose to

37 million and was expected to reach 100
million drives by 1998 (12). Due to the use of
multimedia products, this is increasing further. A
majority of PCs sold are bundled with CD-ROM
drives. A 63 per cent growth of CD-ROM titles
was achieved during 1992 and 1993, and it was
expected to grow more than 300 per cent
during 1993 and 1995. According to the 1995
edition of the CD-ROM Directory of TFPL, there
were about 9,500 titles in market in the autumn
of 1994 (this includes published titles only and
does not include out of print discs and in-house
published titles), which represents 50 per cent
growth over the titles available in the previous
year (avtumn of 1993).
In general, full text databases (titles) account
for 40 per cent sources followed by
bibliographic (25 per cent) and reference works
(16 per cent) respectively (13, pp. 118-124).
Table 3 shows the growth of CD-ROM drives
and titles during 1985-1999. The New Media
Directory of the Waterlow New Media
Information lists 3,269 publishers (out of a total
of 3,642) who are involved in e-publishing using
CD-ROM format, and 32,162 titles including
DVD-ROMs and DVD-Videos. Language-wise,
English accounts for little over 77 per cent
(24,850 titles) followed by German (- 10 per
cent, 5,519 titles) and French (- 9 per cent,
2,789 titles). Of these, 36 per cent account for
prices ranging between US$ 1-50 (14, p. 294,
296).
The speed of CD-ROM drives has changed a
lot from the time they were introduced in the
late1980s. The single speed (1X) drive (at a
transfer rate of 150 kbps) of 1987 has been
replaced by the double-speed (2X) drives in the
early 1990s which in turn gave way to 4X drives
in 1994, 6X drives in 1995, and 8X, 1OX and
12X drives in 1996 which were replaced by 24X
drives (a transfer rate of 3.6) in 1997. Now CD
drives up to 48X speeds are available in the
market. This speed is progressing further.
The prices of CD-ROM discs and drives are
also falling steeply making it within the reach for
many home users. Table 4 shows the cost per
MB storage of three media. The high cost of
hard disc off-sets its highest retrieval speed.

Table 3: The growth of CD-ROM titles and
drives in the market*

Year

No. of CDROM CD-ROM drives
titles
(millions)

1985

1

NA

1986

42

NA

1987

96

NA

1988

160

NA

* Note : Adapted from Herther (12), Purcell ( I 1) and de
Stricker (15); NA : not available, # : estimated. The number
of CD-ROM titles (quoted here from de Stricker ( 1 5) may
vary depending upon the directory the author is quoting
The authors came across three difterent directories quoted
by authors of papers and all the figures with respect to the
CD-ROM titles are different. It has been observed that the
figures are higher in the CDROM Directory published by
TFPL, UK. This may be due to the scope, coverage and
perception of the publisher as to what is to be included in
the directory.

3.1.3 Library Applications of CD-ROM
The contents of CD-ROM products generally
include abstracts, databases, full-length articles,
images, audio and software. CD-ROM
databases are cost-effective. CD-ROMs have
many library-specific applications. CD-ROM
offers a number of advantages as well as
avenues for applications and not surprisingly,
libraries are major customers of CD-ROM
products.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(5)

Table 4: Cost per MB for some of the mass
storage media*
Device

Unit price Capacity Cost per MB
(Rs)
(MB)
(Rs)

Hard disc 5,000
6,200
CDR
Floppy
discs

55
85

4,300
8,400

-1.1 6
-0.74

650
0.08
14.4(1OX -5.90
1.44)

As on April 2000

Many authors attempted comparison of
CD-ROM databases with their printed
counterparts (16-19). The uses of CD-ROM
databases are given below. They:
(a) Facilitatecollection development, evaluation,
print
purchase orders,
produce card
catalogue and quantitativelcitation studies as
databases like Books-imprint Plus with about
2 million records and a number of indexes
offer such flexibility;

(b) Serve as reference tools;
(c) Support current awareness service (CAS) and
selective dissemination of information (SDI)
as it is possible to provide contents, abstracts,
full text etc and also facilitate information
retrieval by a specific journal name;
(d) Allow expanded quality of. services,
enhanced number of users, exhaustive
coverage of information at little or no extra
cost or time;
(e) Are viable and cost-effective alternatives to
online searching, though not as current as
online databases (now the currency problem
is being solved by the online hybrids);

(f) Facilitate

library
automation,
retroconversion of bibliographic data as well as
cataloguing since many OPACs of individual
or groups of libraries are available on
CD-ROMs;

(g) Are amenable for retrospective searching as
back files are also available in many cases;
(h) Facilitate networking, library cooperation,
searching by multi- and remotely-located
users, and resource sharing;

(i) Help in saving of resources as less-used
journals can be discontinued if they are
included in bibliographic databases and only
those articles needed from such journals can
be procured based on CAS and SDI services;
(j) Involve lesser transit delays and provide more
current information than print media;
(k) Enhance the image of the library and serve as
excellent public relation tools, especially in
the present environment of marketing of
information products;
(I) Allow exchange of bibliographic data,
software, etc.; and
(m) Are ideal for archival purposes of gray
literature like internal reports, newspapers,
reports, standards, and patents.

3.1.4 DVD
Digital Videodisc (DVD) is similar to a
CD-ROM in appearance. In 1996, the
developers of the DVD agreed upon a common
standard and as a result, it became to be known
as digital versatile disc. In simple terms, DVD
offers far greater data density, smaller recording
pits, more closely-spaced tracks, and backward
compatibility with CD-ROM. Many variant
forms of DVD have been launched (in both
12-cm and 8 c m sizes) and a few are under
various stages of development. Some of these
include DVD-Video or simply DVD, DVD-ROM,
DVD-R, DVD-RAM and DVD+RW. A m o ~ g
these DVD-R, DVD-RAM and DVD-Audio are in
the pipeline. Ultimately, DVD is expected to
replace CD-ROM in near future. The DVD
systems for music, motion-picture and
entertainment market are known as players
while the computer-based DVD systems are
known as DVD-ROMs. The former is a 12cm
size disc with a thickness of 0.12 cm, having a
track pitch of 74 micrometres. It uses laser
diodes of 635-650 nanometeres, and can hold
4.7 GB data per side per layer. The DVDs are
developed in four forms, viz. the single-side
single-layer (SSSL), single-side double-layer
(SSDL), double-side single-layer (DSSL), and
double-side double-layer (DSDL). Data transfer
rates are varied, but an average 4.7 Mbps is
achieved for image and sound.
The DVD-ROM is a 5.25-inch diametre disc.
The DVD-ROM drives up to 5X have been

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(5)

11

tested and higher speeds are expected. Unlike
CD-ROM drives where each X represents a
data transfer of 150 kbps, in DVD drives it
equals 1350 kbps, i.e., 9 times that of the
CD-ROM data transfer speed. The use and
popularity of DVD-ROM is steadily growing. It
is estimated the demand for it in the market is
expected to grow steeply in the coming years
(20, 21). According to a forecast in the PC
Magazine, by the year 2000, the sale of
DVD-ROM drives should surpass the sales of
CD-ROM drives (22). It was reported that
twenty per cent of desktop computers received
by PC World each month for review are fitted
with DVD-ROM drives. It is also possible to
upgrade CD-ROM drives to DVDROM drives
(23). The CD-ROM drives may become
'obsolete' but not the CD-ROMs as the
DVDROM drives have backward read
compatibility with CD-ROMs, and forward
compatibility with future read/write and
write-once discs. Thus one can play a CD-ROM
on a DVD drive, but DVD discs cannot be
played on CDROM drives. Also, DVD-Video
cannot be able to play a DVD-ROM. Some of
the features of DVD have been compared
with that of CD-ROM in Table 5.
The first generation, SSSL DVD with its 4.7
GB capacity can accommodate the entire
Encyclopedia Britannica in 15 languages with
index to every word. The DSDL DVD holds 17
GB of information (25 times the storage
capacity of a CDROM), equivalent to 8 hours
full-motion video including sound and
additional data tracks. The use of DVD-R discs
at present are restricted to data archiving,
Table 5: Comparison of features of CD-ROM
and DVD

Feature
Diametre

CD-ROM
12 cm

DVD
12 cm
1.2 mm
1.2 mm
Thickness
(2x0.6 mm)
Laser Wavelength 780 mm
635 nm
Track Pitch
1.6 microns 0.74 microns
Track Length
5.4 km
12 km
Data Layers
One
One or two
Data Sides
One
One or two
DataTransfer Rate NA
1350 kbps
-.

-

distribution and DVD content development.
This is mainly because of prohibitive costs of
DVD-R recorders. The application of DVD-RAM
and DVD+RW include data archiving, software
development video and audio editing, and
recording one's own optical discs (24).
Although CD-ROM publishing is still going
strong, many publishers are looking towards
DVD as the new medium for e-publishing.
Multimedia publications like encyclopedias
need more than one CD; this necessitates user
to swap CDs while accessing information. This
problem is solved by using DVD. The market is
encashing this advantage as revealed by the
growth in the number of companies involved in
DVD publishing. The DVD Directory of the
Waterlow New Media Information covered
more than 1220 companies active in DVD
publishing in May 1999, a growth of 20 percent
from the previous year (14). The multimedia
industry i s already exploiting the technokgy.
Many reference sources have been made
available on DVD. MEDLlNE Advanced,
bibliographic
database
of
hlternational
biomedical literature containing ober 8 million
citations and abstracts of artick from 3,700
journals published from 70 comries has been
brought out by Silver Platter; The December
1997 issue of E-Media Prof&sional listed 400
DVD titles (15). These hclude Multimedia
Encyclopedia of Graphic Zone/Grolier, Animal
Planet of Discovery Channel, Vanishing
Wonders of the Sea of kmeria, Encyclopedia of
Electronica of Xiphias, etc. The 1999 edition of
the Directory included 2318 DVD-Videos and
118 DVD-ROM titles. Film studios are releasing
more DVb Videos year after year, leading to
the rapid growth of the DVD industry; they
accounted for 20 per cent growth in 1999. The
Directory 7999 lists 99 companies involved in
DVD-ROM publishing and 77 companies who
brinz out OVD-Videos (14).
Recently
some
DVD
multimedia
encyclopedias such as Microsoft Encarta
Rekrence Suite (containing Encarta 99, Encarta
Virtual Globe 99, and Microsoft Bookshelf 99x),
Webster's International DVD Encyclopedia,
Encyclopedia Electronica, Funk & Wagnall's
Multimedia Encyclopedia, Britiw#?r:a DVD 99
and Crolier Multimedia Encyclopedia have been
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Jechnol, 2000,20(5)

published. All the volumes of 109 years of the
National Geographic Magazine has been
accommodated on just 4 DVDs.
Some of the benefits of DVD are:
(a) Its use as a single interchange standard to
provide unification for computer, consumer
electronics and entertainment industry;
(b) Its backward read compatibility with existing
CDs, and future compatibilitywith readlwrite
and WORM discs;

near future. The optical tape will become
acceptable medium for long-term archiving, as
the magnetic medium is prone to degradation
by creep, track deformation and print-through,
and necessitates data transfer to new magnetic
tapes once in a few years. The present data
transfer rates of 3 Mbps is expected to reach to
about 10 Mbps by the year 2000. By reducing
tape thickness to 0.025 mm and using lasers of
415 nm wavelength one would be able to
record 200 GB data on optical tapes in the near
future (25).
4

(c) Its utility as a single file system for all disc
types;
(d) Its low cost;
(e) It does not need for mandatory containers for
playing discs;

(f) Its reliability in data storage and retrieval
including error correction capability for
ROMs and rewritable discs;
(g) Its high online capacity of 8.5 GB on a single
side (or 17 GB on both sides);
(h) Its high performance for sequential and
non-sequential data (20).
If the rapid developments in the field are any
indication, we can expect notebook PCs with
built-in DVDROM drives (with backward
compatibility to use CD-ROMs) in the near
future.

3.1.5 Optical Tape
In general, tapes are characterised by high
volumetric density. A tape uses its surface area
more effectively than a disc. While 80 per cent
of a 0.5-inch tape is available for recording, only
50 per cent of a 5.25-inch disc is available for
data recording. Further, the tape substrates are
gradually going thinner, from 0.076 to 0.013
mm. By using optical recordindretrieval
techniques, it is possible to achieve higher
storage in tapes (than magnetic technology) just
as it is achieved in the case of optical discs. And
for the same areal density, optical tape has
25 times the volumetric density of CDs now
and probably 75 times their density in future.
Optical tapes also support high data transfer by
using parallel readlwrite channels. The optical
tape is expected to be a low-cost storage
medium and give way to optical cartridges in
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(5)

3.2

Write OnceRead Many Media

When introduced in the early 1980s, no
standard format was available and WORM
optical discs appeared in 5.25-, 8-, 12- and
14-inch sizes. However, in the 1990s the 5.25and 12-inch discs and drives started stabilising.
The data storage capacities depend upon the
number of recording surfaces, which can vary
from one to four. A 5.25inch disc can hold
400 MB to 1.2 GB whereas its 12-inch
counterpqrt can hold from 2 to 6.6 GB of data.
Using jukebox technology, this could be
increased further for archival storage of
enormous volumes of data (9,26). CD-R and
DVD-R are the two important WORM
technologies having potential applications in
libraries.
Initially the WORM optical discs were not
meant for publishing applications; rather these
were introduced for use in digital audio and
video market. Later, after realising their
potential, these were adapted for low cost, high
capacity, computer storage peripherals. In a
WORM disc, data can be recorded only once,
but can be retrieved any number of times. The
recorded data is immune to erasure and
rewriting is not possible. So, WORM discs are
ideally suited for archival applications in
libraries, banking and insurance sectors.
The major problems in the production of
CD-ROM were the high data preparation and
mastering costs. However, it has low cost of
replication (preparing multiple number of
copies from the master). The prices of CD-ROM
have been falling steeply since its introduction
in the market. The introduction of CD-R (or

WORM) in the market in recent times, makes
the medium much cheaper. While the earliest
WORM discs were of 100 or 200 MB capacity,
the latest ones (CD-R) can store up to 600 MB
of data. Standardised in 1989, CD-R became a
tremendous success with corporate and
professional set-ups. It is fast catching up with
CD-ROM in popular acceptance and usage. It
has been estimated that there were 2 million
units of CD-R hardware (as against 37 million
CD-ROM drives) in 1995 which was expected
to reach 27 million (against 100 million
CD-ROM drives) by 1998 (12). If the market
trend is any indication, the gap between the
two w w l d be lesser than the predicted one.
Just as the blank audio and video cassettes and
floppy discs outsell the prerecorded ones,
CD-Rs too are expected to outsell CD-ROMs in
a few years.
The cheap availability of CD-R drives which
were too expensive till recently, makes it easy to
create a CD-ROM of one's own databases for a
paltry sum. JVC's Personal RomMaker, HP Sure
Store CD-Writer 4020i, Olympus Deltis
CD-R2/ISA, Optima Discovery 650 CD-R, Sony
Spressa 920 and Philip's CDD 522 Compact
Disc Recorder are a few recording devices.
Each of these includes suitable software
bundled with them which allows users to
pre-master and master their own CD-ROMs
inhouse. These are available on both PC and
Mac versions.
Even mastering of CD-ROM has come of
age with cheaper mastering costs under clean
laboratory conditions (27,28). Appropriate
software is used to record information on the
CD-R as per a CD standard. A number of
indigenous retrieval software are also available
ranging from as less as Rs 5,000. The recorded
CD-Rs can be used in the same way as the
CD-ROMs.
Starting 1996, the prices of CD-R hardware
as well as blank discs have been slashed. This
has, no doubt, encouraged in-house production
system. This is economical and versatile as
producing one's own CD takes only about 45
minutes to an hour. At present 8X (i.e.,1200
kbps) speed is common. This may further
improve when the recording speeds increase
(supported by user-friendly CD-writer software)

and when the CD-R hardware is customized to
include built-in hard drives or tape drives to
make recording more convenient.
CD-R is found to be useful for in-house
publishing of large data files, creating
multimedia products,
downloading and
distribution of shareware. It is an ideal archiving
medium for in-house databases, as the user can
simply download the data from the computer
system on to the recordable disc. CDR is also
a medium for capturing, storage and retrieval of
coded data, text, scanned images and even
voice. However, it is not a primary publishing
medium.

3.2.2 DVD-R
DVD-ROM is a read-only format and does
not allow the creation of back up of huge data
files or distribution discs of software, etc. To fill
this gap DVD-R and DVD-RAM have been
introduced in the market in 1998. DVD-R discs,
analogous to CD-R, allow information to be
written once and read subsequently any
number of times.

3.3

Erasable/Rewritable Media

The erasable optical media is regarded as
the third generation optical storage device
technology. There are two types of optical
discs, viz., CD-Rewritable (CD-RW, also known
as CD-Erasable or CD-E) and DVD-RAM/
DVD+RW, which are amenable for writing,
erasing, and rewriting data any number of
times.

3.3.1 CD-RW
Although introduced in 1988, CD-RW
technology was made available in 1996 and
met with tremendous success. CD-RW discs
differ with WORM discs in that these allow
erasing and rewriting over stored data. In the
5.25-inch size, they resemble magnetic discs
and provide random access. However they are
slower with about 650 kbps data transfer rate
and access time of 70-120 ms (as against
1.25-8 Mbps and <20 ms, respectively for
magnetic discs). These discs like magnetic
media, are amenable to store, read, record,
erase and re-record data on the same area of
the disc any number of times. This property
makes it a potential contender for computer
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(5)

peripheral applications, where the files are
regularly retrieved and re-recorded. This
technology is expected to compete with
magnetic disc storage as it offers higher storage
capacity, lowcost drives, durability, unlimited
off-line storage and automatic disc handling
through jukebox. Due to falling prices, the
CDRW drives have become affordable making
them ideal alternative mass storage devices.
This trend would continue as the multi-read
specifications
make.
CD-RW
media
read-compatible with CD-R and in future with
CDROM and drives. Although the market for
CDROM is still growing, it is expected that, by
the year 2000, the recordable and rewritable
optical storage will represent up to 40 per cent
of the total optical disc drive market (7). A CDRW can hold about 2.5 GB per side, i.e., 5 GB
per disc. By the year 2000, a DSDL CDRW disc
may be available which can hold 10 GB of data.
While CD-R discs are cheap (in India Rs 55
approx), CD-RW discs are costly (US$ 10-15
each). Table 6 shows the current and projected
sales of CD-RW drives (29).

two different groups of developers with
compositions of different companies that are
behind DVD-RAM and the DVD+RW formats.
In the DVDRAM, data are recorded both
within the grooves and on the lands between
grooves, whereas in the latter the data
recording is done only inside the grooves. Also,
both have different ways for recording physical
address information which resulted in increased
capacity of DVD+RW format (30). DVD+RW is
compatible with most of the DVD players
whereas the DVD-RAM is not. This is reflected
in the ac~eptance and sales (Table 6) of
DVD+RW (29). DVD-RAM drives can copy
3 15 MB of data in about 12 minutes. These are
flexible for reading and writing DVDRAM discs
(up to 5.2 GB). These drives can also read
CD-ROM, CDR, CD-RW and DVD-ROM discs.
However, they cannot create discs in CDROM,
CD-R or CD-RW formats. Some newer (and not
the older) DVD-ROM drives can read the
DVD-RAMS. The DVD+RW drives are
compatible with DVD-ROM, CD-ROM, CD-R,
and CD-RW, but are not compatible with
DVDRAM.

Table 6: Sales of CD-RW and DVD+RW drives
during 1998-2002

3.3.3 Optical Discs and Electronic
Publishing

Year

Optical discs have become synonymous
with electronic publishing (e-publishing).
CD-ROMs, videodiscs and online bibliographic
databases form a major part of the e-publishing
field. CD-ROMs have penetrated all branches of
professional and scholarly publishing. This is
because of success of the CD-ROM as the
optical medium of choice for the publishing
industry and also due to its acceptance by
major libraries around the world. Durability,
capability to hold large volumes of data, and
affordability are the importah factors for the
success of CD-ROMs. Many publishers
including
McGraw-Hill,
Wiley,
Elsevier,
North-Holland, Meckler, Grelier, Prentice-Hall,
Oxford University, etc. have all ventured in this
area. CDROMs are slowly inching towards
replacing microform documents primarily due
to their versatility, low cost and ease of use. The
usability of CDROMs in a networking
environment made this technology more
attractive and acceptable to the library
community.

CD-RW

DVD+RW

1998

4.1

0.1 12

1999

10.5

0.545*

2000**

17.3

1.5

2002**

22.5

7.3

'till September 1999; " estimated

3.3.2 DVD-RAM and DVDkRW
The DVDRAM disc permits an unlimited
number of writings on to and reading from the
disc, and is analogous to the CD-RW format.
Whereas DVD-R discs can hold 3.9 GB of data,
the capacity of DVDRAM holds 2.6 GB.
DVD+RW, a variant of DVD-RAM, is also a
read/rewrite disc with a capacity of 3 GB. The
main difference between the two f6rmats is that
the DVD-RAM requires a special cartridge to
hold the disc since handling can spoil the
sensitive surface of the disc; this cartridge is not
required by DVD+RW (24). This is the result of
DESIDOCBulletin of Inf Technd, 2000,20(5)

Electronic publishing replaced the printed
reference sources to a large extent; secondary
and some tertiary periodicals followed suit. The
primary journals embraced CD-ROM rather
slowly. Many publishers like Elsevier, ADONIS,
IEEE, Chemical Abstract Service, Cambridge
Science Abstracts, SCI, BIOSIS, UMI, INSPQC,
etc. are distributing primary, peer-reviewed
periodicals in CD-ROM format. The full-text
databases produced on CD-ROM during 1993
accounted for 47 per cent of the total CD-ROM
titles. In the coming few years, all the reference,
primary and secondary periodicals are expected
to be brought out as dual publications (in both
print and electronic forms) which later on will
be brought out in electronic form only.

FTP protocols later started providing access to
e-journals on the Net Current technology
provides hypertext links which connect
references to other articles/journals and other
Web files.

3.3.4 Hybrids
The choice of publication medium changes
as per the situational need and depends upon
various
considerations
including
cost,
availability of equipment, frequency of
updation, and other factors. In situations where
text, graphics and video (including animation)
are part of a publication, CD-ROM emerged as
the best medium for e-publishing. Networks,
intranets and lnternet became the publishing
media when the environment warranted
continuous updation. In such an hybrid
environment, CD-ROMs combined with online
networks have become popular and acceptable
hybrid publication media.

In recent times CD-ROM publishing systems
have been on the rise. Besides creating
searchable versions of databases and storing
them on CD-ROM, these allow anyone to
become a CD-ROM publisher/prqducer. These
systems facilitate libraries and other institutions
that are involved in creating databases of their
holdings (and archives) to produce CD-ROMbased searchable products and to market them.
The availability of recordable CD/DVD drives
has facilitated in house CD publishing.
However, these products do not find a place in
directories as the efforts are isolated, mostly
meant for internal use and are neither marketed
nor publicised.

The CD-ROM/online hybrids allow the user
searching a database or an encyclopedia on
CD-ROM to get connected through lnternet to
forums, e-publications, news services and chat
rooms relevant to the subject. Thus, Crolier
Electronic Encyclopedia includes more than
12,000 links through CompuServe (now with
America
Online,
AOL).
World Book
Encyclopedia (1998) of IBM links to a site
offering current news and updates to the CD.

The latest development in e-publishing is the
Web publishing. The World Wide Web is
offering limitless opportunities for becoming
one's own publisher. The Web provides
seamless access to the (published) information,
without any restriction. Many document
publishing systems enable lnternet publishing
and even support the indexing of unstructured
documents while providing full text searching
capabilities for users. lnternet document
publishing process, features of document
publishing systems including list of a few such
systems and document publishirlg on the Web
have been dealt in detail elsewhere (31-33). The
advent of Web publishing has facilitated speedy
publishing. Although initially these were
distributed in ASCII text files through listservs,
the Web browsers like Mosaic and Gopher or

Many major encyclopedias of 1998 offer
online connections. Database vendors like
Knight-Ridder
On-Disc
(Dialog),
and
LEXIS-NEXIS allow users access updated
information on their files being searched; these
also allow users of the respective CD-ROMs
save search strategies and then log on to the
online files to search and download results. A
number of CD-ROM periodicals (for example,
Medio Magazine) with online links have been
introduced. Some have links to Internet. AOL
also offers Compton's Interactive Encyclopedia,
and 2Market-a hybrid CD-ROM shopping
service; Time Almanac, multimedia games and
buyers guides (34). The Multimedia and
CD-ROM Directory of TFPL Multimedia listed
600 hybrid titles in mid-1997, an increase of
160 per cent from January 1997 (15). It is likely
that the same trend will be observed in future
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol,2000,20(5)

too.
Also many CDROM publishers are
offering their publications on Internet.

3.4

Volume Holographic Storage
Technology
-

Holographic storage technique facilitates
3-0 storage of data as against the 2-D storage
achieved by magnetic or optical routes. In
holographic memory, information is stored as a
pattern generated by two mutually coherent
beams split from the same laser source. A plane
wave serves as the reference beam.-When the
two beams intersect in a photosensitive
material, they form an interference, or fringe
pattern which is trapped by the material. At the
time of retrieval, when the recorded fringe
pattern is illuminated by the original reference
beam, the spatially modulated pattern is
produced through optical diffraction. In volume
holography, by exploiting the Bragg effect,
multiple interference fringe patterns are
superimposed in the same volume and
reconstructed without cross talk. To pack
several fringe patterns into one bcation, each is
recorded using a reference beam with a Bragg
angle unique to the pattern. This is achieved by
employing any of the three techniques in use.
In the first, a rotating mirror is employed to
deflect reference beam to different angles. The
second technique uses . a 2-0 array of
surfaceemitting semiconductor lasers to
generate angularly distinct beams. A third
technique employs lenses to convert the spatial
position of a beam source into a distinct angle.
Photo-polymers and photo-refractive class of
materials are used as volume holographic
materials. A 30x30 mm holographic card can
hold 1 GB data. Future developments in the
laser array, spatial light modulator, and volume
holographic paterial technologies would greatly
facilitate the success of volume holographic
storage as an acceptable mass storage
technology (25).

4. FUTURE TRENDS
The latest trend in optical media is towards
.High Density CD (HDCD), DVD, and
-introducing a 24 GB disc. These drives when fit
into jukeboxes, for greater automated access of
DESlDOCBulktin of Inf Technd, 2000,20(5)

data, may provide thousands of GI3 (depending
upon the number of platters in a jukebox).
Hybrid jukeboxes which can accept CDs,
optical discs, or digital linear tapes to provide
storage capacities of the order of a few
Terabytes (TB) are being developed. While
CD-R brought the premastering and mastering
to the desktop; efforts are underway to develop
variant products of CD and DVD with
enhanced or new features. The DVD family is
expected to replace CD-ROM and its variants.
An erasable or rewritable medium has
potential multimedia applications. The digital
technology is diminishing the gap between
entertainment and information, and education
and recreation, With enhanced data transfer
rates and a few GB online capacity, DVD is
being seen as a replacement to VCR. By the
turn of the century, the market for CDROM is
expected to be surpassed by DVD drives which
is likely to touch 80 millions (20). DVD drives
include an add-in card to handle MPEG-2
(Motion Picture Expert Group-2) video and this
will make it popular for home viewers in the
years to come. A DVD recorder may be used to
record programmes digitalfy instead of on
videotapes.
However, it should be pointed out that the
multiplicity of players always led to
disagreement in standards resulting in customer
confusion. Except for the 800 to 1,600 bpi
magnetic tape, which withstood the test of
time, others have been fraught with
disagreement and incompatibility, amongst
their developers. Optical storage, unlike the
magnetic media which was regarded as
long-term archival standard, is used both for
online and archival applicatiops. This broad
range coupled with competition for market
share, resulted in a variety of form factors,
speeds, media formats, capacities and the
resulting disagreement on standards. Until an
agreement on a common standard for the
various factors is evolved, these pose problems
to the end-users.
One more problem raised by the technology
concerns with the shelf life. Many optical-media
claim a shelf life of 100 years and more. Since
no single standard is available for long-term
storage, the technology obsolescence factor is
17

to' be taken into consideration. The rate of
technological advances coupled with merges,
sell outs, and closures over the last few years in
these areas makes one to wonder if any of
these vendors will be there to support their
technology even a few decades from now. It is
also difficult to expect that the current
technology does not change further and will be
viable for a long period of time (35).
The magnetwptic technology is expected
to play a vital role in mass storage applications
in the near future. Also, volume holographic
storage, which is 3-D storage as against the
present 2-D storage, may be a strong contender
for mass storage (25). The scene may move
from-MBs and GBs to TBs and PBs (Petabytes).
Electronic trap technology and proximal probe
techniques using atomic force microscope or
scanning tunneling microscope are being
pursued towards finding an ideal mass storage
technology for the future. It may well be said
that we do not know as yet the technology for
mass storage in the year, say 2010 (4).

4.1

FMPROM

The latest in the storage technology area is
the
development
of
the
Fluorescent
Multi-layered (FM) technology. It enables to
store 140 GB on a single disc of regular-sized
(12 cm) FMD-ROM (Fluorescent Multi-layering
Disc-Read Only Memory). Unlike the CD-ROM
technology which is based on 2-0 optical
memory, the FMD technology is based on 3-0
fluorescence of chemicals in the pits and
grooves. When stimulated by a laser beam, the
fluorescent chemicals produce coherent and
incoherent light Data is stored only in
incoherent light, which allows multi-layering
making the device to have multi layers of stored
data that can be read simultaneously. The
technology is expected to be available in about
a year when FMD-ROM, a regular sized IOlayer
disc of 140 GB and a 30cm 1Wayer
FMD-WORM will be launched in the market
(36).

5. CONCLUSION
Libraries are the major purchasers of printed
publications (book-like documents, periodicals
and microforms) and are facing budgetary
constraints. They are hardly able to cope up
18

with the research output in conventional me
and resort to cancellation programmes
suffer in the collection development front.
introduction of m e d i a is straining the libra
further, since these too are treated as libr
materials and rarely extra budgets are provid
The irony is the ever growing e-media.
products competing for a larger share of the
budget for conventional media. And so the
subscription to journals are declining on an
average by 3-5 per cent per year which may
result in, a few years from now, many ceased
publications. Though there is an exponential
increase in the electronic products and
publications available in the market, print
publications are not decreasing; the market for
printed information at the end of 1997 was
substantially larger than yhat it was in 1992
(37). This makes it imperative that, the
print-on-paper documents will still be in the
field for some more time. Electronic journals
distributed online or on CD-ROM have
tremendous potential as complimentaries and
companions to their printed counterparts.
Scholarly paper publication is doubling
every few years ranging from 5 to 10 years
depending upon the nature of the subject field.
This amounts to about 15 to 7 per cent annual
increase which is much less than the speed of
microprocessors which doubles every 18
months (amounting to about 60 per cent
growth per year). In recent years, magnetic
storage capacities (tape) more than doubled
from 5 to 11-6 Gbpsi and is racing towards 40
Gbpsi. Digital storage of information was a
problem in the past.
The cost of digital storage is drop
steadily at about 40 per cent per year. In a
years the DVD+RW discs are expected to
sold cheaply (say, the present cost of
making the cost of one GB equal to 25
Based on these assumptions, Gilheany
calculated the costs of magnetic discs
magnetic storage in terms of GB and TB (e
to 100 or 1,00,000 scanned library boo
respectively) from 1992 through 2024. The c
of one GB disc (or one GB magnetic stora
will be less than one dollar in the year 2
and one cent in the year 2016. In the case

achieved in the years 2022 and 2030,
respectively.

Thanks are also due to Smt K Shailaja Reddy for
her secretarial assistance.

The areal density of computer memory
(hard disc) had a tremendous growth; from a
mere 2 kbpsi in the late 1950s it rose to 2
Mbpsi by 1981 and to the current 500 Mbpsi
(although some highend PCs offer 1.4 Gbpsi).
in the coming decade, this is expected to reach
between 50-100 Gbpsi. The super-paramagnetic
limit may curtail further improvement since the
magnetic effect may not be stable at this areal
density at room temperature (4). For the same
areal density, today's optical tapes offer 25
times the volumetric density of CDs and
possibly 75 times their density in future. These
developments will be having their implications
for the libraries as well.

REFERENCES

The pace of developments and the falling
prices make it possible to store all the world's
output in a basic subject field at moderate
expenses. Odlyzko (39) observed that all the
papers published in mathematics in both
journal and book form in a year would require
about 4 GB. This means that a magnetic disc or
a DVD would be sufficient for storing this
information. He also observed that the cost of
storing all the world's key mathematical
literature published till now will be less than the
subscription charges of a single core journal in
the subject field. It has been estimated that all
the mathematical papers published over the
preceding centuries may require about 50 GB
space only (if they were all in TW) for archival
purposes; however, for reliable access it may
need 1000 GB. In the near future the storage
requirements are likely to become more
ordinary and we can start thinking PCs with
1000 GB disc drives available in a decade or so
(39)) making anyone to have all the
mathematical papers on the desktop. As the
costs are coming .down, this may make more
number of libraries and individual users, to own
a particular core journal or all the documents
published in a given subject.

1.

2.

3.
4.

5.

6.

7.
8.
9.

10.

11.
12.

13.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors are thankful to Dr Mohinder
Singh, Director, DESIDOC for providing
facilities and permission to publish this paper.
--

--

DLSIDOC Bu//etinof lnf Techno!,2000,20(5)

14.

Chen,
Ching-Chih.
Multimedia
technologies. In World information report
1997/98. Unesco, Paris,l 997. Chapter 16,
pp. 206-25.
Tristram, Claire. The big, bad bit stuffers of
IBM. Technology Review, July-August 1998,
101(4), 445 1.
The Economist, 11-17 November 1995, 84,
107-09.
Stone, David M. Looking forward: Future
mas's storage; (and) emerging mass
storage-even faster and smaller. PC
Magazine, 25 March 1997, 16(6), 182-89.
Freeman, David N. Auxiliary memory. In
Encyclopedia of computer science, Ed. 3,
2V, edited by Anthony Ralston. Edwin D
Reilly, New York, 1993. pp. 855-62.
Plesset, Michael; Theis, Douglas & Chen,
Peter P. Computer storage technology. In
McGraw-Hill encyclopedia of science and
technology, Ed. 7, Vol. 4. McCraw-Hill,
New York, 1992. pp. 266-76.
O1MalIey, Chris. The gig is up. Popular
Science, February 1999,6870.
Encarta Encyclopedia, 1998.
Hendley, Tony. An introduction to the
range of optical storage media. In
CD-ROM: Fundamentals to applications,
edited by Charles Oppenhieim.
Buttorworths, London, 1988. pp. 1-38.
Press,
Laurence. Videodisc.
In
Encyclopedia of computer science, Ed.3, 2
V. edited by Anthony Ralston. Edwin D
Reilly, New York, 1993. pp. 1415-16.
Purcell, Lee. Super CD-ROM madness.
Sams, Indianapolis, 1995. p. 11.
~erther,Nancy K. CD-ROM at ten: The
technology and the industry mature:
Online, March-April 1995, 19(2), 86-93.
Brown, David J. (Cornp). Electronic
publishing and libraries: Planning for the
impact and growth to 2003. Bowker-Saur,
London, 1996.200 p.
Cater, Bethan. Facts and figures. Online &
CD-ROM Review, October 1999, 23(5),
289-96.

15. de Stricker, Ulla. New information
technologies: Possible implications for
libraries. Computgrs in Libraries, February
1998,6145.
6. El-Hadidy, Bahaa. The breakeven point for
using CD-ROM versus online: A case study
for database access in a developing
country. )I.Am. Soc. Inf Sci, May 1994,
45(4), 273-83.
17. Schmidt, D. & Davis, E.B. CD-ROM use in a
science library. Sci. Tech. Lib., 1994, 12(2),
29-41.
18. Sreedhar, M.S. Library applications of
CD-ROM with a case study of CD-ROM
system at ISRO Satellite Centre Library.
Paper presented in Workshop on CD-ROM
Technology, Bangalore, 22-24 February
1995. NAL, Bangalore,l995. pp. N1-N15.
19. Welsh, John J. Evaluation of CD-ROM use
in a government research library. CD-ROM
Professional, November 1989, 55-61.
20. Herther, Nancy K. Taking the compact disc
to new heights in power and function.
Online, September-October 1996, 20(5),
89-98.
21. Herther, Nancy K. CD-ROM to DVDROM.
Database, April-May 1998, 26-36.
22. Karney, James. CD-ROMs: Here today &
tomorrow. PC Magazine, 21 January 1997,
16(2), 172-81.
23. Goodwin, Michael. Taking DVD for a spin.
PC World, February 1999, 7(2), 143-54.
24. Shakkarwar, Rajesh. Host-based DVD:
Arriving on PC platforms today. intel
insight,
1998,
2(1),
8-1 9.
(http://developer.intel.com/ solutions.tech/
dvd/dvdprl 0.pdf).
25. Asthana, Praveen & Finkelstein, Blair. Super
dense optical storage. IEEE Spectrum,
August 1995,32(8), 25-31.
26. Ranade, Sanjay. Data storage media and
data recording devices. In Mass storage

Contributors

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.
37.
38.

39.

technologies. Meckler, Westport, 1991.
145 p. Chapter 2, pp 21-57.
Angus, Gordon & Thornton, Carl
Do-it-yourself CD-ROMs. PC Worl
January 1996, t6(l), 173434.
Hyon, Jason J- & Martin, Michael D. Sta
of the art: CD it yourself. Byte, June 19
21(6), 105-12.
Computers Today, 1-15 September 1999,
15(186), 25.
van Houten, Henk & Schleipen, Jean.
Optical data storage. Physics World,
October 1998, 33-37.
Cox, Jell. Publishing databases on the
Internet. Aslib Managing Information, May,
1995, 2(4), 30-32.
Marloux, Y. and Sevigny, M. Why SGM
Why now? )I.Am. Soc. Inf Sci., 1
48(7), 58492.
Rowley, Jennifer. Qocument publishh
systems. A review of current issues. Onlin
& CD-ROM Review, February 1999, 2
3-9.
Pack, Thomas. Greater than the sum of
their parts: CD-ROM/Online hybrids..
Online, March/April 1996, 20(2), 70-74.
Koulopoulos, Thomas M. & Frappaolo,
Carl. Imaging In Electronic document
management systems: A portable
consultant. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1995.
313 p. Chapter 4.
Madan, Pragya. 140 GB on one disk! PC
Quest, December 1999,314.
Crawford, Walt. Being analog: Building
tomorrow's libraries. 1999. 245 p.
Gilheany, Steve. The meaning of
publishing, speed, capacity and processing
power. Lib. Hi Tech.,. January 1'999, 17(1),
75-88.
Odlyzko, A. Tragic loss or good riddance?:
The impending demise of traditional
scholarly journals. (Ftp://netlib.att.com/
netlib.att.rnath. odlyzko/tragic.loss).

Shri A Lakshmana Moorthy is Scientist E and Joint Director,
DESIDOC, Metcalfe House, Delhi.
Dr CR Karisiddappa is Professor, Dept of Library and lnformation
Science, Karnatak University, Dharwad.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(5)

