DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 20, No. 5, September 2000, pp. 2125

© 2000, DESIDOC

Feature

Resumes: Screening Devices for Employers

Abstract

A resume can be considered as a tool to show a person’s background, skills,
knowledge, and experience and what he can offer that is unique for an organisation.
This article covers in brief what information can be included in a resume. It aiso
discusses in brief how electronic resumes are prepared and sent via e—mail.

1 . Introduction

A resume is the first interface a job seeker
has with his prospective employer. It is one of
the most important deciding factors in
determining whether one gets an interview with
the employer. A resume can be considered as a
tool to show a person’s background, skills,
knowledge, and experience and what he can
offer. that is unique for an organisation. A good
resume varies depending upon the type of job
one is applying for. The point is, one is selling
one’s own unique combination of skills, and
depending upon the job requirements, one
should present one’s work experience, skills,

and education to reflect his qualifications for a'

particular job through his resume. Resumes are
used as screening devices to determine a
candidate whom the employers can interview
and select.

Every person, regardless of the present stage
of his or her career, needs a good resume as
one may be seeking a job, wants a career
change or may get an unexpected job
opportunity. A resume serves as a guide for the
interviewer as well as an information source for
the candidate if he faces an interview
unexpectedly. One can customise his resume if
he is aiming at more than one job opening.

The resume is needed to be kept updated. It
should always reflect candidate's newly

2. Parts of a Resume

A resume must contain a certain amount of
essential information about the candidate. This
information may vary from person to person
depending upon qualification, experience,
special accomplishments, etc.

The following categories may be included:

6 Name, address, city, state, phone number(s),
and e—mail address

Carrier or Job objective
Summary of qualifications
Employment record

Education

Professional training
Professional affiliations
Knowiedge'of foreign languages
Publications

Special accomplishments

9.0.0.9...

A statement to the effect that references and,
ifapplicable, samples of previous work, will be
available on request

It is not necessary to include all these
categories. One can always consider what is
relevant to the position for which one is

applying.

acquired skills and experience.

 

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000, 20(5)

Name, Address and Telephone Numbers

Along with one’s full name, one should give
address, city, state, phone number(s), and e-mail
address where he can be communicated.
Nicknames and surnames, such as ’Junior’,
’Senior’, and ’ll’, should be dropped. All words
in the address should be spelled out (such as
'Street’, ’Apartments’, etc., and name of the
state). Pin code should always be mentioned.

The Career or job Objective

A clear and concise objective statement
describing the type of position one hopes to
obtain should be mentioned. This could be as
simple as a one or two word description of the
position one is seeking—documentation officer,
computer programmer, technical assistant,
library assistant, etc. This is optional as objective
is included in covering letter also.

One should avoid the ’all purpose’ type of
objective. Be specific and emphasise what one
can do for the employer, not how one hopes to
benefit from the position. Be cautious about
using overly ambitious statements. If one knows
the exact job description, define objective to
match the employer’s interests and needs.

Summary of Qualiﬁcations

A candidate can summerize his qualification
if his work experience has been varied and
spread out over a number of years before giving
further details and can present his personal
traits in a positive manner.

Example:

Have the ability to carry out programmes
under established policies and time frame and
also command the respect of staff. Problem
solving, leadership, team building, decision
making, and communication skills are some of
the qualities developed from my experience as
chief librarian, a supervisor and a customer
relations representative.

Employment Record

This section will follow education section if
one believes that education is most important
factor for the job. This is often true for
researcher’s, bachelor’s, and master’s degree
candidates at entry level positions and also for
the fields of teaching, engineering, law, and the
like. The total employment record shouid reflect

candidate's skills and make a positive impact on
the employer. Employment record can be listed
in several ways. In the chronological format,
one should list employment in reverse
chronological order (candidate's present or
most recent job first). One should emphasise
that his skills and experience will be valuable to
the employer. Most employers want dates of
employment and hence a candidate should
always indicate the period of experience in
years. lncorporate as many action verbs as
possible (but don’t go exaggerate).

Example:

ﬂ Participated in feasibility study and planning
of computerised reference services.

it Performed all functions necessary for the
preparation of manual and computer-
processed payables.

II Developed improved mailing system for
library bulletin.

One should tailor description of experience
according to job requirement. There is no need
to say why he left or wants to leave the present
job. This can be answered during interview.

Education

If one has just passed out of the school this
section precedes the employment history. With
little or no practical experience, a candidate's
academic credentials probably will be his
strongest asset; in this case, place them directly
after the objective statement. As one gains
experience, the academic credentials become
less important and are usually placed near the
end of the resume. An exception to this rule is
when the academic background is required for
the job as in the case of law or medicine.

Begin with highest level of educational
achievement. Here a doctorate will be followed
by a master’s degree, then a bachelor’s. If one
has not completed a college degree, list what
one can. Drop references to high school if one
has attended college or has received some
specialised training.

Degree, Diploma, or Certiﬁcate

List a degree, diploma, or certificate as was
awarded by the institution.

 

22

Name of the Institution

Give the name of the institution or
organisation where the learning took place.
One should include the entire name and not
abbreviation.

Location of Institution

Do not mention the city and state where the
college is located if it is obvious from the title.

Year

Mention the year in which candidate was
declared ’passed’ in his degree/diploma, etc. by
the corresponding institution.

Professional Training

it is advisable to separate education from
training. Include this section to focus on special
courses, world seminars or other forms of
continuing education. Training also includes
courses taken to improve job performance.
One should always mention those courses
which can be considered an added asset. For
example, one can mention that one is
computer literate and can be Useful for the
organisation.

Professional Affiliations

A candidate should mention associations
and memberships, which are directly related to
his career objective. It shows that he is up to
date in his profession. For persons making a
career change, a listing of professional
memberships in that new field demonstrates
that one is serious about his intent.

Foreign Languages

State any foreign languages one knows, level
of proﬁciency, and translating experiences (if
any).

Publications

Mention titles of papers, books, etc.

published, along with year of publication, and

name of journals. For papers presented in
conferences, along with title, the name, place
and year of conference should be given.

Special Accomplishments

Career changers, recent college graduates,
and women returning to work after an absence

DESIDOC Bulletin oflnl lechnol, 2000, 206)

The section can include achievements,
activities, social work, project awards, volunteer
experiences, state or national level awards, or
other related facts.

References

As most employers prefer to seek out their
own sources for references, it is not necessary
to list them in a resume. One can simply state:
’References will be furnished upon request’.

3. Keep in Mind

Always read and verify resume two or three
times and update it regularly. Check the
following points during its preparation:

Punctuation Mistakes

O Periods should be there at the end of all full
sentences.

0 Be consistent in use of punctuation.

0 Always put periods and commas within
quotation marks (i.e., Won five awards
incll'Jding the ’leS Award,’ in 2000.).

0 Avoid using exclamation marks.
Other Grammatical Mistakes

0 Do not switch tenses within the ’resume.
The duties currently performing should be
in present tense (i.e., write reports) and
already performed in past jobs should be
in past tense (i.e., wrote reports).

0 Capitalize all proper nouns.

0 When expressing numbers, write out all
numbers between one and nine (i.e., one,
five, seven), but use numerals for all
numbers 10 and above (i.e., 10, 55, 127).

O A sentence beginning with a numeral,
should have that numeral spelled out (i.e.,
Eleven cash awards won while employed).

0 Date formats should be consistent (i.e.,
12/11/99 or November 12, 1999, or
12.11.99. Choose one and stick to it).

Words Count

0 Avoid large paragraphs (five or six lines).
Write small sentences so that the resume
will be easily read and understood.

0 Use action words, i.e., wrote reports,

 

of years can benefit from including a special anSWGFEd queries, COHdUCIEd
accomplishments section. conferences.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000, 20(5) 23

0 Don’t use declarative sentences like ’I
conducted the....’

Potential Mistakes
Always check:
0 Dates of all previous employment.

0 Currency and correctness of address and
phone number.

Design is Important

0 Don’t overcrowd the resume; give plenty
of white space. It should be readable. Use
normal margins (1” on the top and bottom
and 1.25”on the sides).

0 Keep the resume to one page whenever
p055ible.

0 Use minimum number of fonts—two at the
most.

0 A font should be easy to read. Preferred
fonts are Arial, Courier, and Times New
Roman.

0 Do not overuse capitalisation, italics,
underlines, or other emphasising features.

0 At the top of the page, name, address, and
a phone number should be given.

0 Print resume on white or cream standard,
non-texttu'ed, fine-grained paper using a
good quality printer. The photocopy must
be clean and clear. The textured and
dark—coloured paper may not copy well
when employer makes copies to pass to
the selection committee.

0 Print on one side of the paper only.
Honesty is Must

O Employers feel satisfied hiring candidates
whose accomplishments can be verified.

0 There is a difference between making the
most of one's experience and
exaggerating or falsifying it. One can be
caught at the time of interview or later and
may face punishment.

4. Preparation of Electronic Resumes

To make the electronic resume the following
steps are needed:

Word Processor

Plain text (also called ASCII text or MS-DOS
text with three-letter file extension: .txt) is
universally accessible.

ASCII Text

ASCII is a standard, common text language
which allows different word processing
applications (such as MS Word) On various
computer platforms (a Macintosh or a PC) to
read and display the same text information. So
convert the resume to an ASCII file.

While Creating an ASCII Resume:

0 Avoid using special characters such as
mathematical symbols, bullets, etc., as
these do not get accurately and exactly
transferred. .

0 Use the spacebar instead of tabs as the
default for ASCII will make everything left
aligned. So for indenting a sentence or
centring one should use the spacebar.

0 Plain text format does not recognise
formatting, such as bold facing or italicised
text. Fonts will become whatever a
computer uses as its default face and size.
Bold face, italics and various sizes will not
appear in the ASCII copy.

0 One can use asterisks (*), plus, minus or
hyphen symbols (+ or —) and capital letters
to achieve similar effects. Use a 12-point
font such as Courier.

Looks are Less Important

Companies take the electronic resume
option more for getting the basic facts about
the applicant. One should pay more attention
to presenting key details and facts in a precise
and direct manner rather than emphasising on
aesthetics part of it.

Make Content Readable

0 Even in the absence of formatting features,
a resume should look legible and easily
readable. If possible set margins at 0 and
65 characters (in other words, the longest
line, including spaces takes 65 characters
befOre wrapping to a new line).

 

24

DES/DOC Bulletin oflnf Technol, 2000, 20(5)

6. Cover Letter

5. Sending Resumes through E—Mail
or the Web

These days most employers ask for an
electronic resume. Here a resume is prepared
on a computer in a format that can be sent over
email or the Internet i.e., a resume is needed to
be stored in a computer or a ﬂoppy diskette,
i.e., in an electronic format. But most important
is its format. No faxing or mailing is necessary.

Sending resumes through e-mail or‘the web
is quick and convenient, but it has some
difficulties:

I A person or an organisation may not be
willing or able to receive attachments with
email. They may nottbe having updated
version of the software.

I Avoid sendind a resume as an attachment,
as organisations may delete all e—mail with
attachments to safeguard against viruses.

While E-Mailing a Resume:

0 Include a cover letter and mention where
the advertisement was found.

0 Send the resume and cover letter in one
file. One may write cover letter in the
space before the resume.

0 Use the job title and/or job reference
number as the subject of the e-mail
message.

0 Follow up with an email or phone call after
a week or so.

DES/DOC Bulletin of lnl Technol, 2000, 20(5)

A cover letter gives the employers an
opportunity to evaluate a candidate’s ability to
communicate. From a cover letter an employer
may get insight about his ability to express
himself on paper, knowledge of the proper form
of a business letter, command on language, etc.

Here are a few points to consider when
putting a cover letter together:

0 It should draw employers to a candidate’s
resume. For example, “you can see from my
resume that l have the experience you are
looking for” may be a good way to do 50. One
should experiment with his own wording.

0 Keep it brief—no employer wants to read a
candidate’s life history.

, O Tailor it to the position and organisation to

which one is applying.

0 Begin by explaining the purpose of writing
and where one has heard about the job. One
can say something like "Your recent Times of
India advertisement caught my attention."

0 Always mention why one finds himself
suitable for the position/job. If the
advertisement gives job description, one
should refer to those skills in cover letter and
say how he fits in and mention his unique traits
and qualifying features.

0 Always remember to sign the cover letter.

0 Note ’enclosure’ or ’encl’ several lines after
signature because the re5ume is enclosed.

Alka Bansal

