DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol: 20, No. 6, November 2000, pp. 7-8

© 2000, DESIDOC -

Stock Verification of Electronic Publications: A Rejoinder

A. Lakshmana Moorthy

Dr. A. K. Dhiman, in his communication, has
raised certain issues regarding stock verification
of electronic publications. These issues assume
importance in the face of increasing digital
content in libraries and in the light of various
digital and virtual library projects undertaken.

1. PROBLEMS FACED BY LIBRARIES

The following are a couple of pertinent
points not raised in the paper by Dr. Dhiman
which if included, may provide a clear picture.

1.1 Software Locking

In the case of CD-ROM databases (as they
are popularly called), a typical problem faced
by the library is the software lock. Bibliographic
databases like Inside Science of BLDSC, UK; the
full text databases of Jane's Information Group
(for example fane's Geopolitica/ Library, lane's
Defence Equipment Library, etc.), Forecast
International (for example, Space Systems
Forecast, Warships Forecast, etc.), and full text
standards databases from Bureau of Indian
Standards, International Standards Organisation,
American Society for Testing of Metals, British
Standards Institution, American National
Standards Institution, etc. are all having software
lock. This makes CDs unusable after certain
date. In some cases (for example, Jane's) this
period is just one month. Although the CD is
with the subscriber, it is useless due to the
software key. During stock verification although
these CDs are available, they cannot be
'counted' as they are unusable. One way is

weeding out such CDs leaving only active CDs
(those which are usable) in the stock. But it
means that no sooner the publication is
subscribed, than it is being weeded out.

When seen in the light of the subscription
costs of these CDs and their limited period of
utility, there is a necessity to make the
publishers of such electronic publications to
remove the software keys and make them"
usable even after stoppage of subscriptions to
them, much like the back volumes of printed
publications. Librarians also have to take
caution while subscribing such publications.

1.2 Subscription of Online
Publications

Another major issue of stock verification
arises from the subscription of online
publications. Although, in India as on today no
library is subscribing only the online
publications; however, in future there is a
possibility. These can be subscribed in two
modes, online only or along with print
publications.

When online journals are subscribed with
print publications, the library would have back
volumes even after the subscription is stopped.
However, when online publications only are
subscribed, the library will be paying
subscription charges for accessing the online
journal hosted by the publisher or by an
aggregator like OCLC, SwetScan, etc. In these
cases, access to the publication is controlled by

 

DESIDOC Bulletin of Int Technol, 2000,20(6)

password given by the vendor. If the library
wishes to cancel subscription to the online
journal, it cannot access the back volumes of
the online journal which it subscribed earlier.
This also makes the back volumes unavailable for
stock verification-. Unless access fee is paid to
the vendor or aggregator, the back volumes of
the subscribed journal are; not available for, the
library.

Also, stock verification of online journals not
in the possession of the library poses problems.
This is in contrast to the CD-ROM databases of
cumulative nature. The subsequent 'issues'
(CDs) of databases like Aerospace Engineering,
Compendex, Applied Science and Technology
Index, Library and Information Science Abstracts
(LISA), Chemical Abstracts, etc., include the

Contributor

data/material of earlier CDs. Thus, the second
quarter CD of LISA of a particular year-includes
data of the first quarter CD (in fact, each new
CD of LISA includes, data from 1969 till the
current issue). So, virtually the earlier CDs of
such databases can be weeded out, as the
latest (current),CD has all, the data. Here a
single CD will represent multiple volumes of the
electronic publication for stock verification
purpose.

The main objectives of stock verification,
namely, to find out the actual stock of the
documents available in a library and to find but:
if any losses have occurred for regularisation as
well as taking remedial steps to contain such
losses seem to he hazy in the ease of electronic
publications. '

Dr. A. Lakshmana Moorthy is Scientist E and Joint Director, DESIDOC,

Metcalfe House, Delhi-110 054

 

DESIDOC Bulletin of InfTechnol, 2000,20(6)

