DESlOOC Buffetin of lnfomtion Technology, Vol. 21, No. 1, January 2001, pp. 3-19
8 2001, DESIDOC

Classified Catalogue Code of Ranganathan: A Proposal to
Make it Compatible for Developing Compute~Based
Library Information Systems
'Madan Mohan Kashyap
Abstract
This paper deals with the differences between the environments of card catalogue
and online catalogue, and emphasises on the need of developing computer-based
library information systems and services. It describes database technology, kinds of
databases, database management system, computerised library information system,
and management information system. It coven in detail the database design and
compatibility of cataloguing codes for developing databases of computer-based
library information systems.

1. INTRODUCTION
The introduction of information technology
in libraries, development of online catalogues
and bibliographic databases, availability of
documents in vast array of new media and
formats, and huge amount of information
sources made available by the World Wide
Web (WWW) (the multimedia part of the
Internet) necessitate necessary changes in the
rules of Ranganathan's Classified Catalogue
Code (CCC)' to make it an effective tool for
organising and retrieving information in the
changed conditions. If Ranganathan were alive
at this time, he would have brought radical
changes in the rules of CCC to address the
changing needs.
The Canon of Context, one of the principles
of cataloguing, propounded by Ranganathan,
mandates that the rules of a catalogue code
need to be amended, updated and formulated
to keep in step with changes in the features of
book, the mode of book production, the nature
of organisation of libraries, particularly in the
mode and quality of library services, in changed
conditions'. Thus, in the context of accelerating

environment changes faced by the libraries, we
must consider. to bring radical changes in the
rules of Ranganathan's CCC, as decreed by the
Canon of Context. To meet the need of
changed scenario, we must address the need of
preparing
effective
guidelines
or
comprehensive code for (i) building online
library catalogues of vast array of old and new
bibliographic materials, (ii) library networking,
and (iii) searching and downloading information
from online databases of libraries, publishers'
catalogues and Internet.
Today, online library catalogues hold a large
number of records that were earlier constructed
for card catalogues and retain more or less the
same underlying structure. ,The proposed
changes in the CCC rules must support
conversion
and
organisation
of
old
bibliographic data available in card catalogues
into electronic form in a suitable manner,
creating bibliographic records of documents
now available in manifold physical forms in
various kinds of formats [text files, sounds
images, video clips), and storing, organising,
and retrieving bibliographic information from
online databases of library networks, in a way

that enhanced benefits or better results are
achieved by using traditional library techniques
along with electronic technology and its
applications.
To bring h e required changes in cataloguing
rules, it is necessary for us to understand the
differences between the environments of card
c+-logue and online catalogue, and the need
of
developing
computer-based
library
information systems and services.

2. CONTRAST BElWEEN CARD
CATALOGUE & ONLINE

specific bibliographic item or set of items
having similar attributes).

b Specify the source(s) from where the
information for the description of each type
of bibliographic material or item must be
collected.

b Fix the order according to which the entire
bibliographic information (or the elements of
description) must be organised and various
levels of detail in the description.
Describe the various access or search
elements, which are placed at the top
position or leading section of catalogue
entries to provide access or search points.
Access elements constitute names, codes,
words or phrases, etc., under which
bibliographic records are searched and
identified.

>

Specify the rules for choice and renderings
of each type of access element in a
catalogue entry.

>

State the rules for the choice and rendering
of headings, the leading elements of main
entries of a dictionary catalogue (referred to
as main entry headings) or the constituents
of the heading sections of main entries of a
classified catalogue.

>

Delineate the order and the style of
presenting the value of the attributes or data
elements of a bibliographic item on a card
(i.e., specify order and style of elements of
description or output formats of various
types of bibliographic items).

CATALOGUE
Card Catalogue

2.1

The design of the card catalogue is a model
based upon the following objectives, which are
restated in line of Cutter's approach2:

>

P

To enable a person to find bibliographic
items whose one or more attributes, such as
author, collaborators, title, subject, etc. are
known to him.
To show what works or bibliographic items
the library.has:
(a) by a given author
(b) on a given subject
(c) belonging to a series.

> To assist him in the choice of the item, as to
its:
(a) edition

(b) date of publication
(c) language and script
(d) physical format.
To achieve these objectives; the traditional
library codes:

>

Lay down the laws,.principles or canons and
rules of cataloguing.

>

Identify and describe the attributes of
various types of bibliographic entities or
items. (Each bibliographic entity has
particular properties or attributes which
describe it and whose structured description
ultimately helps a person to identify a

-

>

The rules of traditional library codes have
been framed for well structured, but fixed
display of information or data pertaining to the
bibliographic items on cards The order of
representing the values of the distinct units of
bibliographic information is fixed, starting from
the leading element or heading, generally
consisting of a name of an author(s), or title of
the work, followed by the title of the work, and
statement of responsibility, etc.
The organisation of elements of description
of various types of bibliographic items, namely,
monographs,
multi-volume
monographs,
composite monographs, periodical publications
or
serials,
individual contributions in
DESILXX Bulktin d lnf Tcchnd, 22001,21(1)

monographs or a serials (i.e., independent
works or articles forming part of composite
monographs or serials and treated as an
bibliographic entity) is divided into certain
defined sections or areas by library codes. Each
of which includes specific attribute or a set of
attributes (elements of descriptions or data
elements) of the information entities that
describe them.
The information about bibliographic items
included in their retords or catalogae entries,
and the formats of displaying the information
used by. the various codes do not differ very
much. Whatever trivial differences in the order
or in the form of presentation of information
about a bibliographic item exist, the overall
information produced or displayed is always
similar or the 'same and is significantly
meaningful to the end users.

2.2

Online Catalogue

Online
catalogue
is
essentially
a
computer-based replacement of the old card
catalogue and its purpose and functions almost
remain the same. However, the online
catalogue is a value-added system, which
supersedes the functions of traditional
catalogue. It is beyond the capabilities of card
catalogue to provide keyword search, Boolean
searching and to provide interactive instructions
or search facilities to users with possibility of
getting outputs in the various formats and
information contents they require.
As pointed out by Potter: "The power and
flexibility of the online catalogue have caused it
to surpass the card catalogue in searching
capabilities and have also caused its
configuration to change to include three
functions that were formerly distinct and
unconnected. These three functions are the
library catalogue, circulation control, and
authority control."'

Today, an online catalogue reveals to the
re&,
on the basis af hiisher query, whether a
book or set of b o o b of his/her interest are, on
order, under p r o c e s p i on the shelf, on loan,
sent for binding, misplaced or lost, etc. By
developing single or integrated database for all
or near all library fuhctions, or by way of linking
the catalogue, the acquisition system and the

circulation system,
a library provides
bibliographic and status information to the user
and staff at one spot, the terminal.
In card catalogue environment, the user
moves from physically visible drawer to drawer
or from card to card, whereas with online
catalogues (more so in network environment),
he or she is faced with a sort of invisible and
indiscernible universe. The situation as this
presupposes that the bibliographic items not
only be described and indexed according to
rules established for physical description (i.e.,
cataloguing rules) but also for that of the
contents. In this context, the traditional subject
indexing technique(s) coupled with online
query function and efficiency of search
mechanism of an online catalogue becomes
paramount element.
The online catalogues, though, add a layer
of functionality by providing various computer
supported techniques for searching the data,
such as use of system dictionaries, Boolean
operators for combining semantic categories or
terms regardless of any special citation order,
stemming, and truncation etc. At the same time,
they also add a layer of complexity to this
process, because of the hidden nature of
bibliographic records. In recent studies, it has
been f6und that the online catalogues are more
difficult to use and less sewiceable than the
card catalogues. Baker in his article published in
1994 in The New Yorker put forward this
criticism more lucidly, which was widely
discussed by the library community.'
The limitations of online catalogues can be
removed using traditional facet classification
and subject-indexing techniques along with
computer supported techniques. The use of (i)
facet classification and subject indexing
techniques for developing postcoordinating
retrieval systems for an online catalogue, which
use Boolean operators for combining semantic
categories or terms regardless of any special
citation order, and (ii) truncation of class
numbers, particularly provided with the aid of
facet classification for retrieving hierqrchically
different sets of documents has been
highlighted by many. Since, Ranganathan
demonstrated for the first time the application
of his postulates for facet analysis and synthesis,

and the other associated principles in assigning
subject headings5, significant advancement has
taken place in the application of his postulates
for facet analysis and synthesis in the areas of
computerised contextual indexing as well as
searching computerised online databases.
Besides development of computerised indexing
system, such as PREserved Context indexing
System PRECIS)^, POstulate Based Permuted
Subject Indexing (POPSI)',"' and Contextual
Indexing and Faceted Taxonomic Access
System (CfR)lO, lngwersen and Worrnell" have
been found to envisage that Ranganathan's
Principles for Knowledge Organisation and
Facet Analysis Methodology are likely to find
application in advanced information retrieval,
particularly in the areas of cognitive modelling,
neural network techniques and pattern
recognition.
Ellis and Vascon~elos~~
point out the
continuing relevance of facet analysis as a
technique for searching and organising Webbased documents. They argue that facet
analysis, which is essentially a concept based
approach to indexing is an excellent approach
to searching and organising the WWW
searches rather than using either search engines
or search directories. Finally, they argue that the
underlying philosophy of facet analysis is better
suited to the disparate nature of WWW
resources and searches than the assumption of
current information retrieval research.

Neeia~neghan'~"'
finds his General Theory of
Knowledge Classification and Facet Analysis
Methodology relevant in designing specialised
databases. Godert" demonstrates how querying
by classification facets or categories allows
retrieval of documents that would be more
difficult with verbal method.

An empirical study conducted by lyer,
Hernalatal"" indicates that structuring of search
queries using Ranganathan's Theory of
Classification proves very effective in the
process of searching bibliographic databases.
This approach serves the following purposes:

+

Assists in the choice of concepts from the
user's narrative statements representing their
information needs.

4 Assists in formulating search statements by
providing a basis for the use of appropriate
6

+

Boolean operators. Terms repsesentingdifferent facets are combined with the operator
'AND' and those within a facet, or representing different levels of the same facet are combined with the operator 'OR'. The rational of
this i s based on the degree of bondstrength
be.tween facets.
Provides a method for systematically dropping
terms, if the search needs to be broadened.
Terms are dropped from the right end of
search statement.

~ v e n o ~ i u shave
"
develdped a model system
named DORS (Dewey Online Retrieval System)
as an interface to an online catalogue. Its major
feature is an automatically constructed chain
index, in which a term is shown in as many
verbal strings as are needed to show the
hierarchical contexts in which a concept occurs.
One can develop similar model using Colon
Classification. As
a
matter
of
fact,
Ranganathan's Colon Classification Scheme will
prove better than Dewey, because it represents
classes or concepts in more strict hierarchical
fashion and can provide a much better mean to
browse the records of databases (particularly
very large databases, including electronic
library) arranged in classified order. One can
browse and retrieve the relevant information
from the online catalogues with the aid of class
numbers, specific subject headings, and chain
index generated with the aid of Ranganathan's
postulate-based subject indexing methodology.
The analytico-synthetic approach or facet
analysis and synthesis methodology of
Ranganathan, based on his theories, principles,
and postulates of knowledge organisation, can
be effectively used in designing database
schema, expert systems,'9820 thesauri and
computer generated subject indexes, and
formulating query statements for searching
computerised online databases.

2.3

Difference in the Process of
Creating a Bibliographic Record
for a Card Catalogue & Online
Catalogue

To create the record of a document for an
online catalogue, the data needs to be entered
or structured in one format (called input
format), physically stored on an electronic
DESIOOC Bulletin of Id Technol, 200t, 2141)

storage device in another f m t (called internal
or processing formst) a d displeyed in one or
more formats, k p h q in view the need of
different . p u g s of users (called external
formats, end usefis view formats, or output
formats). Records i n internal or processing
format. are stored and maintained for retrieval
and 'output. This format is generally
predetermined according to the requirements
of software (the database management system)
used.

. In a card catalogue, as one finishes
recording the data about a bibliographic item
the output is ready. That is, no distinction exists
between the input format and the output
format of a bibliographic record. However, in
digital environment from one input format one
can create one 'or more styles of outputs. One
to one correspondence does not exist between
input format of an entry and the types of
outputs one can get for display of information.
The methods of inputting data in a
con~putermay vary widely from one library to
another.. Data may be entered directly by the
professional staff responsible for creating the
hibliographical record and description of
inforrnat~onin standard way according to the
rules of the catalogue code being followed.
Alternatively, a person may fill in the
worksheets, which are later checked by the
professional staff and the data operators/typists
key data in. On-screen (electronic) worksheets
and/or general-purpose text-editor may facilitate
keying.

Concluding Remarks
The library users make use of library
catalogues for three purposes:
i To find whether the known bibliographic
items are available in the library collection
and if so, what are their locations?

>

To find what
knowledge resources
(bibliographic items) a library possesses on a
subject or topics of their interest.

>

To seek information about bibliographic
items held in a library or in a network of
libraries, and make list of those that may be
of interest to them.

To help the user to find known bibliographic
items, author, title and other access points are
provided in card catalogues as well as in online
catalogues.
To
locate
the
unknown
bibliographic items that may be of interest to a
user, subject access and other approaches have
been developed and used by libraries. Author
and title search is easy as compared to subject
search, though these are developed various
methods of organising bibliographic records
according
to
subjects
(e.g.,
various
classifications and indexing techniques). The
reasons beingthat very often users are not able
to formulate exact subject queries. Formulating
precise subject queries is difficult because the
searcher must find ways to articulate his or her
intended meaning using terms that match those
in the catalogue, whether assigned by author,
classifier, or subject cataloguer.
According to Borgman, "query matching is
effective only when the search is specific, the
searcher knows precisely what he or she wants,
and the requeSt can be expressed adequately in
the language of the system (e.g., author, title,
subject heading, descriptors, dates). Even with
graphical user interfaces, the searcher must
enter terms and specify relationships that match
those in the database. Many, online catalogues
allow users to browse authority file indexes, but
usually only within the constraints of specific
query."" Classification access is rarely offered in
online catalogues. Perhaps, in an online system,
if one can provide browsing facility as provided
in a classified Card Catalogue, i t could b r of
immense help to the information seekers,
particularly who are not experts in subject
knowledge, semantic knowledge (that is, the
knowledge of how to implement a query in a
given system, e.g., knowledge of Boolean logrc).
[The difficulties with subject query formation
have been analysed by Bated2; Crawfbrd, et a!";
HlJdreth-4;Lancaster, i t aaP5.
While, revising the CCC, one must also
seriously address the issues related to the
creation of online catalogues of bibliographical
materials -now available in vast array of new
media, efficient retrieval of bibliographic
information, and provision of facility for
browsing the records in classified order in
addit~onto author, title, subject search. One

must also address the problems related to
retrieval of information using natural language
descriptors, faceted classification class numbers
combined with chain indexing, and/or PRECIS
strings, Boolean search technique and browsing
of catalogue or bibliographic records in
classified order.
The difference between the environments
and approaches in the construction of
traditional card catalogues and digital
catalogues forces reexamination of the rules of
traditional catalogue codes, making them more
suitable for the creation of online catalogue or
electronic bibliographic databases. These rules
need to be revised and updated keeping in
view the ease and better data processing and
retrieval facilities provided by the information
technology and developing computerised
library information systems and services using
database technology.

3. DATABASE TECHNOLOGY
3.1

Introduction

The current practice of collecting,
organising,
processing
and
retrieving
information by means of computers is called
Datdbase Technology. Database technology
began to replace the file system in the
mid1960's and was characterised by the
introduction of distinction between logical data
and physical data. In a file system, there is rigid
or unchanging association of certain data files
or data sets with individual programs that
operate upon these. In a database system, a
collection of \ogically related data or data
records is assembbd in a set of linked or
integrated files to facilitate the retrieval of
information, which may be processed by one or
more application programs.
The data becomes the central resource in
database environment. Information systems are
built around this central resource to give the
end users flexible access to data. The end users
of information systems or applications use the
database management system (DBMS) to input,
process, maintain, and access the data and to
generate reports or outputs.
The data in a database is organised in
variety of ways, and the particulars for

structuring the data or data records within a
database is called data model. A data model is
a statement of data. logical or conceptual data
model specifies the rules according to which
database records are logically structured and
helps us to collect and analyse information to
describe the logical database structure.
Entity-Relationship (ER) model is widely used to
describe logical database structure or
conceptual schema of a database. Low level or
physical
data
models,
also
called
irnpleme~ation-oriented models,
provide
concepts that describe the details of how data
is stored in the computer storage device. The
three most widely used implementationoriented models are relational, network, and
hierarchical model^.'^

3.2

Database

A database is an organised collection of
structured data, units of information or data
records, independent of any application in a
computer memory that serves the needs of
multiple users. According to Oxborrow'', "a
database is an organised collection of related
sets of data, managed in such a way as to
enable the users or application program to view
the complete coJlection, or a logical subset of
the collection, as a single unit". An organised
collection of related sets of data or units of
information (data elements) in a database is
called record. A collettion of database records
constitutes a database file. The collection of
sets of data or data records in a database are
integrated to reduce data replication, and is
managed in such a way that it can fulfil differing
needs of its users.
A stored or physical record is a named
collection of associated fields. A field contains a
particular type of data or information within
record that can be separately addressed. Thus,
different fields in a bibliographic rec6rd can be
'author field', 'title field', 'imprint field', and so
on. A field may be divided into smaller units
.called subfields comprising data elements. For
example, 'title field' containing the name(s) of
author(s) can be subdivided into still srnaler
units of information (data elements) or
subfields, namely, entry element, other part of
name, date of birth, etc. Each field and subfield
is given a unique identifier, called tag and
DESlooC&rlktinof hf Tkcbd, 2001,21(1)

s u W identifier, respectively. A physical
record is thus composed of fields and subfields.
A collection of records of single type
constitutes a file. As such, a database can also
be defined as a set of related data files
containing facts or information about
something, say about an enterprise, people,
objects, entities, events or a certain problem
area. Identifying what fields and subfelds are to
be included in an entity or object record and
providing them unique field tags and subfields
identifiers is an important task of database
design.

A database can also be seen as a collection
of inter-related, largeiy similar data or data
records. in a set of linked or integrated files
designed to , facilitate the retrieval. of
information, which may be processed by one or
more application programs. Further, the files of
the database are organised and administered in
SU& a flexible way that these can be adapted
to new, unforeseen tasks. I n ' a database, the
data records or rdated data files are stored with
minimum redundancy and organised or
structured in such a flexible manner that
multiple applications or the functional systems
share the entire data, and the end users get the
information out of it very quickly. Primarily, a
database has the following attributes:
A database represents some aspect of a
real world, sometimes called mini world,
that is an enterprise or organisation, or the
universe of discourse, study, research or
investigation, whose database is to be
construc?ed. The mini world or the
universe, whose database i s created,
constitutes o f specific entities and
relationships that exist between them. By
specific entities, we mean those entities
that must be consideredor are important in
the context of an enterprise or universe
whose database is being created.
A database is designed and built for a
specific purpose for the use of intended
groups of users and some applications in
which these users are interested.
A database is designed to avoid duplication
of data as well as to permit retrieval of
information to satisfy inforrnation needs of
wide range of users.

A database permits shared access,
enhances data independence by
permitting application programmes to be
insensitive to changes in the database.

A database can be of any size and varying
complexity,
A databctse is created and maintainedby a
database management system (DBMS),
such as CDS/ISIS.~'

3.3

Kinds of Databases

Broadly, databases can be divided into two
major categories, namely:
(a) Databases of primary sources of information
(also called source databases), and

(b) Databases

of

information
databases).

secondary sources of
(also
called
reference

Source databases provide information in
electronic form or are databases of electronic
documents, which contain primary information
in electronic form. These databases can be
grouped according to their contents. For
example:

0 FdCtext datrbases-Contain the full text of
documents.

0 Numeric databases4ontain numerical data
of various kinds.

0 Reference datab-Lead

the users to the
sources of information: a document, a person
or an organisation. They can be divided in
three categories:
Commercial bibliopphical databasesThese are the databases of indexing or
abstracting services, booksellers and
publishers, which include citations or
bibliographic reference of monographs
and articles published in serials, and
sometime as abstracts of literature.
Library bibliographic resources
database-Provide
bibliographic
information about the bibliographic
documents available in a given library or
about bibliographic holdings of a group of
libraries.
Referral databases-Databases of
electronic reference sources that contain

general information, such as name,
address, specialisation, products, services
etc., of persons, institutions, business
enterprises; geographical entities,
information systems, etc.19

3.4

Database. Management System

A database management system (DBMS) is
a generalised software system, which is
composed of a set of programs that create,
modify, store, manage, protect, and provide
access to the database and enable the end
users to retrieve information in a variety of
ways. A DBMS supports three levels of data
abstraction: conceptual schema, external
schemas and physical view (organisation of
records in electronic form that are normally
inter-related by specific mechanisms e.g.,
indices, pointers, chains; means of locating or
accessing physical records; and techniques used
for inserting new records);' data definition
language; data manipulation language; and
impo~tant utilities, such as data integrity,
transaction management and concurrency
control, crash recovery, and security.30
The genesis of DBMS is based on the idea
separating the database structure or
meta-structure of a database from its actual
contents. The certain .benefits of database
management system software are:

of

n

Different users can share the data stored in
the database files and all the requirements or
information needs of the different users are
fulfiled.

n A

common and contrailed approach is used for adding or inserting new data and
deleting, correcting, modifying and retrieving
existing data records or portion of it within a
database, and

n

Users and applications that access data need
not be aware of the detailed storage
structure of the data on a computer storage
device. Thus, the data are stored in a way
that they are independent of one or more
applications that use'the data.

3.5

Database Design: Approaches &
Tools

Database design and its implementation is
an essential process that is carried out while

developing a computer-based information
system for an organisation or 'person. The
design of a database involves an abstract and
general description of entity types and their
attributes or data elements, whose values need
to be stored in the database, and the
description of data structures, that is,
establishing the
logical
and
physical
relationships between entity records that
comprise the database. This is achieved, firstly,
by separation of the logical definition of data in
the database from the physical implementation
of data (i.e., storage of data on a storage
device), and secondly, by providing application
data independence, i.e., separation of overall or
global logical data definition of the data into
subsets, as viewed by different users in
connection with their use and applications.
The logical data definition of data is the
expression of the user or programmer's view of,
data or the way they think about data. It is
posed in terms of data model. The data model
may reveal little about exactly where each item
of data i s stored. A DBMS and an operating
system work together to convert the logical
view of data into physical view of data and viceversa. The physical view is stated in terms of
specific locations in storage device plus internal
techniques used to find the data, which is,
exactly what the machine does to find and
retrieve the data from a storage device.
Thus, the design of an electronic database
requires that we need to work at three distinct
planes or levels.
(a) the conceptual or logical level of data
definition,
(b) external level, to furnish user's views of data,
and
(c) Internal level, to provide physical layout of
data.

The designs of each level are called the
conceptual scheme or model, the external
schemes or models, and the internal schemes
' or models, respectively.
The conceptual schema or model, is
application-independent and computer storage
independent overall logical description of the
database. The conceptual schema (also callhd
global schema or model) is dadoped using
o E s u o c & l l ~ o f l i rTechnot,
l
2001,21(1)

conceptual data mo&Uing techniques, such as
entityrelatbnship approach, which consists of
both analytical and design methods and a
data-modelling tool.

The external schemas or models, also called
subschemas, are d i e n t useroriented logical
picturqs of the database.
A subschema
describes only part of database or a data
structure needed for a specific application in
the form most convenient to that application.
The main purpose of a subschema is to give a
particular group of users or application an
access only to that portion of the database,
which is of their interest. The external schemas
are specific parts or portions of the database
that may be retrieved, re-organised and
displayed
in
distinctive
patterns
or
configurations, keeping in view the needs of
various end users.
The internal schema or model is a layout for
physical representation or storing of data on a
storage device.

3.5.1 Conceptual Leve1 Schema or Model
The conceptual level schema is an overall
logical database description of a database of an
organisation. The database schema i s
representation of that part of the real world that
the database is about. For example, the part of
real world,that an online library catalogue is
about all types of bibliographic items
commonly collected by libraries, namely,
monographs--simple and composite, serials,
and independent contributions or work forming
part of monographs and serials. Using a
high-level'c~nce~tual
data modelling approach,
one can create a conceptual schema or model
of a database. The conceptual schema (also
called the conceptual or logical view of a
database) is a precise description of the data
requiernents of users. A conceptual schema or
model (also called metadata) can be defined
using entityrelationship approach to data
modelling and analysis and displayed by means
of the graphical notation known as
Entity-Relationship Diagrams (E-R diagrams).'""
One can also apply the postulates, principles of
Ranganathan's
Theory
of
Knowledge
Classification in designing a conceptual schema
or model for specialised database^.'^"' There is
also, similarity between the Entity-Relationship
D E S l D O C ~ d l n f T = c f t n d2200?,21(1)
,

Data Modelling Concepts stated by Peter Chen,
and others and Ranganathan's postulate for
designing a scheme for library classification; the
detail of which will be given in another paper to
be published later in this journal.

3.5.2 lnternal Level Schema or Model
The internal level schema relates to how the
data are actually stored on a storage device. It
involves defining the physical organisation of
the data file on storage device; that is, the way
the data are to be written onto and read from a
storage device. It also entails decisions about
the arrangement or establishing logical
connection of the related physical data or data
records on a storage device for the purpose of
retrieval, processing, and display.
The layout or physical representation of data
on a storage device is the concern of computer
programmers or the DBMS. This is the lowest
level representation of data. The physical
organisation of the database, at this level, is
often determined and rendered by the software
or database system used, and internal
implementation or organisation is unknown to
the end users. Here, database is seen as a
collection of internal records in electronic form,
which are normally interrelated by specific
mechanisms, e.g., indices, pointers, chains, and
other means of locating or accessing physical
records and techniques used for inserting new
data.
The data in a database are usually logically
and physically organised according to some
data model. A data model is a collection of
conceptual tools for describing data, data
relationships, data semantics, and data
constraints. Various experts have proposed a
number of data models for the development of
database systems. They provide a conceptual
basis for logical organisation of related data
pertaining to an enterprise or a problem area
and physically structuring the database in a
database system. In other words, they are
formal basis for defining unambiguously the
components of an enterprise-the concerned
entities, their attributes (data dements), their
interrelationships, operations and a framework
for logical and physical organisation of the
enterprise data in a database system.

k lnformation

The databases are generally structured on

necessary for performing
day-toclay operations or foc taking routine
decision by the staff.

one of the three data modds namely, the
relational data model, the network data model,
and the hierarchical data model, or
combination of these three, or some subsets of
these three models.

3.5.3 &rml

>

Level Schema or Model

The external level design, sometimes called
subschema, relates to those particular views or
formats of data, which are generated as outputs
for specific purposes or to serve the needs of
different groups of users.

b lnforrnation for the support of strategk or
long-term library plans.

In cohtrast, a computer-based library
information system . (ah0 ca\\ed b a t y
management system) serves as an information
system for management and as a bibliographic
information system for library members. It
provides:

The development of conceptual and
external designs (user's views) of a database is
the concern of library systems analysts or library
database administrators. The physical design of
database i s the concern of computer
programmers.

4. COMPUTERISE5 LIBRARY
INFORMATION SYSTEM
Ncrwadays, computerised'library information
systems are developed not only to serve the
purpose of online catalogues, but also to serve
as comprehensive, unified or integrated systems
covering near total library activities or functions,
such as, acquisition of bibliographic documents
and other materials required for running a
library system, creation and upkeep of
inventories of the purchased materials,
membership registration and allied work,
appointment of staff and maintenance of their
service records, bibliographic items circulation
control, upkeep of financial records, and so
forth. Such a library information system serves
not only as a bibliographical information system
for library members but also as an information
system for library management. It supports the
operational, managerial, and decision making
functions of different fevels of library managers,
besides providing information about the library
bibliographic holdings and their status, to its
end users.
In any organisation, a computer-based
information system (atso called computerised
management system) is generally designed to
support the operational and managerial
decision making functions of the organisation
and provides:

lnformation to aid tactical planning and
decision making (tactical planning is
concerned with short-run planning: staff
recruitment, redeployment, promotion, the
annual budgeting process etc.), and

>

Bibliographic infomation about the holdings
of a library and their status to the library
members.

>

lnformation required by library staff and
management to carry out their day-today
Iibrary activities, and

b Information which supports managerial and
decision making functions of different levels
of library managers, particularly that is useful
to them for tactical (or short-run) planning
and for a strategic (or a long-term) planning.

A computerised library information system
integrates or combines near total library
operations, and its subsystems are designed to
carry out the essential library functions or tasks.
These functional or task subsystems are named
monograph
acquisition
system,
serial
acquisition and control system, bibliographic
items circulation system, financial system,
personnel management system, and so forth.
These subsystems are very often considered
distinct from a bibliographic information system
designed to provide bibliographic information
to library users. This actually is not the correct
view.

.

The library system as a whole is a
bibliographic documents handling system that
acquires, processes and makes available
bibliographic documents,
and provides
information about these documents and other
bibI'igraphic items that may not be awlable in
the library to the VIbrary users. \t a h cokcts
DESlOOC 8uIM of Inr Techno/, 22001,21(1)

bibliographic information from commercial or
noncommercial
bibliographic
information
systems or services and reprocesses it for
internal use. Besides processing and generating
bibliographic information, it also creates
another -distinct type of information found
useful for strategic and tactical planning, and
taking decisions about day-today operations for
effective control of library functions and
services, by the operational level and
managerial level staff of the library-system.

;

One must distinguish and clearly perceive
the relationship between library information
system as a whole and a bibliographic
information system that generates bibliographic
information for the use of library members. It
may also be noted that a computerised library
information system represents a much larger
system within which information system for
management is also a part, including
bibliographic information systems. Information
system for management is a subsystem of
library information system that supports work
practices and information need of library staff
for effective management and control. It is
often called management information system
(MIS).
The end users of a bibliographic information
system are library members, whereas the end
users of an information system for management
are the staff members working in the system,
and both the systems constitute subsystems of a
(integrated,
federal
or
comprehensive)
cornputerised library information system, also
called library management system.
A
computerised library bibliographic information
system in turn constitutes a subsystem of a
library system as a whole.
A library information system may be defined
as a set of library transaction processing (or
functional) systems designed to provide
information to library members and to support
the operational, managerial, and decision
making information needs, of library staff. The
kinds of concerned library information system
includes a computer (hardware and software) as
one of its components. The extent of
computerised library information systems varies
from library to library, but the most effective
kinds are those which are integrated. An
D L S l ~ ~ d l n f T e c h n2001,Zf
d,
(1)

integrated
library
information
system
incorporates near all library function< and
provides information to library members and
staff according to their needs. An integrated
computerised library information system is
designed keeping in view that each library
functional area is not only concerned with its
own area information requirements and
support for decision making, but they also share
common information needs.
Thus, a computerised library information
system or library management system can be
viewed as a set of library functional systems
encompassing:
(a) Library work practices or procedures
(b) Information
technologies-computer
hardware and software, having database
management system, and a corporate
database (it is not simply a bibliographic
database but much more), and
(c) Work forces (i.e. library staff).
All geared together for accomplishing the
system's tasks and to provide:
Knowledge sources (i.e. bibliographic
documents of all types) to library users for
their learning, self studies and researches,
Bibliographic and any other type of
information needed by the library
members, and
Information necessary for the library staff
for effective control and management of
library affairs.

5. EXPERTISE REQUIRED TO DESIGN
& DEVELOP COMPUTER- BASED
LIBRARY INFORMATION
SYSTEMS & SERVICES
b s e d on what has been discussed already,
one can summarise that to design, develop and
manage computerised library systems and
services, one needs to have:
Comprehensive or total view of a library
system including its objectives, functions,
processes or activities (task systems to be
computerised) and the various entities
associated with the system, whose
database is needed to be created.

.

- Formats in which entity

records or
information will be displayed ( i.e.,
the formats of required outputs or
reports).

D Command on library tools and techniques
(i.e. library classification, cataloguing and
indexing techniques), and
Expertise in the application database design
and development techniques. One must be
aMe to:

-The type of access points or
elements which could prove very
useful for user to locate or search
the relevant records of bibliographic
items from a database, and the
method or techniques, which may
be used to construct the elements
of search or to formulate queries to
search the database.

A ldentify and describe the entity types

(objects about which information is to be

collected for use) and their attributes and
relationships {i.e. data elements).
A Recognise, designate and define the
essential and optional data elements that
may comprise database record structure
of an entity type.
A Provide unique identifiers and names to
the data elements, i.e., assign unique
codes to identify the different data
elernenis in the record. These unique
codes are also called content designators,
which may consist of field tags, indicators,
and subfields' codes and serve as means
of identifying data elements or values of
fields in a machine readable record, and
A Specify:

- Guidelines or

rules for identifying
and using authentic sources for
collecting data or pieces of
information about an entity. That is,
the appropriate sources from where
the values of the attributes (data
elements) of an entity need to be
collected for description.

- The domain of attributes that define
the va\id values of the attributes and
guide decision in case there are
exceptions.

- Input

data format or formats in
which records of entities or objects
w i l be input to the system (i-e. the
form in which the given pieces of
information about an entity will be
logically recorded).

In other. words, collectivety or blended,
these techniques form special skills to design
and develop computer-based library systems
and services.
The use of computer technology in libraries
forces us to examine and describe afresh almost
all traditional library policies, rules (including
cataloguing rules), procedures, and techniques
as a whole and incorporating certain additions\
elements from the database design and
development technology.

6. COMPATIBILITY OF
CATALOGUING CODES FOR
DEVELOPING DATABASES OF
COMPUTER-BASED LIBRARY
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
The traditional cataloguing codes, like
AACR-11)' and CCC of Ranganathan', presently
only serve as tools to develop manual
catalogues and to limited extent electronic
bibliographic databases. To develop a database
of library information system as a whole, one
needs to:

n
n

- Rules

necessary for uniform or
consistent description or rendering
of the values of the attributes (data
elements), or contents of fields and
subfields
comprising
database
records.

El

Expand the scope of these codes.
Identify and &fine all possible entities or
entity types that are connected with library
systems, including the various types of
bibliographic documents added in a library
collectio~.

&kc efforts to revise them so that they
cowr the rules ,and guidelines to create
databases of these entity types.

These c& d to incorporate guidelnes
to M i conceptual schema, and jogical data

design or. structure of a library database. One
must also:

guidelines can be effectively used for entry and
display in a computer.

n Absorb the components of Common

The rules framed in part H and J of CCC are
" " ~ ~ so
' ~ general that these can be used to render the
Communication Format ( C C F ) ~ ~ ' ~ ~'~n
these codes.
names of:
Include the traditional library techniques for
a Persons: Personal authors, collaborators,
knowledge organisation, subject indexing
library members, library staff, and so forth.
and .information retrieval appropriate for
R Corporate Bodies: All types of organisations.
computer environment, such as facet
Typical examples are: Governments,
analysis approach to classification and
associations, corporate business enterprises,
indexing devised by S. R. Ranganathan.
social, cultural, educational and research
n Include the techniques for query formation
institutions. A corporate body can be an
and search strategies appropriate for
author of a work, a publishing agency (or
computer environment.
publisher), a sponsor under whose auspices a
work
is published, or a business enterpriseThe revised code developed incorporating
library
vendor, book supplier, a library
all the aspects discussed may be called Code
contractor,
a co-operating library, etc.
for 'the Design and Development of
P Conferences: International, national, and
Computer-based
Library
Databases
or
regional.
Information Systems and Services.
0 Geographic Entities: Continents, countries,
Critical an&&
of the CCC reveals that this
constituent states of a large country, cities,
cock (that has inharsnt potentiality), with some
town, sees, and so on.
mckolificatioh, can be used as a code or guide
for creating a comprehensive library database
However, to revise and to convert this code
. covering all types of entities associated with a
into a code for library database design and
library system.*'
development, we need to identify and describe
the
various types of entities, bibliographic or
The careful study of CCC also reveals that it
non-bibliographic
in nature that constitute part
is a code, which much before the development
of
the
library
system
or have affiliation with it,
of database technology, identifies and specifies
and
their
relevant,
appropriate or context
d i r e n t bibliographic entity types, namely:
dependent
attributes
**.
Some of the entities,
serial, monograph, and their subsets. Even the
other
than
bibliographic
in nature, which are
list and definitions of various kinds of
associated or have linked with the library
conventional and non-conventional bibliosystem are: library members and employees
graphic items provided by Ranganathan in the
(potential, existing, or retired); library suppliers;
code are still valid.' This code also lists and
parent organisation(s): library departments or
defines all possible attributes of the entity
units;
library systems and institutions;
set-bibliographic document. That is, it specifies
equipment; orders of items; invoices of items;
all the discrete attributes or data elements of
inventories of library items, and so forth.J7-J
various types of bibliographic items, and has
Besides
incorporating the details of various
framed the rules for description or rendering of
types
of
entities h a t have affiliation with the
their values and grouping and fixing their
library
systems
and specifying their attributes,
relative order or sequence within a printed
one
also
needs
to incorporate the rules for
bibliographic record or a catalogue card. These
"Entities possess numeraK attributes, including attributes attained due to rkbtionshii with other entities and play
dif(emrt rdes or have different identities in different conditions or contexts. Entities have divergent personifitions or their
personalities are transCwmed or lodc different in chacged circumstances, positions, situations, or locale. For example, a person
can be a teacher, a writer, a father, an employee, or member of an organisation. A given set of attributes (or their values) of a
person, e n a k one to perceive, specify or identify him in a particular role, personificationor conm. Name of a person is
u n W identifier. m,
if a p e r m is an employee, then in this case, for hi p w identifitim, one must at least specify
or know the name of organisation in which he may be working and the name of hijob.

rendering the values of the identified attributes
of these entity types.

of an entity need to be collected for
description.

What has been discussed so far in this
paper, can-be summarised that to convert CCC
into a code for library database design and
development, one. needs to:

8. Delineate the domain of attributes (data
elements), which define the valid values of an
attribute and guide decision in case there are
exceptions.

1. Revise and restate the Canons of Cataloguing
of Ranganathanto make them applicable not
only to develop a library catalogue but a
comprehensive database for library systems,
which may include data about bibliographic
as well as nan-bibliographic entities.

9. Outline:

2. Incorporate the Ranganathan's Postulates
and Principles for Designing a Scheme for
Library Classification and Concept Based
Subject Indexing Systems, and the Logical
Data Modelling Technique of Peter Pin-Sen
Chen and further modified by other experts
as methodologies for the design and
development of library database systems.

3. Identify and describe the various types of
the various types of
entities (e.g.,
bibliographic items, library members, staff,
equipment, records, etc.) associated with a
library system,
their attributes and
relationships, or data elements, whose values
comprise an entity record in a library
database.
4. Designate and define the essential (or
mandatory) and optional data elements of
entity types that may comprise database
record structure.
5. Assign unique codes to- the essential and
optional data elements, which serve as
means of identifying data elements or values
of fields in a machine-readable record. These
unique identifiers or codes may be
composed of field tags, indicators, and
subfield codes.
6. Specify a set of rules for uniform or
consistent description or rendering of the
values of the attributes, i.e., the data elements
or contents of fieids and subfields comprising
the database records.
7. Stipulate the guidelines or rules for
identifying and using authentic sources for
collectingdata or pieces of informationabout
an entity, i.e.,. the. appropriate sources from
where the values of attributes (data elements)

Input formats in which the data of various
entities or objects will form input to the
system (i.e. the form in which the given
pieces of information about an entity will
be logically recorded), and
Output or display formats in which entity
records or information,will be displayed
(i.e., the formats of required outputs or
reports).
10. ldentify and specify the access elements or
points-the instruments of searching the
database records, which also constitute
component of a search mechanism used to
retrieve information from the database.

11. Specify the methodology for developing
postcoordinating and pre-coordinating
information retrieval systems appropriate for
computer environment
12. State the techniques of query formation and
search strategies appropriate for computer
environment.

Concluding Remarks .
The development of the proposed code and
making it an effective tool for designing and
developing computerised library information
systems is a Herculean task. It requires
teamwork and support of a nation- level
organisation. One such national agency that
can take up this task is National Information
System for Science and Technology (NISSAT),
Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research (DSIR), Government of India, New
Delhi.
In the revised code, one must specify the
various entity types associated with a library
system,.identify and define their attributes and
relationships, and subsequently construct a
standard list of fields arid subfilds (data
elements) and provide them standard codes,
tags or -identifiers.Generally, electronic records
of different entities comprised fields and
subfields associated with an entity type, and
DESIDOC Bulktin of Inf TeclrnoI, 2001,21(1)

whose vatues are useful to h a t e , identify, and
get information about an object, an action or a
process etc. In addition, an electronic record
contains certain fields, which contain data
required for @e management of database
system or for other administrative purposes. For
example, one such field that forms a
component of electronic record is 'Record
Number', representing unique number of an
entity record of a database. The data fields and
their constituent data demenb comprising the
records of different types of entities need to be
identified and defined.
In the proposed revised code, besides
covering the various aspects listed in the
previous sections, one may also consider to
redefine the Laws and Canons of Cataloguing
as enunciated by Ranganathan in the light of
new milieu. For example, 'Canon of
Ascertainability', the principle prescribing the
chief sources of information to collect data for
creating .bibliographic records of various
bibgraphic items need to be revised to
indude the appropriate sources of information
for collecting data about other entity types
associated with library systems.
With the arrival of inforrnation technology in
library arena, the mindset of some library
professionals about implementation of 'Law of
Parsimony' needs to be changed. In the light of
'Law of Parsimony', Ranganathanhad suggested
to provide only brief but essential description
about bibliographic items, while preparing
catalogues of libraries other than catalogues of
national libraries or preparing national
bibliographies. This approach based on the
principle of 'trade-off' (that is, to get something
you need, you give up something you need less
urgently) though good one, is no more valid for
creating online catalogues or t~nioncatalogues
of libraries, which are used not by library users
but also by those who are involved in book
trade and book publication.
With passage of time, due to the abovementioned trade-off practice in the CCC, many
professional librarians have developed a notion
that CCC has no prcwision to provide detailed
bibliographical description, as is the case in
AACR-It. In CCC, no doubt, there i s direction to
provide only essential information and ignore
WIDUC&JktindlnfTed,nol, ZWt, 21(1)

the less essential data, like price of a book,
while creating catalogues of small libraries.
Nevertheless, it provides a comprehensive list
of all the data elements that may comprise
bibliographic records of various types of
bibliographic items in a catalogue (see CCC
Chapter FQ: Section of Entry). However, due to
mindset, the most professional librarians ignore
this direction and think that CCC rules limit us
to provide detailed bibliographic description
about a bibliographic item in the catalogue
card, unlike AACR-II. This mindset needs to be
changed by way of interpreting the 'Law of
Parsimony' or the 'Principle of Trade-off' in the
present context. The paralld example of
application of
'trade-off in information
technology itself can be seen in the form of
Y2K bug and old hardware and software
designs. Actually, implementation of Y2K
concept is not a bug at all; it is a result of
application of Law of Parsimony or principle of
'trade-off by software and hardware designers
of 19th century. To get more space on disk and
in memory, they gave up the precision of
century indicators, which is proving as a flaw in
software and hardware designs, in the context
of year 2000 and future applications in almost
every field."
The present cataloguing rules were laid
down for creating card catalogue of
bibliographic
items
manually
or
semi-automatically. These rules need to be
revised, updated keeping in view the ease and
better data processing and retrieval facilities
provided by the information technology in
developing the information systems, and
application of new approaches as demanded by
the technology.

A brief outline of the coverage, which may
form the part of the proposed code for library
database design, shall be presented in another
paper.

BlBLlOCRAPHlC REFERENCES
1.

Rangan?than, S. R. Classified catalogue
code: With additional rules for dictionary
catalogue code. Ed 5. 1988.

2.

Cutter, C. A. Rules for a dictionary
catalogue. Ed. 4. Government Printing
Press, Washington, D.C., 1904. P 1 2.
'

Potter, William Gray. Online catalogue in
North America: An- overview. Program,
1986,20(2), 12(130.

-15. Godert, Winfried. Faceted classifition in
online retrieval. lntemationd Uassification,
1991,18(2), 98.109.

Baker, N. Discards. The New Yorker. April,
1994,6446.

16. lyer, Hemalata. Online searching: Use of
classificatory structure. In Tools for
knowledge representation and the human
interface,
edited by R Fuggman.
Proceedings of 1st ISKO Conference
(Darmstadt) (1990/91). INOEKS Ved,
Frankfurt. pp. 15967.

Ranganathan, S. R. Subject heading and
facet analysis. )ouma/ of Documentation,
1964,20(3), 109-19.
Austin, Derek. PRECIS: A manual of
concept analysis and subject indexing. Ed
2. The British Library, London, 1983.
Bhattacharyya, Ganesh A. General theory
of subject indexing language. (KamatakaUniversity, Ph.D. Thesis, 1980).
(Unpublished)

1 7. lyer, Hemalata. Subject representation
entropy. International Classification, 1992,
19(2), 15-8
18. Svenonius, Elaine F. The use of
classification in information retrieval.
Library resources and Technical services,
1983,27(1), 76-83.

Bhattacharyya, Ganesh A.
POPSI: Its
fundamentals and procedure based on a
general theory of subject indexing
language. Library Science with Slant to
Documentation, 1979, 16; 14-5.

19. Stiles, W.G. Ranganathan, cognition and
expert system. Canadian journal of
Information Science, 1895, 10, 16-24.

Bhattacharyya, Canesh A. POPSI: A source
language for organising an associative
classification. Library Science with Slant to
Documentation, 1982, 19, 249-52.

20. Vickery, Alina & Brooks, H.M. Plexus-the
expert system for referral. Information
Processing and Management, 1987, 23,
99-117.

Robins, Matrus & Anderson, James 0.
Contextual indexing and facet taxonomic
literary access system. Drexel Library
Quarterty, I 903, 19(3), 91-109.

21. Borgman, Christine L. Why are online
catalogs still hard to use. jASIS. 1996,
47(7), 493-503.

Ingwersen, Peter & Worrnell, Irene.
Ranganathan in the perspective of
advanced information retrieval. Librj, 1992,
42(3), 184-211.
Ellis, David & Vasconcelos, Ana.
Ranganathan and the net: Using facet
analysis to search and organise the world
wide web. Aslib Proceedings, 1999, 51(1),
3-10.
Neelameghan, A. Application of
Ranganathan's general theory of
knowledge classification in designing
specialised databases. Libri, 1992, 4(3),
202-226.
Neelameghan, A. Concept categorisation
and knowledge organisation in specialised
databases: A case study. International
C/assification, 1991, 18,92-97.

22. Bates, M. I. Subject access in online
catalogue: A design model. )ASIS, 1987,
37, 407-24
23. Crawford, J. C., et a/. A survey of subject
access in academic libraries catalogues in
Great Britain. journal of Librarianship and
Information Science, 1993, 25, 85-93.
24. Hildreth, C. R. Beyond boolean: Designing
the next generation of online catalogs.
Library Trends, 1987, 36, 647-67.
25. Lancaster, F. W., et a/. Identifying barriers
to effective subject access in library
catalogs. Library Resources & Technical
Services, 199 1, 36, 3 77-97.
26. bssen, G . Data models, database
language and database management
systems. Addison-Wisley, Wokingham,
1991
27. Oxborrow, E., Databases and database
management systems: Concepts arid

issues. Ed. 2. ChartwelCBratt, Chichester,
1981.

28 Unesco, Division of Software Development
and Applications, Office of lnformation
Programmes and Services. Mini-Micro
CDSflSIS 2.3: Reference manual
&
CDS/ISIS pascal manual. UNESCO, Paris,
1989.
29. Chowdhury, C. G. Introduction to modern
information retrieval system. Library
Association, London. 1999.
30. Dates, C. J. An introduction to database
systems. Ed. 3. Addison-Wesley, Reading,
MA. 1981.
31. Chen,
Peter
Pin-Sen.
The
a
Entity-Relationship model-towards
unified view of data. ACM Transaction on
database Systems, 1976, 1(1), 9-36.
32. Chen, Peter Pin-sen, Ed. Entity-Relationship
approach to information modelling and
analysis. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1983.
33. Anglo-American Cataloguing Rules, edited
by Michael Gorman & Paul W Winkler. Ed.
2. Revised. American Library Association,
Chicago, 1988.
34. CCF/B: The Common Communication
Format for bibliographic information. Paris,
UNESCO, 1992. (PGI-92/WS/9).
35. CCF/F: The Common Communication
Format for factual information. Edited by
Alan Hopkinson & Peter Simmons. Paris,
UNESCO, 1992. (PGI-92/WS/9).
36. Hopkinson, Alan, Comp. Implementation
notes for users of the Common
Communication Format for factual
UNESCO, Paris,
information (CCF/F).
1993.47~.
37. Kashyap, M. M. Integrated database design
for a library system: Employing librarv

Contributor:

rechniques developed by Ranganathan and
CDS/ISIS DBMS. journal of Library and
Information Science (India), 1993, 18,
82-141.
38. Kashyap, Madan Mohan. Online library
catalogues and standards for common
application in a network environment:
Paper presented at XVI IASLIC Seminar,
Bombay, 1994. In IASLIC Seminar
(Bombay) (1995) (16).
Networking of
libraries: Problem and prospects. 1995. P.
1-25.
39. CCF: The common communication format.
Edited by Peter Simmons & Alan
Hopkinson. Ed. 2. (PGI-88/WS/2).
UNESCO, Paris, 1988.
40. Kashyap, M. M. Database system: Design
and development. Sterling Publishers, New
Delhi, 1993. x+382p.
41. Kashyap, M. M. Database technology:
Basic concepts and terminology. Library
Herald, 1 991, 30(1), 1-1 9.
42. Kashyap, M. M. Common communication
format for online ordering, a proposal for
book trade and libraries: Paper presented
at 15th Annual Convention and
Conference at the Society for lnformation,
held at Bangalore during 18-20 January
1996. In aigital libraries: Dynamic
storehouse of digitized information, edited
by N. M. Malwad, et a/. New Age
International, New Delhi, 1996. pp. 75-89.
26-33.
43. Kashyap, Madan Mohan. Computer-based
library information system designing
techniques. Sterling Publishers, New Delhi,
1999. pp. 259-60.
44. Ullman, Ellen. The myth of order. Span,
1999, XL(6), 46-50.

Prof Madan Mohan Kashyap has retired from Dept. of Library & Information
Science, University of Delhi. His residential address is 201 Kadambari Niwas,
Kadambari marg, Sector - 9, Rohini, New Delhi - 110 085. Tele (R): 786 2699;
Email: mmkashyap@bol.net.in; kashyapl @indiatimes.com

oES/tXX&rlktin d l n f Technol, 22001,21(1)

19

