DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 17-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

Some Basic Aspects For Creation of Website
Vinod Kumari Sharma & Sumit Goswami
Abstract
This article gives in brief the various aspects involved in creation of website. It highlights the
importance of prior planning which is the basic step. Other important aspects for creating a website as
web editors, URLS/lnternet address, graphics software, web authoring, and search engines are also
introduced. It gives the process of registration of domain name for website along with the various
option and technologies involved in the hosting and uploading of a website.

1. INTRODUCTION
The computer age has brought in the facility of fast access to information. Dissemination of knowledge to any
part of the world has become easy through Internet. Books or documents remain the essential tools for
preserving and diffusing the world's store house of knowledge. To keep in touch with increasing knowledge,
changing thoughts, and culture, it is essential that good books/documents are published. The innovation in
new technologies have changed the ways and means of publication. The entrance of electronic media like
Internet, fax, telex, e-mail, scanners, etc. has brought a significant change rh publishing, marketing and
distribution of books/documents. Basically, web designing is publishing a book or document on Internet with
multiple options of browsing/searching the document electronically. Publishing on Internet leads to a number
of advantages:
•
•
•
•

A very large user base
It has had a phenomenal rate of growth to-date
It is an open global network
The Internet is very easy to use and / or operate

The following are some of the major steps to be followed while creating one's own website or document on
Internet:

2.CREATING WEBSITE BUSINESS PLAN
In our experience, adopting a new technology within an, organisational environment usually grows out of a
need within the organisation. The impetus for establishing a website for an organisation has any number of
progenitors:
•
•
•
•
•

The technology is available
Competitors are doing it
Business is already connected to the Internet, so the technology needed to launch a website is already
available
You and your co-workers are drowning in paper
It just seems so cool

But like everything else involved in running an organisation, one needs to determine if the benefits outweigh

DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 17-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

the costs. One should seek answer to three questions:
1. How does an organisation currently create or deliver information on a regular basis?
2. What does the organisation generate and what information everyone needs all the time?
3. How much is it costing?
By answering these three questions one will be able to better define the contents of mission statement and
determine the benefits of a website for the organisation.
The format and specification of a cost-benefit analysis and the period within which one needs to show a
return on investment will vary according to organisation's budgetary policies, financial conditions, type of
business, growth expectations, and so on. The first step in developing a website is to prepare a mission
statement that addresses the business drivers and the specific objective of the organisation.
3. PLANNING FOR WEBSITE
For designing, good planning is the basic step to be considered. One should have an idea of how he wants to
design the page. An outline has to be created which helps in organising and structuring the page. It is
important to know that designing a web document is different from the one for a printed document because of
the fact that the printed pages in a book follow a linear progression when it is read in a particular order, while
in a web document the navigator can jump, hop and navigate from one page to another. It is these
characteristics, which makes structuring of web sites tricky and one needs to take utmost care in making
provision for jumping from one page to another without creeping in any element of confusion and leading
navigator in a state of bewilderness.
For actually understanding, let us consider the following example to create a web page of an
institution/organisation/agency. The points given in Table one are to be analysed.

S.no
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Table1. Contents of home of an Organisation
HomePage
Give all the links to other Pages
Historical Background
Brief history of the organisation
Areas of Work
Technologies Developed
For various applications
Conferences/Seminars
Conducted during the last five years
Director's Profile
Facilities Available
Major facilities available in the organisation
Achievements
Major achievements of the organisation
Awards/Recognitions
During the last five years
Training Programmes Conducted During the last five years

This sketch or outline is an important starting point. It forces one to grapple with matters of
organisation at a time when it is easy to change the structure of the web page. As one adds and
deletes ideas on the page and shifts points from main to secondary topics, one thinks of satisfying
the user's needs. It speeds up the review process when the page must be approved by higher

DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 17-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

authorities. It becomes much easier to make changes at this stage than later when one has
invested time in the draft.
It will not help in identifying the linkages between the pages and how they are going to interact with
each other. For this purpose" the web site developers draw jump maps when creating a new home
page. This jump map really facilitates in linking of various pages so as to make provision for logical
and meaningful navigation. A jump map can be of great help to organise the site. The jump map or
site map can be explained by Figure 1.

3.1 .Home Page
Some of the important points to be considered while designing a home page are as:
1. Objectives
•

Home page is content page and should provide links to all the necessary pages

•

Should provide links to all the principal or higher level home pages.

2. Responsibility
•

Responsible person has to look into the contents that goes in WWW collection

DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 17-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

•
•
•

Right decision should be taken regarding the documents which may go in public
Care should be taken while transferring the information. An error at this point could produce problems
at the final stage
Electronic version should get released before the published version.

3. Accuracy and timeliness of the information (Editors job)
•
•
•
•
•
•

Ensure accuracy regarding the information for public use
Contents in the web page should not have a missing link
Text formatting should be proper
Spelling and syntax should be proper
Links should be verified
Consistency in the style to be followed on all the pages.

4. Retrieval/navigation
•
•

Links to be provided to all the necessary search points
Watchout for dead links.

5. Standard icons
•
•
•
•

Standard icons should be used on all the pages
GIF and jPEG are generally accepted formats for graphics, portable network graphics (PNG)
Portable Document Format (PDF)
Images no wider than 480 pixels.

4. FORMING WEBSITE DEVELOPMENT TEAM
The website developmern and maintenance team will cross the traditional boundaries in the organisation and
may include members from several departments. To make a website dynamic and user-friendly,
modifications and updations should be done periodically. It is possible if one has the team of professionals
dedicated for this purpose. Keeping this objective in view, it is proposed that a website development group
should be constituted which will include the following professionals:
Designer: Designing new pages or change the design of existing pages
Content Provider/Developer: The person should be responsible for developing and providing the contents
which will be uploaded on the website
Editor: Editing new contents for the website and the contents received from the content provider
Proof Reader: Checking up the matter put up on the site for any mistakes
Photographer/ Illustrator: To provide the pictures/illustrations of various events, happenings, etc
Co-ordinator: Co-ordinate with various departments/divisions/organisations to keep the contents of the

DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 17-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

website updated
Web Administrator: Take care of web and mail administration of the website
Imaging Professional: The person should have expertise in the imaging software like Adobe Photoshop,
Flash, Image Composer, GIF animator
HTML Professional: Person expertising in FrontPage/Dreamsweaver to develop static pages
Web Programmer: For developing applications in Java, ASP, and CGI, etc. for interactive web pages
Public Relation Officer: To interact with general users and convey to the technical team the various changes
required for the better interaction between the website and the users.
5. PLANNING FOR WEBSITE SECURITY
Once a website has been uploaded to the wider world of the Internet, security issues are to be kept in mind
and one must be prepared to devote a great deal of time and attention to protecting website from external
intruders. Network security is the aspect of the web administrator's job that has to do with ensuring that onlv
authorised persons use the web server to change the contents and that they do so only in the authorised ways.
Security here means to make the website data available whenever the authorised users need them. External
threats are the most problematic. One never knows when an outsider will attempt to breach website or who
the perpetrator may be. Millions of people use the Internet everyday and many of them will try to break into
website just to see if they can do so. Once the security policy has been formulated for website, it is time to
look at some of the methods one can use to stop malicious intruders from gaining unauthorised access to the
site. One can use the packet filtering routers or the screening routers. Firewalls are also used. The firewall sits
between local .database machines and the Internet. Reverse proxy servers are also used with some security
features incorporated into them for a faster and more secured site access by the Internet users.

6.DEVELOPING CONTENTS
6.1 Use of HyperText Markup Language (HTML)
Web documents are created by using a language called HTML (HyperText Markup Language) that offers
short codes (also called tags) to designate graphical elements and links. Clicking on links brings documents
located on a server to a browser, irrespective of the server's geographic location. Documents may contain
text, images, sounds, movies, or their combination.
HTML is the standard formatting language used for designing web page. One can write HTML pages using
any word processor or text editor. To publish pages on the Internet, submit created pages to a server (a
networked computer running server software). HTML uses embedded codes (tags) to designate graphical
elements and links. These codes can be produced simply from the keyboard using angled brackets and the
slash character. For example, the tag presents text in bold letters. An HTML source file containing the
expression <B> This stands out. </B> is displayed on screen in bold. Notice that the tag </B> is required to
notate the end of the bold expression.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 17-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

6.2 Creating Dynamic Web Contents
So far we have looked at how to publish mostly static information on the website, but many times we need to
create truly interactive applications for the website. One can write- scripts or external programs, using almost
any 32-bit programming language, such as Per! or Windows CGI or ASP or Visual Basic or Java. One just
has to make sure to use one of the standard server interfaces. CGI (Common Gateway Interface) is the
traditional definition of how server and browser interact. CGI is not a programming language, but a definition
of how the server and browser communicate. A CGI script is simply a script that conforms to this CGI
standard.
Scripts are external programs that the webservers run in response to a request from the browser. When the
visitor requests a URL that points to a script, the server executes it, and any output that the script creates is
sent back to the browser for display. One can use a script for tasks as varied as creating an interface to a
relational database system or creating own search engine, and anything in between; there are really no limits.
CGI also allows the server to create new documents on the fly- that is, at the moment the browser requests
them. The major benefit of CGI is that any CGI-compliant script will run on any CGI-compliant web server.

7. URL /INTERNET ADDRESS
URL stands for Uniform Resource Locator, which is just a way of talking about an Internet address. Every
resource available on the Web-HTML document, image, video clip, software program, etc. has an address
that may be encoded by URL. So in the largest sense, the URL can be used to link anything on the web. The
following are some examples:
Website homepage
Specific file on web
FTP site
Image
Databasequery

http:/ /www.computer.org
http:/ /www.stanford.edu/pub/sch edule.html
ftp:/ /rtfm.mit.edu
ftp:/ /www.sun.com/logo.gif
http:/ /www.excite.com/search.gw?trace=@search=laser+diode

8. GRAPHICS SOFTWARE
Unless one plans a text-only website, he needs some type of software to either create new graphics, convert
existing graphics or photos or both. There is a wide variety of high-quality freeware, shareware and
commercial software available for this purpose.
At a minimum, one needs software that can create or modify other image formats into both the GIF and JPEG
formats. If one plans to include a lot of images on the site, or if some of them are large or are photographs,
then one really wants to look for something more powerful that will let to edit an image's palette or
compression ratio to optimize them for the fastest download times.
The actual process of creating graphics or photos is of course software specific. There are hundreds of
software programs. Some simple guidelines to be followed to help graphics look good and load fast are:
(a) Keep the images small, i.e., its binary size or 'byte size'. For example, an image of 30K can take 30 to
view.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 17-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

(b) Use WIDTH and HEIGHT tags in an image's HTML tagging, this speeds up the image loading.
9. WEB AUTHORING
Documents, Images & File Types
Documents mean the computerized version of the word page-something that can store text, images and other
formatting information and can be read somehow on the computer. This is in contrast to the word image,
which specifically means a storage format for a visual image type that can be included within a document.
Finally, the term file. type refers to the actual format of a document, image, multimedia element, or other
format, including:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Simple ASCII text documents including HTML
Complex documents stored in a proprietary format, such as MS Word, Word Perfect, Excel, or
Pagemaker, etc.
Digital images stored in either proprietary formats such as photoshop or illustrator or in one of many
standard compression formats as GIF, TIFF, EPS and JPEG
Digital sound files stored in a variety of formats, such as MIDI, AU and WAV
Digital movies or animations stored as quick time, AVI, AIFF, Shockwave or a similar forma.t
Executable files that are part of or complete software programs, including Java applets.

10. SETTING UP FREE WEBSITE
To set up a site, one will need space on a web server to store all HTML documents. There are a lot of sites on
the Net that give free web space. Select one that meets the requirements. We can use Geocities for an
example.
1. Goto-www.geocities.comandSignin.
2. If you're already a member of Yahoo, type in your username and password, else sign in as a new member
3. Next you'll be asked to fill in a few details, like the description of your page, a topic that best describes
your page, like movies, pets, business and finance, etc.
4. After filling in these details, click on the Submit button
5. The next screen displays your Yahoo_ID and a URL for your site: URL stands for Uniform Resource
Locator and IS the key to uniquely identify your site.
After creating the contents, you'll need an program to upload your site. FTP stands for File Transfer Protocol
and is a way of transferring files to and from computers on the Internet. An FTP client program (FTP client)
sends a request to an FTP server program (FTP server) asking to exchange information and transfer files. The
server then verifies that the user is authorised to send or receive files and responds to the request accordingly.
Numerous graphical FTP client software packages are available as freeware or shareware. One of the best
client software available on the Internet is WS-FTP. You can download it from www.tucows.com or

DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 17-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

www.ftppro.com.
On performing the above-mentioned steps, your site becomes up. Type in the URL in your browser and check
that every page is showing as you expected it to be. To be doubly sure, check in both Internet Explorer and
Netscape Navigator. The page could show differently on the two browsers, or even on different versions of
the same one.
11. REGISTERING YOUR DOMAIN NAME
The first thing to do is to get an address for the website in cyberspace. This is called domain name
registration, for example, www. yourcompany.com. Domain name registration is done through the InterNICan organisation that manages a database of all domain names registered so far and is a collaboration between
National Science Foundation of the US, AT& T, and Network Solutions. One can register a domain name
with Network Solutions, AT&T manages the database and funding is provided by the National Science
Foundation
There are two broad types of domain names-the generic top-level domains of .corn, .org, .net, .mil, and
country-specific domain names like .in for India and .sg for Singapore.
One can register domain name as .com if the organisation is a commercial one, .org if it's a non-profit
organisation, and .net if it is any business. Net4lndia, an Indian JSP, currently offers domain name
registration at Rs 399 per year or Rs 750 for two years. Once a domain name has been assigned, it'll be
reserved for the number of years one has registered it for.
12. HOSTING WEBSITE
When it comes to hosting, there's a wide range of options available in the form of hosting companies and
ISPs. They provide space on their servers for any websjte. To choose one, one needs to iook at various
factors, including the price one has to pay, the space provided, and services the provider offers, including the
kind of access provided, server-side programming support (cgi-bin access), and e-mail services. The amount
of space depends on the content and how exhaustive or interactive the site would to be.
Traditionally, web servers were hosted in the US. But if most of the traffic is coming from India, one can
consider co-hosting server with an Indian ISP. This could often work out to be cheaper.
13. SEARCH ENGINES
The Internet provides access to an enormous number of databases distributed around the world and to a
variety of scientific facilities, including digital L&IC, unique databases, supercomputers and remote scientific
sensing instruments. It collectively offers tremendous potential for collaborating and for sharing resources,
such as documents software data and network services. Access:ng different databases available in different
laboratories/institutions facilitates research in interested areas.
A search engine is a program that searches through some dataset. In the context of the web, the word search
engine is most often used for search forms that search through databases. Search engines are constantly
looking for ways in which to increase their user base. The search engine can interrogate a user request and

DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 17-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

then provide either updating services or suggestions as to potentially useful sites. Some of the search engines
are:
Altavista-www.altavista.com and Infoseek- www.infoseek.com have their own particular approaches in
managing the web. They are useful as they give quick answers to reference questions and general research.
Some of the services are good for exhaustive trawling but when searches return thousands of sites the
effectiveness of the service becomes questionable. Altavista is probably the most powerful web searching
facility with an exhaustive database and the capability to search USENET newsgroups as well as websites.
The query language is also powerful.
Ask Jeeves is an example of a tool that tries to imitate the experienced librarian. Ask a question and it will
respond with several more in an attempt to elicit more accurate details of what one really wants. The
interesting feature about Ask Jeeves is that it uses natural language processing to understand and match user's
Questions to an extensive knowledge base. The knowledge base consists of housands of researched answer
links to web sites compiled by research staff. The publicity material proudly claims supremacy over other
search services precisely because the Knowledge base is built by human not by software spiders. Ask Jeeves
appears to offer a new role in building the knowledge base for particular domains. As the web browser has
become an ubiquitous feature in offices and homes, several traditional online hosts now provide web front
ends, a trend which is to be encouraged.
Yahoo! is one of the stable of products produced by the Yahoo Corporation and is an unsurprising
development in the world of search engines. It employs editors and librarians to catalogue and organise the
sources it references. It allows the user to create their own user profile.
Science Direct Service provides online articles, access to the full text of more than 1000 scientific medical
and technical journals by the worlds leading scientific publisher. The service is only through subscription or
license.
Actually not everyone on every occasion will feel that it is appropriate to do their searching on Internet.
When time is short, the search is complex or the source unfamiliar; they might turn to expert. searches, and
there are many situations in which paying an expert is the easiest and wisest.
Search engines are one of the primary ways that Internet users find web sites. That's why any user with a
good search engine may see a dramatic increase in traffic. Many websites appear poorly in search engine
rankings or may not be listed at all because they fail to consider how search engines work. With the
exploding number of sites, search engines are getting more sophisticated, therefore it is important to know the
features of the good search engines available on Internet and finally decide which would be best for one's web
pages.
14. SUBMISSION OF WEBSITE
What is the point of having a site if the world doesn't know about it? So, after one has designed and uploaded
site, it's very necessary to let people know of site's existence.
One of the most important things one could do to increase traffic to site is getting listed in the major search

DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 17-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

engines. There are two ways to do it:
Automated submission
There are a few sites on the net that quickly submit one's web page to many search engines at once. This is
easy, but usually produces only mediocre results. Here are some sites that do the submitting for any user:
http:/ /uswebsites.com/submit
http:/ /www.netcreations.com/postmaster
http:/ /addme.com
Manual submission screen
One could submit site to each of the major search engines, one by one. The sites on the search engines are
arranged in various categories like, education, entertainrnent, etc. To submit the site, first select an
appropriate category and then click on the 'Submit your site' or 'Add a URL's button from the end of the
category page. Some of the search engines where one can submit site are:
www.lycos.com
www.altavista.com
www.webcrawler.com
www.infoseek.com
www.yahoo.com
www.khoj.com
Search engines have their own rules for indexing sites.
Wish you a happy WEB HOSTING

