DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 26-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

DESIDOC Website - A Portal for DRDO services
AK TYAGI, Sumit Goswami & Hemu Agarwal

1. Everything Old is New Again: DESIDOC website
Websites are hotter than hot, newer than tomorrow, the greatest thing since sliced bread.
Believe it or not, no organization that aspires beyond the neighborhood grocery store
level will be able to survive out in the new century without a website. Once it became
clear how versatile a tool of Internet could be, people everywhere woke up and smelled
the TCP/IP coffee. Then they realized how much more useful the website models over
the intranets was than the proprietary client server software running over the networking
systems; and the intranet stampede was on.
To benefit from website over an intranet requires hard work, education, time and last but
not far from least, a commitment from the top down, that you're going to fundamentally
change how your company works. The tinder was all in place in the form of DRDO's
Rapid Online Network Access (DRONA), but the fire didn't really start until the Network
Services Division of DESIDOC converted its B2B(Business to business) site to a
B2C(Business to customer) or to do a proper justice to the users, B2E(Business to
Entertainment) site with DESIDOC's vast Information services related to books, reports,
articles in journals and conference proceeding holdings etc. alongwith regular updates of
national and international news, stock exchange rates, weather forecasts, cartoons,
software downloads, e-message boards, horoscopes etc and many similar modules are
under construction. By the time you think of a facility, which should be available on
DESIDOC website, we plan to develop and present it to you for use on your desktop.A
big factor in the growth of DRONA will be GroupWare. It will allow people to work
together over the network on one or more common projects. It’s largely an untouched
platform and the idea is under development and would be available at DESIDOC website
in near future with full security and a highly user friendly interface. This will enable
organizations to have integrated communication, key business procedures like office
orders, cash purchase, leave approval, project development, order processing and
technical support handled by workflow support programs.

2. The Completed puzzle: DESIDOC Portal
Does all this sound incredibly difficult? Here we are not only asking you to consider
using all this high technology; but on top of all that, we are asking you to change the very
nature of your organization dynamics. After a comment like that, you might be
wondering if it's worth going to the extra trouble of digitizing an organization when
individual users can simple be given a file of papers containing information.
Unfortunately, there's a lot like getting a mouser when the rest of the Defence
Organizations of the world are moving on to the space fighters. The IT world is
undergoing a massive transformation. You can jump on the bandwagon or get runover by
it.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 26-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

Still not sure? The final answer depends on how you conduct your operations. If you can
deal with slow file transfer, minimal interoffice communication and only a feeble attempt
at co-operative work, you really don't need an Intranet packed with websites. If your
organization can benefit from fast e-mails, true GroupWare, online file transmission and
approval, and getting up-to-the-minute software and news updates then stop waiting! The
DESIDOC website awaits you; and the 21st century awaits your organization.

3. Advantages of using a website:
Web Technology
•
•
•
•
•
•

Web Technology is scalable and can be applied across WANs as well as small- to
medium-sized LANs.
Web Technology is excellent way to publish all the frequently changing
documents within an organization.
Fewer numbers are crunched. Web Servers typically do not need the
computational power of the processor and hard-disk space that GroupWare
applications, such as lotus notes, require.
Easy-to-use Web Browsers are available for virtually all operating systems and
hardware combinations; all of them are cheap, and many of them are free.
There is no single-vendor solution to the Website marketplace; no single company
dominates the scene and as a result of this open nature of Internet standards,
products from different sources interpolate very well.
Advances in HTML authoring tools and the addition of new features to desktop
application suites make it much easier to create HTML pages for webservers.

Cost Savings: The substantial cost savings to DESIDOC can be the result of the
following:
•
•
•
•

Decreasing the number of print copies of various Newsletters.
Sending a softcopy of the document/newsletter to a far off laboratory through the
network, where it can be reproduced, thus saving the transportation cost and time.
Lowering the cost of handling and transporting paper forms by creating and
handling electronic forms.
Lowering of travel cost by providing online training.

Time Savings: DESIDOC not only can save money but also time. It is now capable to do
the following
•
•
•
•

Disseminate information instantly.
Reduce support time and energy by human resource, administration, finance, help
desk and so on.
Minimize time spent on learning specialized software applications through easyto-use web browsers.
Reduce time required to set up database account inquires.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 26-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

Increased Functionality: With DESIDOC website, we are able to increase the
functionality of existing information structure and do the following:
•
•
•
•

Gain global access to information at the speed of light.
Seamlessly connect workgroups and offices.
Keep data up-to-date
Expand knowledge by activating additional levels of details as needed.

Connected Workforce: One of the most important benefit of DESIDOC website can be
in connecting the various aspects of the organization, including the following:
•
•

Top officials can communicate effectively and directly with all the employees
Functionally related, but geographically disconnected workgroups can work
together.

4. How will people access DESIDOC Website?
People will access the site directly once word starts to spread about how useful the
information is and how much time they can save, but we will have to get the word out.
We can do this by the traditional methods of memos and e-mails, but we can also use one
site to advertise another if we include a What's New section on the original site of DRDO
and in various pages of different laboratories. People will also access our site via links
from their sites. This might be a site run by a different laboratory of DRDO or a site
concerned with similar service. The creators of the other sites will add a link to our site
because they think that we have something on it that their users will value, and it makes
them look pretty good to be associated with us in this way.

5. Welcome to the web
It's not the information but the hands-on nature of that information which makes the web,
which makes the web so special. You can find static facts in any book or file. Books
takes months to update, but WebPages take minutes to update. Finding something in a
book or file can take hours if you have access to the right volume or number. Finding
something online can also take hours, but there's a decent chance it will take mere
seconds; and every volume that's online is available for your search. With the
combination of databases on the Web, manually updated pages will become the rarity
rather than the norm. Today, we have a website made up mostly of static, unchanging
information. Oh, it moves in hours and days instead of weeks and months; but still, most
of its information stays untouched by an editor's hand for months. Not anymore. With the
one-two punch of databases in the backend integrated with the scripting languages, we
are quickly moving towards the day when the website will be alive as television
broadcasting, if not more so.
You should also remember that when you put your trust in Web Information, you're
putting your faith in editors and webweavers who just might change the official dicta on a

DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 26-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

subject on a whim based on the political climate of the day. On the web, this kind of
information can be written, edited and published in less time than it will take you to read
this article. Are we telling you not to use the web? Of course not. We are just warning
you not to blindly trust its information.
Over the next few months, you will see many web developments. By the turn of the year,
you will look back at today's DESIDOC website and think it as antique as we now see
Tipu's sword. The biggest change will be the automation of file transfer, ease of
information gathering and inter-laboratory communication.
There's a line in an old Eagles' song, "Hotel California", that says: "You can check out
anytime, but you can never leave." That’s' not a bad way of thinking about the Intranet.
Once your organization has made a commitment to the Intranet, Sir, you are committed.
In sickness and in health, for senior or for junior, once your organization is on the
Intranet, you're there to stay, no matter what second thoughts you might have.

6.Working Together
People will cause you more headaches than hardware and software combined. It's tragic
but true. If everyone worked together in harmony with his or her eyes on the goal, you
could have anything short of a functional website up within a week. Fancier, faster and
interactive sites would take about a month. Forget it. That fantasy scenario isn't going to
happen. Even if you throw orders at your Intranet, its not going to help. That's because
there are atleast three groups that need to get in sync in order to get a website running:
your own development team, the management/administration and your employees.
There's more red tape in that scenario and unfortunately, red tape never sticks together
the way you want it to. So the first thing to do is relax and realize that bringing up my
interactive website, is going to take at least a few more months. Yes, we know everyone
will tell you that they can do it quicker than that. We also know they're lying through
their teeth.

7. Managing our site: Webmaster and Webweaver
Webmaster: It's a job title that gets bantered about a lot, but few people ever focus on
what the job is and isn't about. Our webmaster is in-charge of maintaining the hardware,
software and HTTP connectivity of our web server. Maintaining the server's actual
connections to the Intranet is the network administrator's job. The jobs can be combined;
but if we are doing a lot with our website, we'll find that’s' an impossible job to ask for
anyone.
Another job, which many organizations combine with webmaster, is the webweaver. In
one word: Don't. The webweaver is the person who actually produces the web
documents. To do that job well, the person needs to be a good designer, editor, and writer.
Did you see a word in that description about being able to dissect IP packets? Nope, You
don't expect your desktop publishers to be network engineers, or vice-versa; and the same
holds true for the net.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 26-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

The jobs used to get confused because building and maintaining a website and its pages
used to look like the same technical job. We've long left that point of web page
development behind. Technical expertise is no longer requirement for webweavers.
Webmasters, yes; Webweavers, no. If that confuses you, think of this way: Do you expect
writers and editors to know how to run printing presses, or printing press technicians how
to write solid prose? We think you see our point.
We plan on changing at least the front page, or "home page", of our website at least once
a month. At the same time, we don't want to alienate my users. For example, we don't
want to change how our users reach online databases or log onto a chat session, except to
make substantive improvements. We want to look new and innovative, but not so new
that my old users get lost or run into dreaded 40.4 error, which means that the webserver
can't make heads or tails of an old URL.
7.1 The Hardware and Communication Foundation:
At DRDO, a Wide Area Network links the entire organization. The various laboratories
are connected via ISDN links. The connection within a laboratory is through the local
LAN via Ethernet or fast Ethernet. The employees at remote locations can also connect to
the network through dial-up. This computing and network infrastructure, running TCP/IP,
represents substantial bandwidth and gives DRDO employees information on demand.

7.2 Software Foundation:
For this computing and network infrastructure to deliver information on demand via the
intranet, a number of software components are necessary. We have implemented
numerous components of Microsoft Corp. and Netscape Communications Web
Technology offerings. Primary servers run on Win NT with Internet Information Server.
Forms-based transaction is through ASP using MS-Access at backend and we plan to use
SQL or Oracle in future. Internet Explore is the browser of choice. We would like to
encourage employees to develop their own web pages.
7.3 Navigation Foundation:
The DESIDOC Home Page has a number of features that enhance the user's ability to
access information that is important for day-to-day business. Because of the magnitude of
information that is available through the website, we developed the navigation tools

DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 26-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

described here: the navigation frame, a search engine and the multiple views of
information.

8 LINKS ON DESIDOC HOME PAGE
With the expansion of DRONA and its acceptability among DRDO staff, DESIDOC is
constantly moving towards the betterment of its website and is constantly adding on new
services to give its users a flavor of advancement of DESIDOC towards providing better
and the latest services to its user and moving towards the concept of achieving Digital
Nervous System for DESIDOC and DRDO.
8.1. Home Page [http://10.2.52.1/desidoc/default.htm]:
The home page is the starting point for the exploration of our website. The homepage sets
the tone for the rest of our site, both by way of an introduction and as a gateway; it acts as
a combination magazine cover, billboard, and front page headline. Everyone starts the
exploration of the DESIDOC website from the homepage and it reflects the personality of
our laboratory. DESIDOC is one of the Main Router Centre (MRC) for the DRONA
project. We plan to put on a number of services more than the flavors of Baskin Robbins,
useful to the intranet surfers

DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 26-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

8.2. Services Page:
This includes a list of some basic services provided by DESIDOC.
•

Online Database[http://10.2.51.4/] : This system will help you to search the
following

•
•
•
•

Defence Science Library Catalogue : The search can be based on Title, Author,
Keyword, Publisher, Corporate Source, ISBN and/or year of publication for books.
Journal Holdings of DRDO Libraries:Accession on the basis of title, keyword,
publisher, ISSN and/or starting year for publications; on the basis of title, author,
keyword, Translation number,Accession number for translation database.
Newspaper Clippings :This service enables users to view various news clippings.
They can also search news of interestcategorized by date, headline,author and / or
newspaper.
CEP courses handbook :It comprises of a handbook of various CEP courses
conducted in various sister laboratories of DRDO throughout India thus providing
a timely information for people to plan out the course to be attended. This require
Adobe Acrobat reader installed at the user end which can be also downloaded
from the DESIDOC website.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 26-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

8.3. DRDO Publications :
This comprises of various regular journals and publications published at DESIDOC
•
•
•
•
•

DRDO Newsletter : The user is able to view DRDO News Letter since January
2000. A news letter in the archive is also available since January 1998.
Technology Focus : The user is able to view Technology Focus since December
1999. Archive is also available since June 1997.
DBIT : The user is able to view abstracts from Defence Science Journal since
July 1999. Archive is also available since January 1998.
DSJ : The user is able to view abstracts from DESIDOC Bulletin of Information
Technology since March 1999. Archive is also available since January 1998.
DRDO Science Spectrum : The user is able to view the various special
publications like DRDO Science spectrum. All the papers of Defence Science
Spectrum are available on this webpage.

8.4 About DESIDOC :
It contains general information about DESIDOC like its history, Director's profile and
information
about
its
personnel.
8.5 Personal Information:
It contains informations like strength of personnel, activities done and the responsibilities
of various people in different divisions of DESIDOC.Personal Page is a useful way to
introduce our people,to announce promotions or change in job responsibility.The
Personal page gives the site a warm,personal tone,and adds to its personal credibility.We
have added photographs and plan to put audio and video clips All these elements help to
humanize the subject
9 Other Facilities

DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 26-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

•

DRDO Website: A copy of entire DRDO website, which is available on
Internet, is available on DRONA also.
Online Complaint/Suggestion monitoring System : The user can log on to the
nearest terminal and lodge his complaint or provide any suggestion which is
continuosly viewed at DESIDOC help desk. The latest status of the complaint is
also viewable in the site.
Using DESIDOC website to fill out forms: You are not likely to find the whole
lot of manual forms around DESIDOC these days. You will howevere find a
number of electronic forms on the site and in near future the form movement will
be online too.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 26-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

Download Menu Page : The download menu page gives our users a quick and
easy way to download documents, readme files, device drivers, technical support
bulletin, service packs, shareware, compressed file archives, latest MP3 music,
software revisions, and so on. We plan to use icons to indicate the range of file
types available for download, including text files, executable files, games files,
and zipped files. Along with each filename, will be included the file format, the
size of the file in bytes, and the revision level so that users know exactly what
they are getting into.
Search Engine: The search engine, which uses a keyword to locate specific
resources is a specialised kind of intranet application. Once our intranet grows
above a certain size, we will find that some sort of search capability will make it
much easier to use.
Personnel Page: A personnel page is a useful way to introduce our people, to
announce promotions or changes in job responsibilities. The personnel page gives
the site a warm, personal tone, and adds to its credibility. We have added
photographs and plan to put audio and video clips. All these elements help to
humanize the subject.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 26-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

Technical Support Page: The technical support page will include instructions on
how to perform a specific operation, such as upgrade, or it might contain a
troubleshooting chart designed to help users identify and fix their problems. We
plan to use a Intranet Help Desk, where employees with technical problems
complete online forms detailing the kinds of problems they are experiencing.
Technical Report Page: We will use this to present new or updated technical
information to interested parties throughout the company.
DESIDOC News Page: This page announces new, upgraded or revised services,
new staff, and even new research and development projects. Sometimes this is the
only way employees find out what the rest of the world has already learned about
the organization from the daily orders.
Chat Facility :This enables users of all the labs for an online discussion i.e.
chatting
Message Boards :By using this service one can submit his views for discussion and
any other person logging onto
this site can read his views and if willing, can submit
his reply to the concerned topic
Weather Forecast :The user gets an updated weather forecast and temperatures of
metropolitans

DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 26-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

Horoscope: The DRONA surfer can view his monthly horoscope on this page.
Quiz: Some brain twisters to check out your general knowledge
Word Jumble: Log on to check out how strong your thesarus is.
Outbreaking news:User is also able to view some outbreaking news on this webpage
Exchange rate is: Latest Exchange rate for dollar and pound conversion are also
available
Entertainment:Thinking about the entertainment of DRONA surfers some jokes,
cartoons and beautiful quotes are also added on this site

10 Looking Ahead
So where do you go from here? Pragmatically speaking, you are going to blast off to your
web browser and click onto DESIDOC website. First, let's forget about the nifty new
services, programs and all that jazz and talk about real business. Once in place,
DESIDOC website is going to be more expensive to run and maintain than your old LAN.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 21, No. 2, March 2001, pp. 26-34
© 2001, DESIDOC

You can count on budgeting in a minimum of two employees during its initial phase of
operation: a webmaster and a webweaver. Later on, finances will depend on how your
system grows. If the website is a great success, you may find yourself needing to rebuild
the entire organization around its network connectivity. That's not likely, but it will
happen . So keep your eyes open.

11 FUTURE OF WEB
The web will continue to grow, grow and grow, and…well, you get the idea. For a time,
the web will grow so fast that it's going to outstrip the ability of DRONA to carry it. The
web's audience is going to continue to grow. The DESIDOC website will be the tie that
binds the laboratories of DRDO into one organization. We are not talking about the warm
feelings and the brotherhood of man, we are talking about a fundamental shift in the way
organizational transactions occur. Some business will move lock, stock, and barrel onto
the web. Today, we only talk about having a organization. The website is going to
accelerate that trend.
By the year 2002, our most of the work will be running on the Intranet with some proof
against failures. Most of our users will be working with a universal interface that makes
reading the boss' memo on their machine, using the organizational database to check the
facts for their response to the boss or cash-purchase, and then sending a reply to the
accounts or administration, all parts of a seamless whole. Besides making work faster,
since you won't need to walk from one application to another, training costs will go down.
Today, an office worker needs to know half-a-dozen applications to be the officecomputing wizard. Tomorrow, since everyone will need to know two or three
applications, more people will be using their computers more efficiently and taking less
time to reach that level of proficiency. This may have two effects in the organization.
Some business will work at about the same rate due to what we call the dither factor, but
moving towards more perfection. The intranet can bring a revolution to your workplace,
if you have the courage to change the way your organization does transactions. Just do it.
Another, similar change is that even now, the white collar elite refuses to work with
computers. The day for that sort of outlook is long since gone; and anyone who thinks
like that is already holding your organization back. Tomorrow, they won't simply be
burdening your business, they'll be an anchor around your neck dragging it to its doom.
Tomorrow, real organizational power will be belonging to those who can use the
unparalleled communication and information abilities of the intranet. It's time to stop
putting up with featherbedding executives and get rid of them. They've got their golden
parachutes; so we wouldn't shed any tears for the executive who insists that a web is just
something a spider makes.
Transformation, metamorphosis, evolution in action - the rise of DESIDOC Website is all
this and more. You know the issues now; you know enough of the details to make
informed decisions. Now, it's up to you. The new day is what you will make it. Ignore the
changes, and you'll have cause to regret it. Ride the wings of change, though, and you can
take our organization to new heights. Enjoy the trip. It will be a hell of a ride, but the
rewards at the end will make the voyage more than worth the effort. We wish you a
Happy Surfing of our site.

