DESlDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 21, No. 3, May 2001, pp. 3-16
Q 2001, DESIDOC

Similarity Between the Ranganathan's Postulates for
Designing a Scheme for Library Classification and
Peter Pin-Sen Chen's Entity Relationship Approach to
Data Modelling and Analysis
Madan Mohan Kashyap
Abstract
This paper describes the theoretical framework of Ranganathan's postulates for
designing a scheme for library classification and Peter Pin-Sen Chen's
entity-relationship approach to data modelling and analysis techniques to see the
similarity between their concepts and applications, in their respective domains. It
also emphasises the importance of Ranganathan's postulates in organising and
searching the World Wide Web resources.

1. INlRODUCTION
We find that there is a similarity between
the Ranganathan's Postulates for Designing a
Scheme for
Library
Classification and
Entity-Relationship Data Modelling Concepts
stated by Chen, Peter Pin-Sen. These
technologies are further modified by other
experts. Both of the theoretical approaches are
concerned with the organisation of information
and apply almost similar theoretical principles,
concepts,
and techniques for effective
organisation and retrieval of information in their
respective domains. Postulational approach to
classification based on a set of postulates or the
principle o f facet analysis and synthesis
formulated by Ranganathan can be applied for
(a) designing a facet scheme of library
classification, (b) classifyng and organising
documents possessed by the libraries in a
helpful classified order, and (c) organising
records of the bibliographic items as Jibrary
catalogues to enable the library users to search
and identify the bibliographic items of their
interest through various access points.'" The
Entity-Relationship
[ER]
data
modelling
technique is used to specify a conceptual
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2001,21(3)

model of a database or to formulate a data
structure design to organise the data or data
records about a real world entities (such as
animal, plants, documents, people, etc.).
This paper describes the theoretical
framework of Ranganathan's postulates for
designing a scheme for library dassification and
Peter
Pin-Sen
Chen's
entity-relationship
approach to data modelling and analysis
techniques to see the similarity between their
concepts and applications, in their respective
domains.
Both of these theoretical approaches in our
view are complimentary and supplementary
and are used as means for designing,
developing and searching databases of all types
of organisations, irtcluding libraries.
We find that the faceted classification
systems and subject indexing systems based
upon Ranganathan's postulational approach or
faceted analysis technique have been found, in
some respect, superior to other techniques of
online retrieval of information from the
databases of information systems. This point of
view is demonstrated by Codert' by three
3

examples, the first one is based on a short
classification system derived from B. Bachnan,
the second is built upon the classification
systeni used by Library and Information Science
Abstracts (LISA), the third example is concerned
with sonie possible consequences which could
be derived from retrieval with PRECIS strings.
Ellis and Vasconcelos' have also pointed out the
continuing relevance of facet analysis as a
technique for searching and organising World
Wide Web based documents. They argue that
facet analysis, which is essentially a concept
based approach to indexing is an excellent
approach to searching and organising the
WWW resources rather than using either
search engines or search directories. Finally,
they argue that the underlying philosophy of
facet analysis is better suited to the disparate
nature of WWW resources and searches than
the assumption of current IR research.
Neelameghan in one of his paper indicated that
"the process of developing the conceptual
schema, which involves identifying, delimiting
or description of various entity-types, their
attributes and the relationships among them
and mapping them on to a data model is similar
to the process of designing a scheme for
knowledge or subject classification by
Ranganathan. "'-'

2. ENTITY RELATIONSHIP (ER)
APPROACH
The (ER) approach as a data analysis and
modelling technique was first introduced by
Chen, Peter Pinssen, in 1976." Since that time,
many experts in the field of information
technology
have
suggested
several
modifications to the ER m ~ d e l . ' ~ "It has
presently evolved into one of the most
important data analysis and database design
technique. Database design is fundamentally a
task in data modelling and a data model is
architecture for data. It describes the general
structure of how data is organised.
The
purpose of data analysis is to represent data as
it is perceived by its users and referred to as
semantic modelling technique.''
This database modelling approach is an
analytical technique, which is based on three
fundamental concepts namely: (i) Entities, the

objects or things about which one wants to
keep data or fact in a database, (ii) Attributes
which represent the properties of the entities,
and (iii) Relationships, which represent the
association between entities and the entities
acquire or possess certain attributes or
properties due to their relationships with other
entities. These concepts are the foundation of
the ER model, with the help of which we can
outline a conceptual model (also called logical
view) of a database. The conceptual level
model or design of a database relates to the
representation of that part of the real world that
the database is about.
Prior to the introduction ER approach, data
requirements of an enterprise were determined
by analysing the processes, transactions,
outputs, or data flow of a system, or data
element presumed to be needed by users, or by
examining forms, files, reports of the enterprise
or
organisation
whose
computer-based
information system was being designed.

ER approach preempts, identifying and
describing of the real world, that is the universe
of the enterprise or problem area, that is the
objects or things associated with it, whose
database is to be built. This approach was
based on the assumption that examining only
processes, transactions, outputs, or data flows
of a system, or examining of all factors gives
partial of the environment. Without a proper
understanding of entities, objects or things
themselves and their environment, one can not
make reasoned decisions as to what data was
needed about those objects or things.

2.1

ER Approach
Databases

for

Building

ER approach helps us to get true or
complete picture of the real world or universe
whose database is to be built and involves:
(i) Identification and definition of entities of the
concerned real world -the problem area or of
the enterprise,
(ii) Entity grouping and description, and
(iii) Enterprise or problem area context
Each of these steps are explained below:
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2001,21(3)

2.1.7 Entity identification and definition
This step involves recognising various
entities whose database is to be built,
determining why they are important to the
organisation, researchers or users of database,
and naming them.

2.1.2 Entity grouping and description

entity-type, to be of importance for creating a
database of library .system, would be too
general or broad, as it can be fragmented into
too many subsets. Where as, to consider
'Library Users', 'Library Employees' and so on,
as the entities of interest is more precise and
relevant selection. O n the other hand, to
consider 'Temporary Members' and 'Per~iianent
Members' as entities of interest w o i ~ l d too
specific, particularly if niernber of each group is
given equal status or privileges accordi~igto the
rules of a library system. In this case,
'temporary' and 'permanent' are the attribute
or status of a user, and can alternate between
the two positions and still user having is tlqual
status.
b t b

This step involves grouping of entities of
interest (i.e., the given population) into broad
and narrowly. defined classes, identifying,
describing the . relevant attributes of the
entity-types (or entity classes) for creating the
records of entities in the given context.
Each group or class, broad or narrow,
constitutes of a number of entities that have a
set of attributes in common. Thus, the entity
description consists of identifying which
attributes of an entity-type (or entity class) are
relevant for creating the records of entities in a
given context.
.
Broadly, we can group entities around us
into persons, organisations, things, places,
events, etc. However, these groupings are too
general to handle in meaningful manner.
Therefore, we must form subgroups of each of
these classes into subtypes, i.e., into different
kinds of people, things, places, etc., for ease of
handling. The categorising of entities may be
based on criteria, such as, what the entities are,
what purposes they serve, what they do, how
they look like, how they are used, etc.
The entities sharing common attributes are
grouped together and form a class. In other
words, an entity class could be considered as
an aggregation of attributes. Similarly, an entity
or object could be considered as an
aggregation of its properties. Selecting
appropriate differentiating attribute(s) or
characteristics does the further division of entity
classes into sub groups. The cannon for
characteristics and cannon of succession of
characteristics of Ranganathan" are helpful in
this process.
One has to specify the recognised entities
and entity groups and subgroups at the exact
level of precision that ensures that it not so
general as to be meaningless, and yet not too
specific. For example to consider 'person', as an
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2001,21(3)

It is sometimes necessary to tiivicitl
entity-types into sub-groups. For exnnlple,
Professional
Staff,
Semi-professional,
Non-professional Staff might all be declared as
subtypes of entity-type Library Employee. Like
wise Library Manager, Deputy Library Manager,
and Assistant Library Manager would be
declared as subtypes of the entity-type
Professional Staff. While forming groups of
entities, it is necessary that we attempt to use
the most general, yet niost meaningful,
grouping possible. The important consequenctA
of forming generalised hierarchy of entities or
entity groups or classes is that - entities lower
down the hierarchy inherit the attributes ant1
relationships of entities higher up in the
hierarchy. Hence, a deputy library manager
would inherit attributes of deputy library
managers in general, and of eniployees in
general. Likewise, a deputy library manager
would inherit the relationship of a library
employee to a department.
The broad group of an entity set or the first
level group is called family or super-class. E,lc:h
super-class or family constitutes of subgroups,
and the groups higher level can he further
subdivided in subgroups. (The term - type and
subtype is also used in place of group ;~ntJ
subgroup, respectively). Each subgroup within
the family or super-class has a comnlon
characteristic that differentiates i t from other
groups of the family, and shares all the
attributes of the family as whole. (A
5

characteristic is some property or attribute that
distinguish one thing from other).
An entity, entity family, entity-type or group
is defined within the context of the organisation
or the library system whose database is
supposed to be built. Thus, an entity belonging
to a broad group in one context may belong to
subclass/subgroup/subtype of entities in
another context.
Entity groups, at family level and below, are
primarily formed based on role which member
of each group plays in the organisation. Further,
the et3tii.j qrouping may be created in the form
of a mutually exclusive (disjoint) type of
subclasses or mutually inclusive
(partially
disjoint or overlapping) type of subclasses.
In some instances however, an entity can
play a multiple role. For instance, a member of
a university library system can be a teacher, a
student, and a library staff member. In real
world, a tedcher, a student, and a library staff
member belong to mutually exclusive sub
classes. In case the library rules do not provide
equal loan facilities or other privi!eges to the
members each group, then in this case, each
group must be treated mutually exclusive
group. However, if member o i each group is
given equal status or privileges according to the
rules of a library system, then though the roles
of each entity-type or group are distinct in the
context of university set up, all these entity
groups be merged in one family type - Library
Member. Their roles (as teacher, as student, or
staff member) may however be treated as their
attributes. The subgroups of entity-type Library
Member, namely Teacher Member, Student
Member, and Employee Member are to be
treated as its overlapping or mutually inclusive
subclasses.
While classifying entities into families (super
classes), groups and subgroups, the following
factors need to be kept in mind:
(a) If the roles are mutually exclusive, i.e., if the
entities can play one role i n the organisation
and not other, define separate entity families,
groups, or subgroups.

(b) If the roles are distinct, but not mutually
exclusive, merge the entities into a single
entity family or a broader group.

2.1.3 Enterprise Context
Enterprise context involves identifying and
defining the relationships that exists between
the identified and defined entities, their relative
importance to the enterprise as a whole, and
each specific part/sub-unit/subsystem of the
enterprise. The enterprise or problem context
also involves identifying the role or function of
each of the entities or entity-types within the
enterprise or organisation. For example, the
Entity-type 'bibliographic item' has different
perspective in the context of a library system in
comparison to its as~ociationwith a business
enterprise (e.g., publisher). The specific
description of bibliographic entitjes and their
relationships with other entities within a library
system are relevant only within the context of
the library system.

2.2

Entity Relationship (ER) Diagrams

Entity models are usually mapped out as
entity-relationship diagrams (ER diagrams). The
product of entity-relationship diagramming is a
model of entities (objects of interest), the
relationships between entities, and attributes
associated with entities in some domain of
discourse. An ER diagram illustrates the data to
be stored in an information system, which
constitutes a database of the information
system. The data to be stored in a database
pertains to an entity or a set of entities in real
world, sometimes called the mini-world. The
data about an entity are essentially the values
of its attributes (or attribute set) and their
relationships with other entities, that is the
attributes the entity acquires or attains due to
its
relationships
with
other
entities.
Relationships represent connections between
entities and meaningful dependencies between
them.
An entity or an entity-type (i.e., the object
set about which one wants to keep data or fact
in a database) is represented on a diagram by a
rectangular box in which written the meaningful
name ior entity. A relationship between entities
is represented by drawing a line (some time
labelted) between relevant entity boxes, on the
diagram. An attribute is represented an oval
attached by a line to the appropriate entity. The
entity identifier (attribute) is underlined.
DESIDOC Bulletin of lnf Jechnol, 2001,21(3)

Gets on Loan

User

Document

Figure 1. An illustration of ER Diagram

ER diagrams show data at rest, i.e., data
being stored or to be stored in the proposed
system, independent of how that data will
eventually be processed or used. ER diagrams
complement data flow diagrams or flow charts,
which show data in motion i.e., as data flows.
System analysts use this tool to develop
implementation-independent data
models,
which allow them communicate with end users
in
non-technical
language.
The
implementation-independentmodels are usually
called conceptual, logical or essential models.
The conceptual model (also called conceptual
or logical view of a database) is a concise
description of the data requirement of end user
or users of computer-based information system.
It describes the various entity-types, their
attributes and the relationship between them.
The conceptual schema might be regarded
as an ovtr all logical database description or a
global model representation of a database as
conceived by the library database administrator
or systems analyst.and is entirely independent
of physical storage organisation of a database.
A coriceptual schema can be defined using ER
model concepts and can be displayed by means
of the graphica) n~tation.""~
An ER diagram is conventionally referred to
as a conceptual model of a database system.
From this conceptual model, we derive an
implementationdependent
logical
model
(expressed in the form of as a series of tables
structured in third normal form Tor a relational
database system), which may be mapped on to
or converted into the database structure of a
Database Management System (DBMS). The
final step in database development is to
produce a physical model. That is, a series of
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2001,21(3)

record structures expressed in the syntax of
some programming language or DBMS.''

A database conceptual schema is specified
during database design of an information
system and is not expected to change
frequently.

3. DEFINITIONS OF KEY CONCEPTS

OF ER APPROACH
3.1

Entity

An entity or ot,ject is defined as anything
(physical or abstract) in the real world about
which one wants to keep data, facts or store
descriptive information in a database record. An
entity may be a tangible object with physical
existence, such as, a particular person, an
employee, a library member, a book, n serial, a
chair, or a table. It may be a non-tangible object
with conceptual existence or an abstract
concept, such as, an event, a transaction, a job,
a procedure, a subject of study, or a kniversity.
All entities are distinct from one another in
the sense that each possesses a particular set of
properties, attributes or values i:~osedistinguish
it from the others. Thus, a hibliographic item
has properties such as title, sire, price, cost,
etc.; a library user possesses attributes such as
name, age, educational qualification, place of
residence, etc.; and a library employee has
attributes such as name, address, basic salary,
etc.
The entities may exist in large homogeneous
groups where all members are capable of.beinp
described in the same manner having identical
attributes, or they may be fragmented or
considered into many subtypes, each with a
description which are either slightly different, or
7

in some cases radically different, from the other
members of the same group.
We contrast or differentiate between
entities, for some purpose, based on some
characteristic or characteristics, wen if in the
real world they are from the same class of
objects. For example, library members and
library eniployees are both persons, but library
member is a person who niakes use of library
collection, while library employee is a person
who organises and maintains the library
collection for the use of the library members. A
monograph and a serial are both bibliographic
items, but a monograph is a non-serial
bibliographic item (i.e., it can complete in one
part or iinite number of parts, or intended to be
completed in a finite number of parts), but a
serial is a periodical publication or bibliographic
item published/issued in successive parts
bearing
numeric
and/or
chronological
designations and intended to be continued
indefinitely. Each part is generally made up of
distinct and independent contributions, not
forming a continuous exposition.
The manifestation we referred to above as
entities can be called entity-types (or entity
classes) because each denotes a set of objects
(individual entities), each of which exhibits the
properties/attributes described for the class and
about which one may be interested in collecting
facts or data for use. An entity-type is a
category and an entity, strictly speaking, is an
instance of a given entity-type. The data
collected about an entity is descriptive data
about attributes of the entity. Thus, the
entity-type 'library member' i s made up of
individual entities, each of which has attributes,
name, age, and educational qualification, place
of residence, etc. Every individual entity
belonging to this class possesses all the
attributes of the class but differ from one
another in the values of data elements or items
associated with their attributes.

3.2 Attribute
An attribute is a characteristic, a property, or
a fact of an entity, entity class or entity-type,
and a set attributes describe an entity or
entity-type. An attribute associated with an
entity or entity-type can be intrinsic or natural,
such as 'size' of a book, or extrinsic (or
8

associative, assigned to it or acquired by an
entity due to its relationship with another
entity), such as 'written-by', 'accession number'
of a book. An attribute may also describe, why
a relation exist, how long it will exist or has
existed, or under what condition it exists.
The value of an attribute of an entity
provides a piece of information or elementary
data about an entity or about its relationship
with other entities. Title, for example, is the
attribute of the entity bibliographic item (a
monograph, a serial or an article), and so is
edition, date of publication and extent. From
the values of attributes: title, date of
publication, extent, bibliographic item, type,
etc., we can identify a barticular bibliographic
item, know whether the item is a monograph,
serial, or component of a serial or composite
monograph. A string o f symbols used to
represent an attribute of particular entity is
called a value of the attribute. Thus, 2nd ed.,
1998 and xx+200p are the value of the
attributes - edition, year, date of publication,
and extent respectively, of a particular book.
A value of an attribute is often divided into
elementary parts or units called data elements.
For example, we represent the attribute name
of an author is into following parts (or data
elements) - entry element, other part the name,
role, etc. Thus, a defined attribute of an
entity-type has one or more data elements
associated with it.

3.3

Relationship

A relationship represents associations or
connections among the entities. in real world
entity does not stand-alone and acquires certain
attributes due to its relationships with other
entities, or due to actions performed on by
other entities or agents those bring changes in
its state or conditions. A particular bibliographic
item in a library, say a monograph is writtewby
an author(s), published by a publisher, sold by a
vendor, is bought by a library, is classified by a
staff member, etc. Each of these is an example
of a relationship, a logical connection between
two or more entities. For example, the terms
'written by' and 'edited by' show relationship
between the entity-types MONOGRAPH (i.e., a
published work of an author) and the
AUTHOR. Thus, we can say that the name of
DESJDOC Bulletin d l n f Technd, 2001,21(3)

author or editor of a 'Monographf is the
attribute acquired by an entih/ 'Monograph'
because of its association or link with the entity
'Author'.
It may be pointed out that
relationships exist only between entities, not
between attributes of entities.

3.4

Domain of Attribute

To facilitate the correct construction and
efficient operation of a database, we not only
recognise and define the entity sets with which
we are concerned,.their relevant attributes, but
also state the domain of each attribute. The set
of valid values of an attribute is called the
domain of the attribute. For example, a designer
of a bibliographic database system must make
decisions about matters, such as: (a) what
elements of information about the bibliographic
items to include-the name(s) of the principal
author($, the name(s) of collaborator(s), title,
edition, so forth! (b) how to determine who is
the principal author of the work? (c) whether an
author's name should be recorded as it appears
on the document, or should be recorded in the
form described or restated in an authority file,
and so forth.

4. RANCANATHAN'S POSTULATES
FOR DESIGNING A SCHEME FOR
LIBRARY CLASSIFICATION
According
to
Ranganathan,
library
classification is concerned with "classification of
subjects or universe of subject^."^ A subject i s
the theme of a work, an organised or
systematised body of ideas, facts, data, or
information concerning some thing or things, or
exposition of theoretical construct(s) embodied
in a tiibliographic item. The content of a
bibliographic item is product of intellectual,
transintellectual, creative activity or imagination
of man recorded in an intelligible, coherent and
communicable form. The focus of study and
description in a work or document can be
about a conceptual (abstract) or concrete
(physical) entity or entities, or their properties.
A subject of study is itself something created by
man that encompasses a body of knowledge
about some thing or things and is governed by
a set of fundamental laws, hypothesis,
postulates, and principles.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno!,2001,21(3)

A work comprises the thought contents,
information, or knowledge contained in a
document or package of information, plus the
language in which the thought contents are
expressed or communicated. A work i s equal to
thought contents, which is soul of a docunient
and language or any other means of
communication of thoughts, which is subtle
body of a document.

4.1

Definition of Document

Ranganathan defines a document as "record
of a work on paper or other material, fit for
easy physical handling, transport across space
and preservation through time". The term
'Documenf' includes any bibliographic item or
the record of any kind of work-macro or
micro-and
the physical embodiment i s
exclusively of one work or is shared by more
one than one work. It constitutes of subject (i.e.
thought contents, knowledge, information, or
message
it
holds),
plus
language
(comrnunjcation medium or thought channel),
and plus recording material (paper, electronic
media-tape, disk, and so forth)." The subject i s
the soul of a document, language subtle body,
and recording material represent gross body of
a document.
He defines entity as "any existent, concrete
or conceptual, that is, thing or idea." Any entity
has distinct personality comprising of a set of
characteristics or attributes. An attribute being
"any property or quality or quantitative
measure of an entity.""
If we perceive or know about the attribute
or attributes possessed by an entity or entity set
we know about it or them. We can also
distinguish one entity or entity set from another
because of
certain characteristic(s) or
attribute(s) possessed by one and not by other.
For example, we know that the entity tree i s
distinct from the entity tiniher. Because we
know that for a living tree i t is essential that i t s
root to be in soil and for its branches to have
access to water, light and air. The 'tree-ness'
(the personality of tree) of living tree is distinct
from the dead tree as 'timber' or 'wood'. If soil,
water, light and air are removed, there can be
no tree left and it turns into timber or wood.
The 'tree-ness' of tree is energy (water, light and
air) depended and tied to matter (soil). Further,
9

a tree or specific type of tree can exist in
certain conditions and places, or live up to
certain time. Thus, 'tree-ness' of tree is related
to matter, energy, space and time in specific
way and none of these elements can be
excluded from it. The description of the
properttes of the tree, its relationship with or
dependence on water, soil, air, light and
specific environmental conditions, and that it
exists in particular place, and !ive up to certain
time, provides us knowledge or information
about the entity tree, or portrays its total
pers~n~~lity.
Soil, water, air, light, place and time are also
entities in their own right, having their own
personalities that are distinct from the entity
tree. Tree i s living thing; where as soil, water, air,
light are non-living physical things. Space and
time, per se, are conceptual entities.
Ranganathan divided the universe of
knowledge into traditional 'basic subjects' or
'main ciasses of subjects' followed by a
sub-division of these bask subjects or classes
through the application of 'trains of
Characteristics' or 'facets'. The term 'facet'
refers to a manifestatim of any one of the five
fundamental categories - Personality [PI, Matter
or Property [MI,Energy or Action [El, Space IS]
and Time IT].

4.2 Postulates for Designing a
Scheme for Library Classification
The set of postulates formulated by
Ranganathan for designing a scheme for library
classification as well as classifying the
bibliographic documents according to their
specific subject put the theory of classification,
and the work of classifying and indexing the
bibliographic documents on firm scientific basis.
These postulates or principles of facet analysis
and synthesis were first time formally stated by
Ranganathan in his paper presented to the
International Study Conference on Classification
for Information Retrieval, held at Dorking in
1957." Though, the explicit statement of the
postulates or principle of facet analysis and
synthesis was first time made by Ranganathan
in his paper presented to the Dorking
Conference, yet these were actually applied by
him, implicitly, in designing his Colon
10

Classification Scheme published in 1933." The
fourth edition of Ranganathan's Colon
Classification is the first version of Colon
Classification, whose design is based on his
explicitly stated postulates or principles for
facet analysis and synthesis for library
classification, which were first time stated by
him in paper presented at the lnternational
Study Conference on Classifjcation for
Information Retrieval, held at Dorking in 1957.
Ranganathan,
later
incorporated
these
postulates, somewhat in an elaborated form, in
his Prolegomena of Library Classification.
Edition 2." The enunciation and application of
the postulates became more sharpened, clear
and simple in his later works, particularly
Prolegomena of Library Classification. Ed. 3."
One of the major contributions of
Ranganathan in the field of Library and
Information Science is chain procedure, the first
version of which was published in 1939." It is a
subject indexing technique to derive subject
headings from a class number mechanically.
The method is based upon Ranganathan's
theory of symbiotic nature of classification and
cataloguing.
Ranganathan was of the view that once the
class number of a bibliographic item is
determined on the basis of a classification
system, the specific subject heading of a
document can be derived by verbal
interpretation
of
class
number
and
consequently deriving other related subject
headings for a subject catalogue, with the help
of the chain indexing technique. However, later
he suggested that specific subject heading of
each bibliographic item can be derived
independent of a class number based on the
'Postulates of Facet Analysis'. In Ranganathan's
own words: "the .postulates for facet analysis
and principle for Facet Sequence are as much
help in finding out the names of the Subiect
Heading, as they are in establishing its Class
Number. The tasks of cataloguing and of
classifying are equal beneficiaries of these
postulates and principles. The use of one and
the same procedure in cataloguing and
classifying does not warrant the assumption of
subject heading being derived from class
number or class number being derived from
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/,2001,21(3)

subject heading, of two different branches say
A and B of m e and same tree, we do not say
either A stems from B or that €3 stems from A."%

4.2.1 Postulates of Different Kinds of
Subjects
Ranganathan postulated that a sul?ject of a
work or a document can be Basic Subject,
Compound Subject or Complex Subject, that is,
three types of subjects exist namely: Basic,
Compound, and Complex Subject.
Basic or Simple Subject

A subject without any isolate idea or
concept as a component is called a basic or
simple subject. A basic subject represents a
field of study, a discipline or subdiscipline
(branch of learning, e.g., Algebra) or any
aggregate of fields
of
studies (e.g.,
Mathematics), mutually exclusive and totally
exhaustive first order array of subjects of a
scheme for classification. A basic subject forms
the Basic Facet of a compound subject. It
encompasses a body of knowledge that is
concisely governed by a set of fundamental
laws, hypothesis, postulates, and principles.
Mathematics, Arithmetic, Algebra, Biology,
Botany, Cytology, Social Sciences, Political
Science, Literature, Sanskrit Literature, Physics,
Space Physics, Logic, etc. are examples of basic
subjects.
According to Ranganathan, "if a work or
document contains overall description of an
entity or an entity set, which are the central
theme of a work, or contains an exposition of a
theoretical concept or concepts about some
phenomenon/phenomena or thing(s) then the
subject of the work is deemed to be of type
simple subject."
Compound Subject
A compound subject is a subject having a
basic subject (basic facet) and one more isolate
ideas or concepts (isolate facet) as its
components. For example, each of the
following subject statement or title of a
monograph indicates that the subject matter of
the monograph is compound subject. Examples
of compound subjects: Mining of gold,
Chemistry of gold, Bibgical study of animals,
Botanical study of flows, T i t m e n f of cancer
DESIDOC Bulletin of lnf Technd, 200 1,21(3)

in Ayurvedic System of Medicine, represent
compound subjects. (The terms in bold letter
represent the basic subject or facet and a term
in bold and italics represents an isolate idea or
facet of the compound subject). Each Isolate
is
facet/idea
of
compound
subject
manifestatron of one of the five fundamental
category.
According to Ranganathan "if in a work or a
document, one describes only part or portion
of the personality of an entity or an entity set,
nr gives description of one or some attributes
possessed by an entity or entities, and/or
actions on it by or through other entities, in a
particular space and time context, then the
subject of the work is deemed to be of type
compound subject."
Ranganathan postulated that make up of a
compound subject constitutes of one or more
five mutually exclusive fundamental categories:
Personality [PJ, Matter [MI or Property, Energy
[El or Action, Space [SJand Time (TI. This set of
fundamental category for brevity denoted by
initionym PMEST. i l e also introduced an
extended version of these in the form of levels
and rounds of their manifestations.
Complex Subject

A complex subject is two or Inore phased
subject. It is represented by a subject statenlent
which shows some relation (e.g., bias,
comparison, influence etc.) between two or
more simple subjects or compound subjects,
for example: Physics compared to Chemistry or
Psychology for Doctors.
According to Ranganathan, "if in n
document or a work deals with or contains
description of interrelationship, cornparison,
etc. among two or more basic suhjects or
compound then such a subject of the work or
document is deemed to be of type complex
subject."
Postulates of Isolate Idea or Concept
An Isolate Idea (or concept) is any idea or
concept which itself cannot deemed to he
subject but fit to be a component of a
compound subject or complex subject. Isolate
concepts or terms such as: Gold, Animal, Child,
Air, Flower, Cell, Hardness, Goodness, Red,
Blue, etc. do not convey us any meaning unless
11

we associate them with some basic subject.
Further, each isolate idea of a compound
subject is deemed to be manifestation of one
and only one of the five fundamental categories
of ideas, defined below:

4.2.2 Postulates of Five Fundamental
Categories
There are five and onJy five fundamental
categories of isolate, concepts or ideas namely,
Personality (Entity), Matter (Attribute or
Property), Energy (Action), Space, and Time. An
isolate idea or concept belongings to any one
of these five fundamental categories.
The fundamental category (FC) 'Personality',
'Matter', 'Space' and 'Time' can manifest many
hierarchical levels or may comprise of facets of
different levels.
The FC 'Energy' may manifest itself in one
and same subject more than once. The first
manifestation of the FC 'Energy' is taken as end
of round one of the manifestation of the three
fundamental categories 'Personality' [I PI,
'Matter' [ I M), and 'Energy1 [IE]. The second
manifestation of FC 'Energy' is taken to end
round two
(represented by symbol (2Ej),
followed by /2P], [ZM], [2E],and so on.

An isolate idea belonging to the
fundamental category 'Personality', 'Matter',
'Space' or 'Time' may pertain to any one of the
hierarchical level of the category.
PERSONALl7Y [PI
The fundamental category 'Personality' (PI i s
the most crucial or essential category among
the five categories. There was time when many
scholars in the field of library science,
particularly western scholars,
felt
that
"Ranganathan has not attempted strict
definition of personalities."'"'
It appears that Ranganathan chose the term
'Personality' to represent the focal point of
description or key object or objects of study or
description in a work. A basic subject or
domain of study is concerned with the study
and description of a conceptual or physical
object or a set of objects. The domain of study
Botany i s concerned study and description of
plants (found in nature). Physics i s concerned
with physical phenomena - Heat, Light, Sound,
12

-

etc. Medicine Human body, and its organs.
As DahlbergWM points out "man is always
concerned with two realities:
(a) Entities or being such as inanimate beings
(e.g., gold, earth, water, and so on), animate
beings (plant life, animals life), divine beings
and mental beings, and
(b) Predications (knownjestablished facts)about
the entities or beings, i.e., determinations of
beings."
Correspondingly, Ranganathan divides the
subjects dealing with the various kinds of
entities, that is, the living or non-living natural
beings (systems), or the material, intellectual,
cultural, and spiritual products of man and
society, into different 'Basic Classes' or
'Subjects'. Further, he postulated that the study
and description of the subsets of entities,
including their parts, constituents, or organs,
etc., falling within the domain or perview of a
'Basic Class' or 'Subject' (i.e., a field of study or
any aggregate of fields of study) are deemed to
be the component of the 'Personality' facet of
that 'Basic Class' or 'Subject'. Where as, the
predication
about,
or
perceptions of
entity-types, or the description of discovered,
established or known attributes or facts about
the entity types or their subsets falling within
the domain or preview of a 'Basic Classes' or
'Subject' are deemed to be the component of
one or more of the remaining four facets or
fundamental categories-Matter
(Property),
Energy (Action), Space and Time. J l appears
that the Ranganathan picked up the terms for
these four fundamental categories from the
domain of physical sciences.
The category 'Personality' or 'Personality
Facet of Compound Subject' stands for as any
physical or conceptual entity or entity set,
object or object set, phenomenon or
phenomena or theoretical construct(s) about
which
facts,
information,
explanation,
knowledge, or mental images as formed in the
mind of a person, and described or embodied
in a work or a document. When we collect and
outline or explain facts about an entity, we
actually give description about its whole
personality or part personality, i.e., we describe
its attributes, character, nature, relationships
with other entities (i.e., influence, impact,
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/, 2001,21(3)

control, etc. on it, of or by some other entity or
entities), or its interaction or symbiosis with
some other entity or entities, as well as about
its being present or existing in certain
space-time context.

MAlTER (Attribute or Property) [ M I
The isolate ideas or concepts representing
the intrinsic matter, material, properties,
attributes, of entity /object or entity/object set,
that is, qualities, quantities, functions, activities,
processes, growth, change of state, behaviour
or characteristics of entities or objects belong to
this category. Morphology, Defect, Disease,
Colour, Inflammation, Reliability, Weight, State,
Harmony, Authority, Constitution, Structure,
Hardness, etc. are some examples.

ENERGY (Action) [El
The category 'Energy' (or Action) covers the
isolate ideas or concepts that represent the
attributes attained or acquired by the focal
entity due to its relationships with other entities,
or action, operation (mental or physical) or
impact on a the focal or core entity (i.e., the
object or thing affected by action on it, by or
through another entity), which brings change i n
the property or characteristics of the entity. This
category demarcates isolate ideas or concepts
of the attributes relating to the energetic actions
or interactions that may take place among and
by all kinds of entities - inanimate, animate,
conceptual, intellectual and initiative."
Isolate concepts such as Measurement,
Treatment, Evaluation, Diagnosis, Calculation,
Critical Evaluation, Control, Influence, Impact
and so forth belong to this category. As pointed
out earlier that the fundamental category
Energy may manifest itself in one and same
subject more than once. The first manifestation
of the fundamental category (FCJ 'Energyr is
taken as end of round one of the manifestation
of
the
three
fundamental
categories
'Personality' [IP], 'Matter' [IM], and 'Energy'
[IE], which is followed by second round of
'Personality' [2P], 'Matter' [2M], and 'Energy'
[2E], and so on. For example, the result (value)
of measurement (action) [IE] is the property
(1 MI of an entity or object [ I Pj measured with
the aid of yardstick or instrument/tool/agent of
measurement (2P], another entity. It may be
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 200 1,21(3)

observed that the concept of relationship as
defined by the ER modelling approach has
correspondence with the Ranganatha:lJs
postulational approach. In the example, we find
that the tool of measurement (entity) has
relationship with the entity being measured and
the result of the connection is the finding of the
specific value of the attribute possessed by the
entity measured.
SPACE [S]

The category 'Space' denotes concepts,
isolate ideas such. as geographical location, or
place where the entity resides, or where some
event or action takes place in relation to an
entity or entity set. Location of an entity is also
a distinctive property or attribute of an entiiy.
Examples:
Geographical .Space - continents
Countries - India, Districts, etc.

-

Asia,

Population Clusters - Cities, Towns and Villages,
etc.

-

Physiological Formations Mountains, Deserts,
Rain-Forests, Rivers, Lakes, etc,
Water Formations - Oceans, Seas, etc.
TIME [TI
The category 'Time' includes isolate ideas or
concepts, such as, Mitlennium, Century,
Decade, Years, Day, Night, Winter, Rainy day,
Dry day, Hour, Second and so on. Presence or
existence of an entity in specific timc is also its
distinctive property or attribute of an c. ~tity.

CONCLUDlNC REMARKS
As can be seen from above presentation
that the theoretical approach of defining the
conceptual level schema or an over all logical
database description of an information system
of a problem area is related in characteristics to
the theoretical approach of Ranganathan for
designing a scheme for subject or knowledge
classification. Ranganathan, also recommended
that the work of designing a scheme for subject
classification may be divided into three planes
of work - idea plane, verbal plane, notational
plane. ~eelameghan' points out that "this
approach can also be applied usefully to the
designing of databases. The major steps in the
13

Table: Steps of designing a database and designing a scheme for subject classification

Designing a database
Idea Plane

Designing a scheme for subject classification
Idea Plane

1.

Identifying data entities (objects about Identifying/defining the subject domains for which
scheme for classification is to be designed
which data is to be collected)

2.

Selecting attributes of data entities of Selecting attributes of the entities constituting the
interest to potential users
subject

3.

4.

5.

Selecting classification model (hierarchic, faceted,
Selecting data model, a schema to map
freely faceted) for mapping information about the
the entities and their attributes
entities (concepts /isolates)
Grcilping/dividing the data entities by Grouping/dividing the concepts/isolates by their
their
common
attributes
and common attributes and differentiating attributes
differentiating attributes (characteristics)
(characteristics)
Organising,
arranging
the
groups, Organising arranging the groups, subgroups and
isolates d e f i e d at step 4
subgroups, and units derived at step 4
Verbal Plane

[ Work on the Verbal Plane ]

6 . Naming fields and data elements
Notational Plane

7.

Assigning tags to fields, coding, etc.

three planes of work are again similar as shown
in above mentioned table:
Library classification and indexing systems
based upon the theory of knowledge
classification of Ranganathan or his facet
analysis and synthesis approach are formal
devices, which have been used very effectively
for organising the documents in helpfui order
(i.e., according to APUPA arrangement? and
indicate their subject matter with a purpose of
identifying the documents on specific subjects
and related subjects available in a library). Facet
analysis and synthesis approach of Ranganathan
(also called concept based indexing approach)
can also be effectively used to organise and
search huge volume of information being
generated on the Internet or on the Web (or
the WWW), the multimedia part of !he Internet.
The utility of using facet analysis to organise
and search WWW resources is well
demonstrated by Ellis and ~asconcelos.' They
also point out that "if Ranganathan were alive
today he would be aware of the potential of his
ideas for searching and organising WWW
14

[Work on the Notational Plane]

material. Indeed, the genius of Ranganathan is
attested to be the very portability of his ideas
acrdss time, technology and culture, simply
because they address the very foundation of
effective information storage and retrieval.

BIBLIOGRAPHIC REFERENCES
1.

Kashyap, Madan Mohan. Algorithm for
analysis and representation of subject
contents of documents in a documentary
language. Library Herald, 1983, 22, 1-29.

2.

Ranganathan, S.R. Prolegomena to library
classification. Madras Library Association,
Madras, 1937.

3.

Godert, Winfried. Faceted classification in
online retrieval. International Classification,
1991, 18(2), 98-109.

4.

Ellis, David & Vasconcelos, Ana.
Ranganathan and the net: Using facet
analysis to search and organise the World
Wide Web. Aslib Proceedings, 1999, 51(1),
3-10.

5.

Kashyap, Madan Mohan. A proposal for
the introduction of an integrative approach
DES/DoC Bulletin of Inf Techml, 22001,21(3)

in the study and teaching of library
procedures, cataloguing and database
organisation and designing techniques. In
Towards the New lnformation Society of
Tomorrow: Innovation, Challenges and
Impact, edited by N M Malwad. Paper
presented at 49th FID Conference and
Congress, 11-17 October 1998, New
Delhi. (FID Publication, 719). 1998. pp.
15969.
6.

Neelameghan, A. A p p l i c a t i o n of
Ranganathan's general theory of
knowledge classification in designing
specialized databases. Libri, 1992, 4(3),
202-26.

7.

Neelameghan, A. Concept categorization
and knowledge organisation in specialized
databases: A case study. International
Classification, 1991, 18, 92-97.

8.

Chen, Peter Pin-Sen. The entity-relationship
model-towards a unified view of data.
ACM Transactions on Database Systems,
1976, l(l), 9-36.

9.

Chen, Peter Pin-Sen, Ed. Entity-Relationship
approach to information modelling and
analysis. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1 983.

10. Teorey, T I et a/. Logical design
methodology for relational database using
the extended entity-relationship model.
ACM Computing Survey, 1986, 18(2),
197-222.
11. Codd, E.F. Extending the database
relational model to capture more meaning.
ACM Transactions on Database Systems,
1979, 4(4), 397-434.
12. Codd, E.F. Relational database: A practical
foundation
for
productivity.
Communications o f the ACM, 1982, 25(2),
109-17.
13. Codd, E.F. The relational data model for
database management system. Ver. 2.
Addison-Wesley, Mas., 1990.
14. Mair, D. The theory of relational database.
Computer Science Press, Rockville, Mary
Lands, 1983.
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol,2001,21(3)

15. Date, C.]. An introduction to database
systems. Vol. 1. Ed. 5. Addison-Wesley,
Mas., 1990.
16. Ranganathan, S.R. Prolegomena to library
classification. Asia Publishing House,
Bombay, 1965. Part El F.

17. Kashyap, Madan Mohan. Computer-based
library information system designing
techniques. Sterling Publishers, New Delhi,
1 999. pp. 259-60.
18. Kashyap, Madan Mohan. Ranganathan's
postulational approach to classification, its
development and impact. In Ranganathan's
Philosophy, Assessment, Impact, And
Relevance, edited by T.S. Rajagopalan.
Paper Presented at the International
Conference 'on Ranganathan's Philosophy,
11-14 November 1985, New Delhi. 1986.
pp. 200-15.
19. Howe, D.R. Data analysis for database
design. Ed. 2. Edward Arnold, London,
1986.
20. Ranganathan, S.R. Prolegomena to library
classification. Assis by M.A. Copinath. Ed.
3. Sarda Ranganatban Endowment for
Library Science, Bangalore, 1989. pp. 94

21. Ranganathan, S.R. Prolegomena to library
classification. Assis by M.A. Gopinath. Ed.
3. Sarda Ranganathan Endowment for
Library Science, Bangalore. 1989. pp. 53.
22. Ranganathan, S.R. Library classi-cation a
discipline. Paper presented at International
Conference o n Classification for
lnformation Retrieval, 17 , Dorking.
1957. pp. 3-14.

23. Ranganathan, S.R. Colon Classification.
Madras, 1933. pp. 8.
24. Ranganathan, S.R. Prolegomena to library
classification. Ed. 2. Library Association,
London, 1957.
25. Ranganathan, S.R. Theory of library
catalogue. Chap. 11. Madras Library
Association, Madras, 1938.
26. Ranganathan, S.R. Postulational approach
to facet classification. Annals of Library
Science, 1958, 5, 33-51

.

15

27. Vickery, B.C. Classification and indexing in
science. Ed. 2. Butterworths, 1958.
28. Roberts, Norman. A n examination of
personality concept and its relevance to
the colon classification scheme. Journal o f
Librarianship, 1969, 1{3), 131-40.

-

pntributor:

-- -

29. Dahlberg, Ingeraut. Optical structures and
universal classification. Sarda Ranganathan
Endowment for Library Classification,
Bangalore, 1978. pp. 11-17

-

ada an

Prof.
Mohan Kashyap retired as Professor from Dept of Library &
Information Science, University of Delhi. His residential address is 201 Kadambri
Niwas, Kadarnbri Marg Sect~r-9,Rohini, New Oelhi-110085. Tele: 7862699 (R);
*
e-mail: kashyapl @indiatimes.com

