DESlDOC Bulietin of Information Technology, Vol. 21, No. 3, May 2001, pp. 17-28
8 2001, DESIDOC

Internet: Importance and Usage for Library and
lnformation Professionals
Neena Singh

Abstract
The paper focuses on the impact of lnternet on various library processes, services
and products. I t also emphasises the challenging role of librarians and information
professionals in the present lnternet era. Today the lnternet has revolutionised the
traditional library activities viz document acquisition, teclinical processing,
circubtion, reference service, resource sharing, document delivery, etc. The paper
also emphasises the crucial role of librarians and information professionals in
designing and maintaining libraries' web page/website leading to increase in library
efficiency.

1. INTRODUCTION
One of the most significant achievement in
the informaticin and communication sector is
the introduction of advanced communication
network i.e., the Internet, the technology
connecting a computer with millioris of
computers in the network. The lnternet today
has become one of the most important mode
of communication and its services are being
exploited by people in every walk of life such as
business, education, defence, medicine, etc. In
the field of library and information science, the
Internet has become one of the most popular
and talked about subject. In fact the library
profession is one that has been mbst intenseiy
affected by the challenges of lnternet and the
World Wide Web (WWW). The shift from
collection
management
to
information
management, from ownership to access, and
the change in nature, boundaries and structure
of information all call for a change in mind set
of library professionals.
The library professi0,nals need to position
themselves as leaders not only in information
field but also in the field of information
technology. One can do it by information
organisation and management on Internet and
DESIDOC Bulktin of Inf Technd, 22001,21(3)
*

by designing and maintaining library website.
Libraries can also project their collections and
activities on the site and supplement their
services by exploiting the Internet. The scope is
unlimited, all that is required i s selective and
imaginative appiications to library activities.
Before we see the opportunities the lnternet
and the WWW offer to the library and
information professionals, it i s better to have
brief about what lnternet is.

2. WHAT IS INTERNET
The term lnternet has been coined from a
denotes
concept
inter-networking tridt
interaction between neiwolking of computers.
It is an umbrella under which different
networks, small and big, freely exchange
information across the globe. Internet, thus, can
broadly be defined as world wide network of
computers communicating via an agreed upon
protocol (rules for exchange of information). It
provides access to the most diversified source
of information hosted by individuals and various
organisation world wide on a vast network of
servers.'
lnternet gives on to the world web, the
interconnections to thousands of servers

created by various organisations, commercial
establishments, industrial units, academic
establishments, various groups, individuals. The
web pages loaded on various servers provide
variety of information in the form of text,
graphics, animation, multimedia, etc. either free
of cost or for a modest fee.
The main characteristic of Internet and the
W W W are:
(a)

Users across the world can connect or
access information irrespective of time and
space factor.

(b) Point to point communication, rather than
one to many broadcast communication.
(c) Provides access to large number of
databases.
(d) The facility of hyper linking from one
server to another by clicking on a
highlighted word which enables the user
to directly switch to another data source,
on the other side of the world.
(e) Instant and interactive community creation
on a global base.
The lnternet therefore, i s a vast electronic
library made up of millions of pages of
information stored in hundreds of thousands of
linked computers a the globe. The Web has
brought to the desk top, not only metadata
sources like bibliographic databases and table
of contents, but also full text of journals,
preprints,
technical
reports,
patents,
courseware, etc.

3. IMPORTANCE OF INTERNET TO
LIBRARIES
lnternet has become a part of library
environment today. It has added a great value
to the library and information services.
According to Gryez, "with the expansion of
lnternet a new class of electronic document has
emerged, it was at once promising and
attractive for its obvious advantage of speed
and transmissibility and profoundly elusive and
confounding to the library community because
of its intangibility and malleability. Within the
last ten years, the Internet has become global
and ubiquitous. It reaches in hundreds of
countries o f all continents and is featured daily
in the business sections of all major news
papers.a2
18

lnternet is playing an important role in
transforming the library system and the way in
which we view the library resources and the
library services. With the help of web based
library services in developed countries, users
are attended round the clock. Internet provides
links to various library sites, specializing in
almost every topic and they can be accessed
directly from any part of the world. As the
libraries are going web based more and more
libraries' are becoming accessible via libraries'
web pages. With an lnternet connection, a
student in any university of India can browse
through the documents in computers of US
National libraries or else where in the globe.
The Net therefore, provides instant access to
billions of information sources which include
books, reports, journals, video films, sound
recording and wide variety of other sources.
The library and information professionals have a
vital role to play in organising the information
and bridging the information gap. lnternet has
created some of the following new and
different service operations:
(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)
(e)

(f)

By designing clearly organised, easily
accessible and well published library web
sites librarians can extend the traditional
librarianship to the use of information
technology and seize a leadership role in
both fields.
The libraries can initiate Bulletin Board
Service which gives complete information
regarding services, products, and various
events organised by them.
Ready reference service can be provided
with greater speed and in much shorter
time.
Books and journals can be ordered online,
technical processing of the documents too
can be done without much effort.
E-mail services can be used for delivering
information
to
the
users
and
communicating
with
the
fellow
information professionals.
E- SDI services can be used for delivering
information to the users.

(g) Access to various databases and OPAC of
other libraries located in remote areas can
be provided.
lnternet has thus integrated nearly all library
activities e-mail, discussion through listserves,
DESlDoC Bulktin of Inf Technd, 22M)1,21(3)

support reference service through search of
remote databases, exploiting the catalogue of
other institutions, participation in inter-library
loan (ILL), ordering books and journals,
inter-library loan establishing home page, etc.
Under these circumstances resource.sharing
and cooperative functioning of the libraries
through lnternet has also become vital. The
utilisation of facilities by them largely depend
on getting lnternet connection and exploiting its
services and resources for providing better
access to global information. The scope is
unlimited or rather limited to the imagination of
library professionals.

4. NEED OF LIBRARY
PROFESSIONALS IN THE
INTERNET ERA
Librarians acting as custodians of
information have gone through a dramatic
change and frorn providing document to their
clienteles have switched to be information
providers. The role of librarian as information
organiser and a navigator has gained
importance in the lnternet era.
The library professionals need to focus and
seize new opportunities and demonstrate how
the tools of lnternet can be gainfully harnessed
for improving library services.
lnternet can be viewed as the biggest library
in the world in which information is not
properly structured and.organised, there are no
standardised rules of classification or access.
Recent/current literature shows that the best
search engines on the lnternet allows access to
only approximately 30% of the information
corresponding to sea& This underlines the
inadequate methods used to access inforrnation
despite the best avaitable search engines.'
Moreover, there is no guarantee that same
query expressed in the same language using
various search engines will give same results.
The inforrnation on the lnternet is stored in an
unstructured way with innumerable databases,
each having its own searching interface, also
the volatile nature of .sites, lack af information
on these sites will come in the way of accessing
the Internet.' Taking into account the current
and foreseeable increase in the number of
DESIDOC Bulktin dlnf Techd, 2001,21(3)

documents or the web sites on the Internet,
these issues will become the crucial problems
in access to information It is therefore,
important to seek a definition of catalogue,
indexes and thesauri and help of library
professional'which would provide homogenous
access to information and data.
lnternet has many other drawbacks like lack.
of comprehensiveness, coverage, the inability to
distinguish between popular material and
research work, lack of controlled vocabulary
and also a casual approach of the web page
designer often makes the web databases more
difficult to search. In addition to this, according
to a latest report, a search engine covers only
15% of the total database available on the
lnternet,'
Librarians can play a greater role in
identification, listing, and classifying inforrnation
sources and providing systematic approach to
accessing the required information. This way
they can take rightful place as human agent
abng side the search engine in searching the
Internet. In the due course of time the librarians
will have to develop new indexing methods and
evaluation techniques to tap inforrnation from
the lnternet and also establish the classification
modes in a open way to allow for those
addition of neirv categories of document that
may differ frorn original priorities. Hence, the
uncertainties raised by some peop\e that
lnternet may be a threat to library and library
science profession is no longer true.

5. ROLE OF INTERNET IN
DISCHARClNG LIBRARY
FUNCTIONS
lnternet is playing an important role in
discharging the functions of libraries. It is
changing the ways, the librarians organise,
manage and disseminate information. With
more and more documents getting puMished
electronically and Internet resources growing at
18% a month, libraries of 2 1st century will have
to shift towards electronic means of acquiring,
processingand disseminating inforrnation.'
Today all sorts of library services from
membership registration to document delivery
can be offered through the Internet. The trend
is quite evident from the web sites of American
19

Business School Libraries that are quite
advanced in library and information services
arena.

journals and newsletters along with details
of the subscription.
4.

Britannica Online offers the world's first
online encyclopaedia. The libraries can
provide access to the readers by paying
some registration fee. The Britannica
Online has advantage of accessing articles
not yet in print, and Britannica Book of the
Year
http://www.eb.com/

5.

Amazon.com books web site provides
access to greater selection of books with
over one million title which is searchable
by keywords, author, title or subject. The
site also has provision for purchase, via
Netscape's secure commerce server or
over the phone.
http://www. amazon.com

Some of the important library services that
can be offered through the lnternet are as
~O~OWS:

5.1

Acquisition of Documents

Internet has made simple and speedy
purchase of information sources/documents like
books, iournais and electronic publications. A
number of commercial databases are available
for the librarians to exploit viz the CAB
abstracts, Agricola, Medline, Agris, Biological
Abstracts, Compendex, etc. of Dialog and BRS
Information Technology.
Most of the publishers and booksellers have
their web sites on the lnternet and place their
regular catalogue and leaflets of new
publicatio~s.Some of the publishers of primary
journals fike American Chemical Society, IEEE
(USA), Elsevier Science publishers are providing
their journals online. The IDRC, Canada is
providing books on research and development
that can be ordered online through the URL
http://www.idrc.ca/bookhque.
IDRC
also
publishes its best reports online which are
available at web site http://www.idrc.ca. CAB
Publishing has recently launched a series of
subject specific online communities catering to
the needs of librarians and researchers, each
community will feature a comprehensive
abstract databases with 25 years archive.
Examples of some of the useful set of links
available through the lnternet for acquisition
are:
1.

Association of learned and professional
society publishers
http://www.alsp.org. uk/member.html

2.

lngentia journals, provides access to
bibliographical information from more
than 550 journals from Academic Press,
Royal Geographical Society, White House
Press and Harwood Academic, etc. and
can be searched without restriction
http://www.ingentia.com

3.

20

ARL Directory of Electronics Journals
produced by Association of Research
Libraries gives Information on electronic

The library and information professionals
can easily browse through the current
publications available on various web sites in
their area of interest, confirm the prices, etc.
and place orders online. Any discrepancy in the
invoices or bills, edition of books, printing, etc.,
can be clarified within minutes through e-mail
and much of the paper work is reduced. It is
estimated that within the next 5-6 years the
lnternet will become the mechanism for
distribution of three fourth of the specialised
journals and also the major medium for transfer
of research information.'
The librarians will thus need to change their
attitude towards collection development, as the
technology advances in future, it will encourage
access to document rather than ownership. In
future, virtual libraries may replace traditional
libraries which means there would be purchase
of access to information rather than the source.
This trend will generate many questions about
values of libraries.

5.2

Technical Processing/
Classification & Cataloguing

Preparing standard catalogue without much
effort has become possible due to lnternet and
the (WWW). Librarians can check the
catalogues of other libraries like that of Library
of Congress and confirm the information
required for a record which can be easily
ascertained from the original document. The
library professionals can also access lnternet
LHSIDOC B W n of Inf Techno/,22001,21(3)

resources for verification and downloading
bibliographical
information
from
other
institutions. OPACs via lnternet have become a
popular source of bibliographic information.
Libraries can use of other institutions by
OPACs to get information they need to
organise knowledge. Databases of bibliographic
utilities will become more comprehensive
source of information than has been so far
possible by their present catalogues. With
advance information retrieval facilities, the
libraries in future will have added value by using
catalogue of journal articles.
The
librarians
can
provide
the
bibliographicai data through lnternet access via
OPACs of other libraries in the world. The
electronic documents can be supplied to the
users on demand through the network.
According to Schmidt, "access to OPACs will be
increasing from outsid;
the library. The
boundaries'between the cataloguing of libraries
holding and cataloguing of information will be
more difficult than today, in my opinion they
will vanish completely when networks have
reached a certain technical capacity." '
lnternet has also affected the traditional
classification system of our libraries. Several
libraries are opting the Cyber Dewey Decimal
Classification Summaries as a way to organize
and navigate resources on the WWW. The
Cyber Dewey website includes alphabetical
index to Dewey. The Dewey home page
(http://www.oclc.org/pp) division contains links
to some of these systems. According to the
editor of DDC, Joan Mitchell, "it is exciting time
to be Dewey user because we have a
commitment to keep pace with knowledge to
help our users classify efficiently and help our
users extend from the shelves of their libraries
into the electronic en~ironrnent."~

5.3

Circulation

The lnternet has made the circulation of in
house document much easier. After the
technical processing, the new books documents
can be placed in the OPAC on the day of
acquisition itself and readers with lnternet
connection at home or at university can browse
and reserve the books sitting right at their
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol,2001,21(3)

offices or at home, within seconds after arrival
of the book in the library.
Further libraries subscribing to electronic
journals need not necessarily provide access to
it in the library. Since each subscription is
provided with a user ID. The reader by
enquiring the user 10 from the circulation
section can access the journals from their
departments or offices without taking pain of
visiting the library.
Through Internet, the libraries can also
provide bibliographical databases via OPACs
from libraries of other institutions world wide.
The OPACs may be searched from a terminal
within the originating library or from a terminal
located at a remote place. Some of the
examples of online catalogues are:
1.
2.

Library of Congress.
locis.loc.gov
Catalogues-Catalogue Guide to several
OPACs
path:/pus/doc/library
ftp:funet.fi

3.

Library, University of Southanipton.
http://www.soton.ac.uk/library

4.

University Library, University of Newcastle.
http://www.ncl.ac.uk/library

The electronic documents required by the
readers can also be supplied on demand
through the network.

5.4

Reference and Information
Service

lnternet for reference work in the library is
gaining popularity. Reference librarians use a
multitude of information sources to answer the
question they are asked, these are called ready
reference collection. The lnternet can be
successfully utilised for providing short-range
and long-range reference service because
various primary and secondary sources of
information are available online from many
sites.
Several
sites
like
http://kiz.at.ymas.edu.irre.html
provides
alphabetical listing of a full text resources data
suitable for ready reference.
The URL http://www,refdesk.com/exposes
the librarian to an excellent virtual library for
reference source known as 'My Virtual
Reference Desk'. Similarly India World
21

http://wvw.india.corn,
is a comprehensive
reference service on the net. The IFLA World
Directory of National Union Catalogue is now
available
on
IFLANET,
at
http://www.ifla.org/v1/2/due, this is a complete
listing of all known current national union
catalogues, including monographs, serials and
general union catalogue and a hot link is also
included for direct access for catalogue which
are available on the Internet.''
Some of the general reference sources
available for the reference librarians are given i n
the Annexure. Though lnternet i s useful in
providing relerence service it may not provide
answer to every reference enquiry. Sometimes it
may also take a long time to locate the
iniormation, in such cases the librarians have to
keep useful supplementary sources of
information in the library.
However, the lnternet can be useful in
Finding certain types o f information such as
social, economic, statistical data, censes
information, daily exchange rates, government
budget and reports, etc. including current news,
calender events, employers' profile and other
career information.
According to Sara Ryan, certain type of
information most likeiy to be found on the
lnternet are: the computers and the people who
use them; scientific and technical information,
popular culture and entertainment, PR type of
company information, historical and humanities
information." The librarians have to keep guide
to the lnternet resources or guide to various
web sites available to the users interest for
example ftp:unahh.lib.urlich.edu. (Path: inetdirs)
i s an important resource guide. The University
of Michigan also has a number of subject
guides to h e r n e t resources. Although lnternet
is a won&rfu\ resource, the authoritativeness of
the information is quite concerning. Most of the
information available online is being supplied by
the volunteers.
Though we can often trust them, they can
also occasionally contain inaccurate and
misieading information. Hence the reference
librarians have to double check the facts before
giving it to the users.
22

5.5

Communication

lnternet has become the primary mode of
communication which carries more than the
combined total of the postal services of all
countries in the world put together by the turn
of the century. It is an important means of
communication which provides a cheap and
efficient means of mail transfer. Libraries can
use this facility extensively to communicate
with the publishers, book sellers and vendors of
the other library products and services with
scholars librarians and users across the globe.
The most popular means of communication on
the lnternet is e-mail. Like the regular mail, there
are also mailing lists to address groups of
people.. These mailing lists often called listservs,
can serve a valuable resource for the librarians.
A more public electronic forum for discussion
on the lnternet i s called the Usenet News.
Usenet provides large numbers of news groups
or conference that have open participation
which can be used by the library users and
library professionals.

5.6

Resource Sharing and the
lnternet

With the advent of Internet, major libraries
are now available online through lnternet and
hence directly accessible from any part of the
world. Librarians can have access to the
catalogue of various libraries attached to the
universities and colleges in the world and
accordingly place a request for their users. The
increase in the cost of documents for many
disciplines in recent years has meant thar the
libraries have been able to provide less and less
access to research literature through their
in-house collection. Also with the financial
constraints, the librarians and information
professionals are seeking aiternative means of
providing access to journals. The problem of
print
journab
and
the
concomitant
development of computers and communication
technologies have lead to the deve10pment of
electronic alternatives to print journals, i.e., in
various forms of electronic journals.
Recently a number of publishers have
agreed to offer their journals electronically to
libraries through
First Search Electronic
Collection Online. This enables the libraries to
DESDOC8uIkin of Inf Technoi, 2(X)1,21[3\

subscribe a large collection of academic
journals from many publishers from a single
WWW interface that support cross journal
searching and extensive browsing. According to
Rick ~oble," Vice President of OCLC reference
service, "First Search Electronic Collection
Online is one of the first online system to
address the key issues necessary to make the
transaction from paper to electronic journals.
The system can accommodate thousands of
journals and libraries can choose the journals
they want to include in their electronic
collection and journals will be loaded in their
entirety on or before their publication date."
Libraries using Electronic Collection Online will
be able to access them remotely through
WWW. The users will be able to search and
browse citation from journals, abstracts and
complete articles from journals subscribed by
their libraries. Further this service combines the
cost benefit associated with remote access to
data with the advantage of local collection
management. It will reduce information cost for
libraries by centralising storage access. In
addition, the electronic collection online offers
libraries a number of value added features,
including print quality article representation,
usage statistics, technology migration, technical
and product support, etc. To make use of such
collection, the lnternet plays a crucial role and
its impact on library services and process is
quite obvious."

5.6

Inter-Library Loan (ILL)

To facilitate resource sharing, many libraries
have been using ILL. The traditional inter-library
loan operations are quite time consuming and
labour intensive. With the advent of new
technology, the electronic documents and
various inter-library management tools such as
software like Ariel and Avis have facilitated the
libraries to share their resources effectively and
efficiently."
Ariel software opens the window on lnternet
document transmission. The Ariel workstation
has been developed by Research Libraries
Group. In US, several university libraries were
heavily involved in testing it. Ariel lets users
send and receive crisp clear copies of
document over the lnternet with speed and
ease of fax. Avis is another Canadian product
DESlDoC Bulletin of Inf T k h d , 2001,21(3)

developed at the University of Waterloo and
refined with the cooperation of interlibrary loan
practitioners in libraries across Canada and
USA. Avis is PC based software designed to
manage all aspect of inter-library loan process.
The inter-library loan office can network
multiple Avis workstation on local area
network. It offers the following benefits:
(a) Single comprehensive solution for the
management of all ILL activities
(b) Effective management of the paper work
and record keeping acquired in borrowing
and lending an item
(c) Status tracking of request at all stages af
the ILL process
(d) Integration of bibliographic and location
information from CD-ROM catalogue and
online union catalogue
(e) Transparent electronic transmission of
requests and messages through the
Internet.
Thus with the help of these software
inter-library loan over the lnternet has become
of great help in the inter-library lending and
borrowing. Retrieval has become easier and
transaction much quicker as the request can be
sent through e-mails.

6. DESIGNING AND MAINTAINING

LIBRARY WEB SITE
Libraries can play an important role in
disseminating information by creating their web
site. Through their sites they can inform about
various services, products, events, and courses
offered by them.
For academic librarians the most important
users includes the faculty, students and other
librarians. However, depending on the type of
library the primary audience may vary. The
most important point for libraries in designing a
web site is to consider primary audience and
provide information relevant to their needs not
readily available elsewhere. Since most
information is generally available in other sites,
the librarians role get emphasised in organising
the information in their web pages by providing
links utility as they save time over the print
volume and money over the online databases.
In essence, combining information or links to
other information in ways not previously done
23

can add value to the information
consequently to the library web site.

and

To provide easy access to the libraries'
websites the librarians need to heed on some of
the following basic rules."

6.1

Subject-Specific URL

The Uniform Resource Locator {URL) of the
website should be related to the subject
content, easy to remember.

The files should be short to ensure fast
loading. The web pages often load slowly
because the file is too large or contain too
many pages in this case the file may be split
into multiple files to give easy access to the file.

6.3

Clarity of Information

The information in the web pages should be
categorised for clarity using headings, breaks,
paragraphs, etc. which can be done by using
HTML codes. To ensure the audience to quickly
ascertain what specific information the library
web pages provide, the pages must be provided
with the explanatory notes.

information as possible. Original material refers
to the text file containing hypertext documents
located on their own server. More the material
the librarians own, the less they will have to
depend on other servers. To house material on
the libraries server, it has to be either typed,
scanned or copied, then converted into
hypertext format. Having too many full text
documents the server could also creates traffic
congestion because the individuals will access
the server for longer period of time. This will
make it difficult for other members to access
the library site and in essence create the access
problems the library is trying to avoid.
The librarians should strive to provide a
mixture of hypertext links to documents owned
by others and full text documents located on
one's server. This mixture gives the web pages
more credibility and adds value to the
information while decreasing the frustration
resulting from too much reliance on other
websites.

6.5

Interactive Sites

The librarians also need to provide brief,
clear and informative statement regarding the
content of their web pages in the web site so
that effective hyperlink can be provided.

Librarians should also provide mechanisms
for communicating with their users and moving
them between their web pages, generally when
individuals read books they often have question
such as when it was written how to contact the
authors, whether new editions are forthcoming
or where other similar books are located. This
can be done by providing the hypertext links.

Librarians while designing their web pages
should try to provide as much original material
as possible. Although web pages provide list of
hypertext link to remote or documents located
on other servers can be dangerous as servers
may crash or there may be a change of address.
Under this situation the users may receive 'file
not found'. If there are too many concurrent
users on the distant server the audience will
have to wait longer to access the file.
Unfortunately placing a hypertext link in a page
implies to the audience that they will access
particular document by following that link. If
they follow the hypertext link but experience
problems accessing the document they may
perceive the web site as problematic. To avoid
these frustrations and misunderstanding the
librarian should try to provide as much original

The librarians can also monitor the usage of
their server and particular files by placing a
Counter software in the home page. Counter
software monitors traffic on the server, and
provides periodic statistical reports summarising
which file are being accessed most and
redefine their web page to meet the readers
needs and strategically place administrative
links on highly used pages. Similarly the
audience response and statistical feedback
enable the librarians to create new titles and
include statements like date of modifications
and like 'What's New' and date of last modified
hypertext links. Date last modified gives
credibility to the web files. To keep the
audience aware of new material, librarians may
include links to those materials at the top of the
home page and other heavily used pages. This

6.4

24

Information About Content

provides greater access to new materials and
allow promotion of continued growth of web
sites.

Nair, Raman. lnternet for library and
information services. Ess Ess publication,
New Delhi, 1999.

Once the links are placed, the library
professionals should also consider the aesthetic
appearante of the web pages since the colour,
text, hypertext links and background, etc.
generally influence the use of the web site.

Tadasad, P.G., et a/. lnternet and university
libraries in India: Some issues. in Library
Vision 2010: Indian Libraries and
Libiarianship in Retrospect and Prospect,
edited by JL Sardana. Paper presented at
the 45th All lndia Library Conference,
23-26 December 1999, t!isar. pp. 242-43.

Finally the library professionals need to
effectively publicize their web site through
forums to which the users pay particular
attention. Newsletter and electronic discussion
groups may be used for this purpose.
For publicising the web site to diverse
audiencejusers, librarians can register their web
sites URL with major search engines like Yahoo,
Lycos, etc. and providing brief descriptions of
their contents.

7. CONCLUSION
The lnternet has thus integrated nearly all
aspects of the library activities, the librarians
can now use the Internet for exploiting the
catalogue of the other institutions, ordering
books and journals online, participate in ILL, use
e-mail, and discuss through listserves, support
reference service through remote databases
and most important of all establish library/home
pages to project their collection and services on
the site.
The scope is only limited to the imagination
of library professionals. All that is required by
the today's professionals is a through
understanding of change in concept of
librarianship and psychological willingness to
look upon the lnternet and the WWW as an
opportunity and respond to the challenges of
information resource
management and
information infrastructure development for
harnessing the benefit of the much talked about
lnternet technology in context of the libraries.

REFERENCES
1 . Satyanarayana, Pattnaik & Saravanan A.
lnternet in India: An overview. Yojna, April
1999,4445.

2.

Gryez, Jan Czeslaw. Resource sharing in
the systematic of schdarly communic~tion.
Library Trends, 11997,45,500.

Sharma, D.K. Threats and challenges to the
libraries and the profession from
development in information technology. In
Library vision 2010: lndian Libraries ancl
Librarianship in Retrospect and Prospect,
edited by -JL Sardana. Paper presented at
the 45th All lndia Library Conference,
23-26 December 1999, Hisar. pp. 168.
Sharma, jitendra. Coping up with the
challenges of information technology to
the library profession. In Library vision
2010: lndian Libraries and Librarianship in
Retrospect and Prospect, edited by
1L.Sardana. Paper presented at the 45th All
lndia Library Conference, 23-26 December
1999, Hisar. pp.171.
Nair, Raman. lnternet for library and
information services. Ess Ess .publication,
New Delhi, 1999.
Schmidt, Ronald M. Libraries bibliographic
utilities and library networking: Looking
ahead. In Towards A World Wide Library:
A Ten Year Forecast, edited by Ahmed H.
Helal & Joachim W. Weiss. Paper
presented at the 19th International Essen
Symposium, 23-26 September 1996.
Universitatsbibliothek Essen, Essen, 1997.
197p.
Mitchell Joan. Dewey and the Internet.
OCLC Newsletter, JulyjAugust 1996,222.
lASLlC Newsletter, January2000,4.
Rayan, Sara. Using the lnternet for
reference. In The lnternet Searchers
Handbook: Locating Information People
and Software, edited by Peter Morville et
a/. Neal Schuman, New York. 1996, pp.
16-18.
Noble, Rick. First group of publishing
partners announced for new OCLC First

search electronic collections online. OCLC
News letter, (Nov/Dec) 1996,224,23.

Services in India, edited by PB Mangla et
a/. Shipra, New Delhi. pp. 241-48.

13. Jain, Nirmal. Internet and library services. In
50 years of Library and Information

14. Cooper, A Eric. Applying the fundamental
of librarianship to technology: Designing
and maintaining your libraries website.
lllionois libraries, 1997, 79(1), 5-10.

Contributor:

Ms Neena Singh, Assistant Librarian; G.B Pant University of Agriculture &
Technology, Hill Campus, Tehri Garhwal (UP).

ANNEXURE

List of Important Uniform Resource Locators

(URLs)
personalised news online books, and
manuals, computer resource centres,
newspapers and magazines. The site is
being updated regularly and also has :I
search helper.

A list of URLs-which are useful in reference
work for librarians are enumerated below:

T.

Martindale's The Reference Desk: It is a
trove of more than 4600 reference works
including online calculators to dictionaries
and science tables and databases.

http://wwwai.libaci.edu/martindde/
Ref.html
2.

3.

My Virtual Reference Desk: For a quick
access to the basics including current
news, calendar of events and .links to
reference and search aids which provide
access to over 11000 other sites, online
encyclopaedias search engine information,
and weather links are also provided.
http://www.refdes&.com
The 2000 World factbook: It is a wry
detailed reference resource for countries,
oceans,
economics,
geographic,
population of the world, etc.

http://www.odci.g;w/cia/pubIkations/
pubs.himl
4.

The Periodic Table Site at Sheffield: In this
site, one can click on an element in the
taMe to access essential information
{symbol, atomic number and weight group
nirmber and CAS registry ID).
http://~r~~shef.~cuk/uni/acadernk/AC/
&em/

5.

Weighs and Measures Tables: This is static
site which lists scientific notations metric
conversions, their interrelationships and US
equivalents.
http://alahanza.com/kabacofff/interlinks/m.c//weights.htm(

6.

Windweaver Search Pages: Maintained by
Tracy Marks, this site has links to about
250 of the Net search directories and
search engines. This includes qukk search
short cuts to companies on the web,

http://www.windweaver.com
7.

Career Magazine: This online magazine
features searchable listing of current job
opening, resumes on file, employers
profile, other career information and US
immigration information.

http://ww~.car~rmag.comjcareennag
8.

Indian Census Data: This site gives annual
crop
and
production
data.

ftp://cwmills.umd.edu/pub/lndia
9.

Statistical Abstracts: The 2000 Statistical
and graph on social, economic and
international subjects.
http://~vw.census.gov/prod/www/

statistical-abstractws.html
10. Hypertext Dictionary-The hypertext
Webster interface: It is an online dictionary.
The dictionary is linked to thesaurus and
the entries are also hyperlinked to more
definitions. This is an excellent reference
tool.
http://c.gp.cs.cmu.edu:51
O3/prog/
webster.
11. World Health Organisation Home page.
http://umw.who.int
12. University of Virginia Internet Library
Reference shelf, It provides an index of
Internet resources arranged by subject.

http://w.lib.virginia~du
reference.html
13.

/

~h~ internet
R~~~~~~~ Guide
r@xmaJth.llb.umich.edu

1 4. The whale 4rttemet catalogue.

hW/-a-y-~~/fP-t/
matrix/whde.htm
15. Big Web India: A directory of Indian
corporate and business related sites on the
Internet
http://www.bip&Jndiil. corn
16. Booklist: It contains reference book bulletin

http://wwwJh.or&ddQt
1 7. Index of Online Directwies.
http://www.buck~/di~

18. Information Pleases Almanac
wuvw.~e.com

19. Book Review.

ttp=mrgl
path pub/Abdc.reviews
20. Directory of electronic journals,
Newsktbers and Academic Oiscussion List:
Association of Research libraries, USA
http://~.org/scommm/edir

