DESIDOC Bulletin of Information T e c h m y , Vol. 21. No. 6, November 2001, pp. 3-24
Q 2001, DESIDOC

Building Digital Libraries: An Overview
Jagdish Arora
Abstract
Tools, techniques and protocols necessary for building up digital libraries have
now fully evolved with computing power that allows parallel processing,
multitasking, parallel consultation and parallel knowledge navigation and
sohare tools that facilitate artificial intelligence and interadivity. Coincided with
availability of sofhvare, hardware and networking technology, the advent of world
its ever increasing usage and highly evolved browsers have
wide web 0,
paved the way for creation of digital libraries. With rapid developments in
technologies necessary for developing digital libraries, the world of digital
information resources has expanded rapidly and exponentially. Increasing
number of publishers are using the internet as a global way to offer their
publications to the international community of scientists and technologists. With
the technology available at an effordable cost, the libraries are initiating small
digitisation projects as an individual library or as a group of libraries. Building-up
digital collection and the infrastructure required to access them is a challenge
that every library has to deal with. The article delves into technological evolution,
cultural revolution and contents enrichment that led to revolution in growth and
development of digital libraries. The artide has two distinct parts, while the first
part deals with various aspects of building, accessing and organising digital
resources and collection, the second part elaborates on the process, technology,
formats, compression techniques and tools used in digital imaging. The article
describes optical character recognition (OCR) and advocates for hybrid solution
for preservation of digital information.

1.. INTRODUCTION
Computerisatioo of the library during past

few decades has focused heavily on creation
of surrogate records of printed documents
available in a library or for providing
computerised services through secondary
databases held locally on CD-ROM or
magnetic tapes. The integrated library
packages have served well in providing
access to documents at bibliographic level.
Similarly, secondary services like MEDLINE,
INSPEC, COMPENDEXplus and CAS have
proved themselves as effective tools for
bibliographic control of research information.
However, since these databases provided
only bibliographic information on research
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol,2001.21(6)

articles, users had to depend heavily on
physical collection available either in their
institutional library or on interlibrary loan from
other libraries for references retrieved from
the secondary services. Attempts were made
in past to make the full text of research
articles available through online search
services, although technology available till
late 1980s and early 1990s supported only
simple text (ASCII) without graphics. Tools,
techniques and protocols necessary for
building-up digital libraries evolved with
availability of computing power that allows
parallel processing, multitasking, parallel
consultation
and
parallel
knowledge
navigation and software tools that facilitate
-.- - -.-

3

artificial intelligence and
interactivity.
Coincided with the availability of software,
hardware and networking technology, the
advent of world wide web (WWW), its ever
increasing usage and highly. evolved
browsers have paved the way for creation of
digital libraries. With rapid developments in
technologies necessary for developing digital
libraries, the world of digital information
resources has expanded quickly and
exponentially. A large numbers of STM
(science, technology and medical) electronic
journals are appearing on the web. Digital
information resources include not only rapidly
growing collection of electronic full text
resources, but also images, video, sound, and
even objects of virtual reality.
The most significant shift in building digital
coflections is greater interoperability among
information systems across the country and
internationally. Wtth the technology available
at an effordable cost, the libraries are
initiating small digitisation projects as
individual library or as a group of libraries.

Building-up digits\ collection and infrastructure
required to access them is a challenge that
every library has to deal with. Today's digital
libraries are built around Internet and web
technologies with electronic journals as their
building blocks. The increasing popularity of
lnternet and
developments in web
technologies are catalyst to the concept of
digital library. Fig.. 7 is a pictorial
representation of digital library infrastructure
and services that can be generated from
them.

2. DIGITAL LI6RARY:VHISTORICAL
PERSPECTIVES
Although the term digital library has gained
popularity in recent years but they have
evolved along the technological ladder for
past more than thirty years. In early 19?0s,
digital libraries were built around mini and
mainframe computers providing remote
access and online search and retrieval
services to users using computer and
communication technology available at that

Library Sewices
- 0 P A C to WebPAC
sCDR0.M to Web Databases
-Manual to Digital Reference

Infrastructure

infrastructure

Library SEwkes
.Virtual Library T o r n
.Librsry Wrb Site
.Library Ponalr

.Library Calndar

Standards,Protocols

.Web F a m a
.Bmlklin Bomrds, Dbcurrion

Figurn 1. Digital Library Infrastructure and Services
4

DESIDOC Bulletin d l n f Technol, 2001,21(6)

time. The earliest application of digital library
concepts involved character-coded storage
and full text indexing of legal and scientific
documents. The legal information through
electronics
(LITE) system was first
implemented by the US Air Force in 1967.
Several software packages were released
during mid-1970s and late 1970s for
computer-based storage, indexing and
retrieval of documents in character-coded
form. Some of the better known text storage
and retrieval packages included: IBM's
storage and information retrieval system
(STAIRS),
battelle automated search
information system (BASIS), INQUIRE,
BRSBEARCH, DOCUAUASTER, ASSASSIN,
STATUS, CAIRS, etc. By 1980s, text storage
and retrieval programs were available from
dozens of vendors for major computing
environment
including
main-frame,
microcomputers and local area network
(LAN).
Sophisticated information storage and
retrieval systems were built during 1980s
using state-of-the-art technology of distributed
database management system linking
different . remote systems. These online
information retrieval services used data files
generated in the process of electronic
phototypesetting of printed abstracting and
indexing services and other primary journals.
As such, online hosts like DIALOG and STN
were not only offering online databases, but
also full text online journals for past several
years, although as a simple ASCII or text files
without graphics and pictures. In 1989, there
were almost 1700 full text sources available
through'sixteen online systems. Availability of
CD-ROM in late 1980s as a media with high
storage capacity, longitivity, and ease of
transportation triggered production of several
CD-ROM information products which were
earlier available through online vendors or as
conventional abstracting and indexing
services in printed format. Moreover, several
full text databases also started appearing in
late 1980s and early 1990s leading tb
beginning of digital era. Some of the
important full text digital collections available
on CD-ROM include: ADONIS, lEEG7EE
Electronic Library (IEL), ABIANFO, UMl's
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2001,21(6)

International Business Database, UMI's
General Reference Periodicals, Espace
World, US Patents, etc.
Digital document imaging system, which
employs computer hardware and software to
scan and store images of documents in
digitized formats, evolved in early 1980s to
overcome the limitation of text storage and
retrieval systems which could only store
textual information. The earliest application of
a document imaging system was the Optical
Disk Pilot Project at the Library of Congress.
Several
document
imaging
software
packages are currently available in the
market. OmniDoc (Newgen) and Datascan
(Stacks India) are two important document
imaging software from India.
The beginning of full text digital library
involved building-up several client systems
usable in a multitude of environments, such
as MS Wndows, MS DOS, Apple Macintosh
and a diversity of UNlX systems as well as for
terminal-oriented mainframe systems, notably
VT-100 and VT-220. Upscaling of digital
library in those days entailed huge
maintenance problems because all clients
system had to be upgraded and scaled for
new facilities and emerging new techniques
and processes.
However, 1990s brought in a true
revolution in digital library system. The advent
of WWW offered a crucial advantage with the
availability of ready-to-use, publicly available,
user-friendly graphical web browser for all
prevalent platforms. Standard WWW clients
such as Netscape Navigator and Internet
Explorer are being upgraded regularly for
added functionality such as e-mail client,
support for JAVA, Active X and the ability to
view important document formats without
having to install plug-ins for them. These
browsers solved the maintenance problem
allowing developers to concentrate fully on
the server side and not to bother with the
ctient side. These browsers are available
freely and are easy to use eliminating the
need of extensive support and user's training.
The internet and associated technologies,
made it possible for digital libraries to include
multimedia objects such as text, image, audio
5

and video. These internet and web
technologies thus brought-in the graphical
components to the digital library which was
missing
in
earlier
digital
library
implementation. There has thus been a
steady move up the technological scale for
the digital libraries from previous (late 1980s)
low-end electronic publications available as
ASCII files, to being organised and
searchable on gophers (1992), and to being
tagged and graphically viewable on WWW
sites (1994). Recent growth and development
in digital Libraires can be attributed to
availability ~f the internet and web technology
as a media of information presentation and
delivery and convenience it offers.

3. BUILD1NG-UP D1GITAL
COLLECTIONS
,

The most important component of a digital
library is the digital collection it holds or has
access to. Viability and extent of usefulness
of a digital library would depend upon the
critical mass of digital collection it has. A
digital library can have a wide range of
resources. It may contain both paper-based
conventional documents or information
contained in computer-processible form.
Information contents of a digital library,
depending on the media type it contains, may
include a combination of structured/
unstructured text, numerical data, scanned
images. graphics, audio and video recordings.
Different types o f resources need to be
handled differently in a digital library.
us bridge'^ divided resources for a digital
library in following four distinct categories, i.e.,
legacy, transition, new and future.
Legacy resources. these are largely
non-digital resources, including manuscript,
print, slides, maps, audio and video
recordings. lnspite of the fact that large
investments are being made in the process of
digitisation of resources, vast majority of
existing legacy resources will remain outside
the electronic domain for many years to
come. These legacy resources are the major
resources of existing libraries
Transition resources: primarily designed for
another medium (mostly print), are those
which are being or have been digitised,
6

making the transition into the digital world.
Such resources are converted for increased
access and to reduce reliance on physical
libraries. The transition resources are either
digitized images or images that are converted
to text by the process of OCR.
New digital resources: these are either
expressly created as digital or are created in
parallel to print. Publishers are increasingly
moving to XML or SGML format. These
formats are used to generate datafiles
required for producing printed outputs. The
SGMUXML databases are also used for
generating HTMLIPDFIXHTML or postscript
file dynamically using appropriate DTDs. New
digital resources are designed with a
particular use in mind employing new Internet
and web technologies embodying a great
variation and value addition.
Future digital resources: there is an
increasingly wide range of digital resources
from formally published electronic journals
and electronic books through databases and
datasets in many formats, i.e., bibliographic,
full text, image, audio, video, statistical and
numeric datasets. Future resources may
contain data sets which are not formally
specified.
A digital library is not a single entity
although if may have digital contents created
in-house or acquired in digital formats stored
locally on servers. A digital library may also
act as a portal site providing access to digital
collections held elsewhere. The digital
constituents of a digital library are shown in
fig. 2 and are described below:

3.1 Acquisition of Collections
available in Digital Formats
Thousands of CD-ROM databases are
currently available from multitude of CD-ROM
producers including Silver Platter which alone
produces more than 250 information products
on CD-ROM. Moreover, several full text
databases also started appearing in late
1980s and early 1990s, launching the
beginning of a new digital era. CD-ROM
networking technology is now available for
providing weta-based simultaneous access to
CD-ROM databases on the LAN as well as on
wide area network (WAN). More evolved
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol,2001,21(6)

Acquiring

:

Di~italMedia

Content Creation
Born Digital

Buying Access

Digital Library

Content Creation
Scanning

-.

,

Portal Sites
--.-.

Integrated
Access

Figure 2. Collection Infrastructure of a Digital Library
technology allows caching of the contents of
CD-ROMs on to a server, which, in turn,
provides web-based simultaneous and faster
access to the information contents of
CD-ROMs. The libraries have an option to
subscribe to these full text databases as a
part of their digital library.
The Silver Platter's Electronic Reference
Library (ERL) technology facilitates uploading
of contents of ERL-complaint CD-ROM
databases on the hard disc of an intranet
server, which, in turn, provides integrated
access and search on ERL-complaint
databases. Moreover, individual research
articles in the ERL-complaint database are
linked to their full text research articles using
Silver Platter's Silver Linker.

3.2 Buying Access to External
Digital Collections
The libraries will not become digital
libraries, but will rather acquire access to ever
growing digital collections on behalf of their
users. Majority of these collections would be
provided by external sources like commercial
publishers, collections mounted by scholarly
societies, resources at other libraries,
electronic journal sites, etc. Internet has long
been a favorite media for experimenting with
electronic publishing and delivery.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno!. 2001.21 (6)

The technology is now available for
creation of fully digitised multimedia products
and make them accessibe through the
internet. Technological changes, especially
the internet and web technology, continue to
attract more and more traditional players to
adopt it as a global way to offer their
publications to the international community of
scientists and technologists. Most of the
important publishers now have their
web-based interfaces to offer full texts of their
journals.
The current electronic publishing market
consists of traditional players offering
electronic versions of their print journals as
well as several new enterprises offering new
products and services that are 'borne digital'.
The market also has several subscription
agents in their new role as aggregators.
These players include:

3.2.1 Publishers and Scholarly
Societies
Most well-known commercial publishers of
traditional journals such as Elsevier Science,
Kluwer Academic Press, Academic Press,
Springer Verlag, Wiley Interscience and
scholarly societies such as SIAM, ACM,
IEEEIIEE are making their publications
available online through their web sites.
7

Several
universities
host
specialised
collections on their web sites. Several
universities, as members of the networked
digital library of theses and dissertations
(NDLTD) initiative, host doctoral dissertations
submitted to their respective universities.

3.2.2 Aggregators
Third party aggregators provide access to
numerous journals from a variety of
publishers. Aggregators include organisations
like JSTOR 4hat offer extensive backfiles for
more than 100 academic journals and OCLC
Electronic Collection Online which offer full
text access to more than two thousand titles
via their First Search service. Other
aggregators like Lexis-Nexis, Bell and Howell
(UMI) and Web of Science (ISI) offer
searchable indexes with links to full text
journals on publisher's site. EBSCOHost, IAC
Trac SearchBank and Blacbell's Electronic
Journal Navigator (EJN) provide common
search interface for the journals aggregated
by them from assortment of publishers.
Growing number of susbcription agents are
working with publishers to provide aggregated
services for packages of titles or for full text
databases.

3.3 Pricing Model
Total number of electronic journals
available on the web has grown steadily from
less than 10 in 1989 to 8500 in April, 2000.
One of the major issue that the publishers
are concerned with is to save their economic
interest in the process of providing electronic
access to their printed publications. The
publishers make a significant investment in
the process of production of a journal which
involves
activities
like
peer-review,
administration, editing, layout design,
production, subscription management and
distribution. Most activities that are performed
for publishing a journal are common to both
electronic and paper media, except for
production and distribution where the cost
involved is relatively low. Moreover, electronic
version of journals generally provides
additional features like link to corrections, link
to additional materials, e-mail link to
author(s), etc., which require additional work
8

on part of the publisher. Tenopir and King
(1997) in a study concluded that the cost of
electronic journals can not be substantially
lower than their printed versions.
Journals are made available through the
web at varying price models. In a survey of
8001 peer reviewed electronic journals
conducted by EBSCO, it was found that 50%
of electronic journals are free with their print
journals, 34% require additional payment over
their print subscription and 16% are available
online only without their print counter-part.
Overall, 84% of joumals require a print
subscription to journals as a prerequisite for
online access to their electronic version3.
Following are prevalent pricing models:

3.3.1 Electronic Subscription linked
to Print Subscription
The electronic subscription Do journals in
most of the cases are linked to their printed
counterparts, i.e., it may be offered free with
print subscription (e.g. publications of
American Society for Physics and ASCE) or
priced at a fixed percentage over the print
subscriptions (e.g. IEEE's ASPP package).

3.3.2 Electronic Subscription with
Campus Licenses
Electronic publishers facilitate campus
wide unlimited access to subscribed journals
on payment of a fixed amount of platform fee.
Example: Elsevier Science (ScienceDirect).

3.3.3 Electronic Subscriptions are
Bundled
Several electronic publishers offer access
to the entire range of their electronic journals
and other publications bundled into one. For
example IEL and AGM Digital Library offer
access to their entire site on subscription.
Access to individual journals or a subset is
not permissible. Similarly, Academic Press
offer all journals available on their site
(Academic's Project IDEAL) for 10% more
than the print subscription to library consortia.
Publishers and aggregators have started
experimenting with models wherein a user
can search a database online for a modest
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/,2001,21(6)

usage fee, identify articles of interest, and
then call up such aftides in full text on a
per-look basis.

3.3.5 Electronic Only
A few publishers and aggregators have
started offering only electronic version of their
journals providing a modest discount for those
who forego print versions.

3.3.6 Consortium Licensing
Consortia provide union strength to
negotiate with electronic publishers for the
best possible price and rights. Most
publishers already have well-defined policies
and offer for libraries subscribing as
consortia. The consortia licensing is widely
used the world over by the libraries. It is
slowly pickingup in India also.

3.3.7 Nati~nalLicensing
National licenses can atso be negotiated
with electronic publishers for core collections.
Singapore, Taiwan and UK have arranged
national licenses for some of the important full
text resources.
Besides, electronic journals, there are
several online databases that are now
available through.the web including Medline
(several versions), AGRICOLA and ERIC (all
free). Most online search services like STN
and DIALOG also have their web-based
interfaces.
Reference
works
like
encyclopedia,
dictionaries,
handbooks,
atlases, etc., are also making their electronic
appearance on the web. Electronic resources
created exclusively for the web include
web-based educational tutorials called 'online
courseware'.
The online courseware are proliferating the
web as a strong contender for distant
education.
Telecampus,
Canada
(www.telecampus.edu/) lists more than
12,000 online courseware available on the
web. Moreover, highly specialised web sites
are now coming-up in various disciplines
khich offer information in totality including all
kinds of resources in electronic format, El
Engineering Village (http://www.ei.org/), ISI
Nectronic Library (http:/lwww. isinetxom), /EL
(http:l/www.ieee.org/), Engineering Sciences
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/,2001,21(6)

Data Unit (http:/hww.esdu.com) are some of
the important examples.
Electronic resources accessible on the
web for free or for a fee are undeniably major
and important constituent of a digital library.

3.4 Converting Digital Datasets
The
libraries or
the
institutions
implementing digital libraries may have
datasets that are originally created in digital
format. Doctoral dissertations submitted to
universities and research institutions are
undisputedly highly valuable documents that
qualify to be an important component of any
digital library. Moreover, institutions may have
in-house journal(s), annual reports, technical
reports, or other datasets, that may be
included in digital collection. Items listed
above are invariably composed in one of the
word processing programme or in a desk-top
publishing package.
The documents composed on word
processing packages or desktop publishing
packages can be converted into HTML,
Postscript and PDF using tools like Acrobat
4.0 or Acrobat Exchange. Online converters
are also available through Adobe's site.
HTML, as a defacto language of the web and
PDF as a defacto standard for online
distribution of electronic information, can be
employed to facilitate transition from
computer processible files to a format
accessible on the web.
For regular publications, the institutions
may adopt SGML or XML to provide structure
and functionality to their publications. Most
electronic publishers are increasingly using
SGMUXML to ripe the benefit that the format
offer. SGML (or XML) documents provide
benefit of a database management system
without being one. Publishers code the
accepted submissions in SGMUXML in a
semi-automated process using assortment of
sotWaf8 packages available b them or using
custom-made software specially designed for
this purpose. The database of SGML
documents are used for providing search by
authors, keywords, etc., and browse the
content pages of journals. Behind the web
interface lies a relational database like Oracle
9

that store SGMLIXML documents. Search
and browse operation on highly strctured
XMLISGML datasets provides dynamically
generated web pages (HTML-on-fly). These
HTML. files provide link to full text of
documents in HTMLIPDFIPostScript, all
formats are generated dynamically from the
same SGMLIXML datasets using pre-defined
DTDs.

3.5 Conversion of Existing Print
Media into Digital Format
Several digital library projects are
concerned with providing digital access to
mateials that already exist with traditional
libraries in printed media. Scanned page
images are practically the only reasonable
solutions for institutions such as libraries for
converting existing paper collection (legacy
documents) without having access to the
original data in computer processible formats
convertible into HTMLISGML or in any other
structured or unstructured text. Scanned
images are natural choice of large-scale
conversions for major digital library initiatives.
Printed text, pictures, and figures are
transformed into computer-processible forms
using a digital scanner or a digital camera in a
process called document imaging or
scanning. The digitally scanned images are
stored in a file as a bit-mapped page image,
irrespective of the fact that a scanned page
contains a photograph, a line drawing or text.
A bit-mapped page image is a type of
computer graphic, litera!ly an electronic
picture of the page which can most easily be
equated to a facsimile image of the page and
as such they can be read by humans, but not
by the computers, i.e.. 'text' in a page image
is not searchable on a computer using the
present-day technology. An image-based
implementation require a large space for data
storage and transmission. There are several
large projects using page images as their
primary storage format, including project
(www.jstor.org)
at
Princeton
JSTOR
University, USA funded by the Melon
Foundation. The project JSTOR has a
complete set of more than 120 journals
scanned and hosted on web servers that
reside at the University of Michigan-..and is
10

mirrored at Princeton University, USA. Using
technology developed at Michigan, high
resolution (600 dpi) bit-mapped images of
each page are linked to a text file generated
with OCR software. Linking a searchable text
file to the page images of the entire published
record of a journal along with newly
constructed table of contents, indexes,
permits high level of access, search and
retrieval of the journal content previously
unimaginable8.
Capturing page image format
is
comparatively easy and inexpensive, it is
reproduction of a page maintaining page
integrity and originality. The scanned textual
images, however, are not searchable unless it
is OCRed, which, in itself, is highly error
prone process specially when it involves
scientific texts.

3.6 Creating Portals or Gateways
to the Electronic Collection
available on the Web
The web has become the most successful
networked hypermedia-based system that
allows rapid access to a wide variety of
networked information resources. It allows
linking amongst electronic resources stored
on servers dispersed geographically on
distant locations. The portal sites or gateways
redirect a user to the holders of the original
digital material. It may provide its own
indexing and search services or may combine
original resources from a number of different
providers. The portal sites or the gateways
restrict their operation to providing linkages to
independent third party sources. Home pages
of all the major education and research
institutions, specially in developed world,
provide an organised and structured guide to
electronic resources available on the internet.
Some of the major portal sites or gateways
that provide access to electronic resources on
the internet are as follows:
WWW Virtual Library
http:liwww.edoc.comi
Internet Publ~cLibrary
http:l/www.ipl.org/
Michigan Electronic Library
http://mel.lib.mi.us/
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technot,2001.21 ( 6 )

Penn Electronic Library
http:llwww.library,upenn.edulresourcesl
BUBL lnformation Service
if?http:l/bubl.ac.uk/
Argus Clearing House
http:llwww.clearinghouse.net/
Internet Index
http:llsunsite.berkeley.edu/lnternetlndex/

3.7 Integrated Access Interface
Digital libraries typically integrate multitude
of resources and media types. Constituents of
a digital library may have:
(a) Collection acquired in digital form
(b) Collections digitised in-house
(c) Buying access to electronic resources
including e-journals
(d) Subject gateways and the library OPACs.
In effect, a digital library may not only have
multitude of resources but also multitude
mechanism to access these resources. Most
libraries having sizable coHections in digital
forms and have adopted two-fold strategy that
include: (a) provide access to resources
through the library catalogue wherever
possible; and (b) provide access to electronic
resourc5s and specialised collections through
the library home page.
In cases of electronic journals, web access
via an alphabetical listing and/or subject index
of all titles, offers a quick and simple means
of inventory and direct hypertext links to full
text sources. Similarly, access to other
specialised collection can also be provided
through a set of menus that serves as rough
and ready finding aid. It is particularly useful
for institutions that have not implemented
web-based catalogues and cannot offer
hypertext links from a catalogue record. On
the other hand, access to e-journals is
separate from the online catalogue and other
journals that are part of the library's collection.
Web-based catalogues can enable users to
connect directly to the full text source via
hypertext links in the catalogue record.
Acquisition of Endeavour's lnformation
system by the Elsevier Science, marks
integration of Elsevier's contents into
Endeavour's digital library technology. A- new
DESIDOC Bulletm of Inf Technol, 2001.21 (6)

product called 'ENCompass' from Endeavour
would come up as a single, seamless search
across disparate remote and local collections
(Science Direct Connections, 2000).

4. PRINT TO DIGITAL: OPTIONS
FOR CONVERSlON
The digital imaging technology offers a
number choices that can be adopted
depending on the objective of scanning, end
users, availability of finances, etc. There are
four basic approaches that can be adapted to
translate from print to digital:

o Scanned as image
u OCR

o Retaining page layout using acrobat
capture
o Re-keying the data.

4.1 Scanned as lmage
lmage only is the lowest cost option in
which each page is an exact replica or the
original source document. Since OCR is not
carried out, the document is not searchable.
Most scanning software generate TIFF
format, by default, which can be converted in
to PDF using a number of software tools.
Scan to TIFFiPDF format is recommended
only when the requirement of project is to
make documents portable and accessible
from any computing platform. The images can
be browsed through a table of contents
composed in HTML provid~nglink to scanned
images.

4.2 Optical Character Recognition
(OCR)
The latest versions of both Xerox's
TextBridge
and
Caere's
Omnipage
incorporate technology allow the option of
maintaining text and graphics in their original
lay6ut as well as plain ASCII and
word-processing formats. Output can also
include HTML with attributes l~ke bold,
underline, and italic retained.

4.2.1 Retaining Layout After OCR
Several software packages now offer
facil~tyof retaining the page layout after it has

been OCRed. The process for retaining the
page layout is software dependent. Caere's
Omn~prooffers two ways of retaining page
layout following OCR. It calls them True Page
Classic and True Page Easy. True Page
Classic places each paragraph within a
separate frame of a word processor into
which the OCR output IS saved. If one wishes
to edit anything subsequently, then the
relevant paragraph box may need to be
r6sized. However, 'Easy Edit' facilitates
editing of pages without the necessity of
resizing the boxes although there is a greater
chances of spillage over the page. Xerox Text
Bridge offers similar feature called DocuRT
which is broadly equivalent to True Page
Easy Edit. The process of OCR dismantle the
page, OCR it, and then reassemble it in such
as way that all the component parts such as
tabs, columns, table, graphics can be used in
a text manipulation package such as word
processor.
The process of OCR results in
computer-processible file that is less accurate
than rekeying-in the data. At an accuracy ratio
of 98%, a page having 1800 characters will
have 36 error per page on an average. It is
therefore, imperative to cleanup after OCR
unless original scanned image will be viewed
as page and OCR being used purely for
creating a searchable index on the words that
will be searched via a fuzzy retrieval engine
like Excalibur which is highly tolerant to OCR
errors.
Another possibility for cleaned-up OCR is
use of specialist OCR system such as Prime
Recognition. With production OCR in mind,
Prime OCR licenses leading recognising
engine and passes the data through several
~f them using voting technology along with
artificial intelligent algorithms. The use of
multiple OCR engines improves the result
achieved by a single engine by 65-80 %. The
technology is available at price depending
upon number of search engine that one would
like to incorporate. Michigan Digital Library
production services used Prime OCR for
placing more 'th$n two million pages of
SGML-encoded text and the same number of
page images on the web.
--- ---.
12

.

.- --.

4.3 Retaining Page Layout Using
Acrobat Capture
The Acrobat Capture 2.0 provides several
options for retaining not only the page layout
but also the fonts, and to fit text into the exact
space occupied in the original, so that the
scanned and OCRed copy never over- or
under-shoots the page. Accordingly, it treats
unrecognizable text as pasted-in images,
which are perfectly readable by anyone
looking at the PDF file, but which will be
absent from the editable and searchable text
file. In contrast, ordinary OCR programs treat
unrecognised text as tildes or some other
special character in the ASCII output. Acrobat
Capture can be used to scan pages as
images, image+text and as normal PDF, all
the three options retain page layout.
lmage Only: lmage only option has already
been described in option 1.
Image+Text: In image+text solutions, a
OCRed text is generated for each image
where each page is an exact replica of the
original and left untouched, however, the
OCRed text sits behind the image and is used
for searching. The OCRed text is generally
not corrected for errors since it is used only
for searching. The cost involved is much less
than PDF Normal. However, the entlre page is
a bitmap and neither fonts nor line drawings
are vectorised, so the file size of lmage + Text
PDFs is considerably larger than the
corresponding PDF Normal files and pages
will not display as quickly or cleanly on
screen.
PDF Normal: POF normal gives the clearest
on-screen display, is searchable, and yet with
significantly smaller file size than Image+Text.
The result is not, however, an exact replica of
the scanned page. While all graphics and
formatting are preserved, substitute fonts may
be used where direct matches are not
possible. It is a good choice when files need
to be posted to the web or otherwise
delivered online. If, during the capture and
OCR process, a word cannot be recognised
to the specified confidence level, capture, by
default, substitutes it with a small portion of
the original bitmap image. Capture's 'best
guess' of the suspect word lies behind the
bitmap so that searching and indexing are still

--

DESlDOC Bulletin of lnf Technol,2001,21(6)

possible. However, one cannot guarantee that
these bit-mapped words are correctly
guessed. In addition, the bit-map is somewhat
obtrusive, detracting from the 'look' of the
page. Further, capture provides option to
correct suspected errors left as bit-mapped
image or leave them untouched.

A classic solution of this kind would
comprise of keying-in the data and its
verification. This involves a complete keying
of the text, followed by a full rekeying by a
different operator, the two keying-in operation
might take place simultaneously. The two
keyed-in files are compared and any errors or
inconsistencies are corrected. This would
guarantee at least 99.9% accuracy, but to
reach 99.955% accuracy level, it would
normally require full proof-reading of the
keyed-in files, plus table lookups and
dictionary spellchecks.

5. STEPS IN THE PROCESS OF
DIGITISATION
The following four steps are involved in the
process of digitisation: scanning, index~ng,
storage, and retrieval. Software, variably
called document image processing (DIP),
electronic filing system (EFS) and document
management systems (DMS) provides all or
more of these functions:

5.2 Indexing
Indexing of a document converted into an
image or text file is the second step in the
process of document imaging. The process of
indexing scanned image ~nvolveslinking of
database of scanned images to a text
database. Scanned images are just like a set
of pictures that need to be related to a text
database describing them and their contents.
An imaging system typically stores a large
amount of unstructured data in a two file
system for storing and retrieving scanned
images. The first is traditional file that has a
text description of the image along with a key
to a second file. The second file contains the
document location. The user selects a record
from the first file using a search algorithm.
Once the user selects a record, the
application keys into the location index, finds
the document and displays it.
Most of the document imaging software
packages. through their menu driven or
command driven interface, facilitate elaborate
indexing of documents. While some DMS
facilitate selection of indexing terms from the
image file, others allow only manual keying in
of indexing terms. Further, many OMS
packages provides OCR capabilities for
transforming the images into standard ASCII
files. The OCRed text then serves as a
database for full text search of the stored
images.

5.1 Scanning

5.3 Storage

The process involves acquisition of an
electronic image through its original that may
be a photograph, text, manuscript, etc. into
the computer using an electronic image
scanner. An image is read or scanned at a
predefined resolution and dynamic range. The
resulting file, called 'bit-map page image' is
formatted and tagged for storage and
subsequent retrieval by the software package
used for scanning. Fax card, electronic
camera or other imaging devices may also
employed for acquisition of an image,
however, image scanners are most important
and most commonly used component of an
imaging system for transfer of normal
paper-based documents into an image.

The most tenacious problem of a
document image relates to its file size and,
therefore, to its storage. Every part of an
electronic page image is saved regardless of
presence or absence of ink. The file size
varies directly with scanning resolution, the
size of the area being digitised, compression
ratio, content and the style of graphic file
format used to save the image. The scanned
images, therefore, need to be transferred
from the hard disc of scanning workstat~onto
an external large capacity storage devices
such as an optical disc, CO-ROMfDVD-ROM
disc, cartridge tapes, etc. While the smaller
document imaging system use offline media,
which need to be reloaded when required, or

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno/,2001.21(6)

13

fixed hard disc drives allocated for image
storage, larger DMS use auto-changers such
as optical jukeboxes and tape library systems.
The image storage device may be either
remote or local to the retrieval workstation
depending upon the imaging systems and
DMS used.

characterised by multiple core and peripheral
systems that includes:

5.4 Retrieval

(scanners, computers data
storage and data output peripherals)
n Software
(image
capturing,
data
compression)
n Network (data transmission)
a Display technologies.

Once scanned images and OCRed text
documents have been saved as a file, a
database is needed for selective retrieval of
data contained in one or more fields within
each record in the database. Typically, a
document imaging system uses at least two
files to store and retrieve documents. The first
is traditional file that has a text description of
the image along with a key to the second file.
The second file contains the document
location. The user selects a record from the
first-file using a search algorithm. Once the
user selects a record, the application keys
into the location index, finds the document
and displays it. Most of the DMS provide
elaborate search possibilities including use of
Boolean and proximity operators (and, or, not)
and wild cards. Users are also allowed to
refine their search strategy. Once the required
images have been identified their associated
document image can quickly be retrieved
from the image storage device for display or
printed output.

Digital images, also called 'bit-mapped
page image' are 'electronic photographs' or
set of bits or pixels (picture elements)
represented by '0"and '1'. A bit-mapped page
image is a true representation of its original in
terms of typefaces, illustrations, layout and
presentation of scanned documents. As such
information contents of 'bit-mapped page
image' cannot be searched or manipulated
unlike text file documents (or ASCII).
However, an ASCII file can be generated from
a bit-mapped page image using an optical
character recognition (OCRJ software such as
Xerox's TextBridge and Caere's Omnipage.
The quality of digital image can be monitored
at the time of its capture by the following
factors:
Bit depthldynamic range
Resolution
8 Threshold
Compression
Image enhancement.

6. DIGITAL IMAGING
TECHNOLOGY

6.1 Bit Depth or Dynamic Range

Digital imaging IS the process of converting
paper documents including text, graphics, or
pictures into digital images that can be made
accessible over electronic networks. A digital
image, in turn, is composed of a set of pixels
(picture elements), arranged according to a
pre-defined ratio of columns and rows. An
images file can be managed as regular
computer file and can be retrieved, printed
and modified using appropriate software.
Further, textual images can be OCRed so as
to make its contents searchable. Digitat
imaging is an inter-linked system of hardware,
software image database and access
sub-system with each having its own
. .-- - -- .- systems
.- .. .- .. . - . .-. Digital
components.
are
-14

n Hardware

The number of bits used to define each
pixel determines bit depth. The greater the bit
depth, the greater the number of gray scale or
colour tones that can be represented.
'Dynamic range: is the term used to,express
the full range of total variations, as measured
by a densitometer between the lightest and
darkest portion of a document. Digital images
can be captured a1 varied density of bits per
pixel depending upon: (a) the nature of
source material or document to be scanned;
(b) target audience or users; and (c)
capabilities of the display and print subsystem
that are to be used. Bitonal or black & white
or binary scanning is generally employed in
libraries to scan pages containing text or the
drawings. Bitonal or binary scanning
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno!,2001, 21 (6)

represents one bit per pixel (either '0' (black)
or '1' (white). Gray scale scanning is used for
reliable reproduction of intermediate or
continuous tones found in black & white
photographs to represent shades of grey.
Multiple numbers of bits ranging from 2-8 are
assigned to each pixel to represent shades of
grey in this process. Although each bit is
either black or white, as in the case of bitonal
images, but bits are combined to produce a
level of grey in the pixel that is black, white or
somewhere in between. Colour scanning can
be employed to scan colour photographs. As
in the case of grey-scale scanning, multiple
bits per pixels typically 2 (lowest quality) to 8
(highest quality) per primary colour are used
for representing colour. Colour images are
evidently more complex than grey scale
images, because, it involves encoding of
shades of each of the three primary colours,
i.e. red, green and blue (RGB). If a coloured
image is captured at 2 bits per primary colour,
each primary colour can have 2' or 4 shades
and each pixel can have 44 shades for each
of the three primary colour.
Evidently, increase in bit depth increases
the quality of image captured and the space
required to store the resultant image.
Generally speaking, 12 bits per pixel (4 bits
per primary colour) is considered minimum
pixel depth for good quality colour image.
Most of today's colour scanner can scan at
24-bit colour (8 bit per primary colour).
Table 1 provides binary calculation for no
of shades represented by bit depth.

SI. No.

No. of No. of No. of
No. of
bitsl shades shadeslpixel
Bits shade

6.2 Resolution
The number of pixel in a given area
defines the resolution of an image. It is
measured in terms of dot per inch (dpi) in
case of an image file and as ratio of number
of pixel on horizontal line x number of pixel in
vertical lines in case of display resolution on a
monitor. Higher the dpi set on the scanner
the better the resolution and quality of image
and larger the image file.
Regardless of the resolution, image quality
of an image can be improved by capturing an
image in greyscale. The add~tionalgray-scale
data can be processed electronically to
sharpen edges, fill-in characters, remove
extraneous dirt, remove unwanted page
strains or discoloration, so as to create a
much higher quality image than possible with
binary scanning alone. A major draw back in
gray scale is the large amount of data
captured. Continuing increase in resolution
will not result in any appreciable gain in image
quality after some time, except for increase in
file size. It is thus important to determine the
point at where sufficient resolution has been
used to capture all significant details present
in the source document.
The black and white or bitonal images
(textual) are scanned most commonly at 300
dpi that preserve 99.9% of the information
contents of a page and can be considered as
adequate
access
resolution.
Some
presewation projects scan at 600 dpi for
better quality. A standard SVGANGA monitor
has a resolution of 640 x 480 lines while the
ultra-high mon~torshave a resolution of about
2048 x 1664 (about 150 dpi).

1

1

1

1

1

6.3 Threshold

2
3

2
4

2
3

22=4
23=8

43=@

a3=512

4

8

4

2'=16

163=40$6

5
6

16
32

5
6

25=32
26=64

323=32768
643=262144

The threshold setting in bitonal scanning
defines the point on a scale, usually ranging
from 0 to 255, at which gray values will be
interpreted as black or white pixels. In bitonal
scanning, resolution and threshold are the
key determinants of image quality. Bitonal
scanning is best suited to high-contrast
documents, such as text and line drawings.
For continuous tone or low contrast
documents such as photographs, gray scale
or colour scanning is required. In gray

64
7
2'= 128 1 283=2097152
8
128 8
2'=256 25€i3=167772 16
Table 1: Binary Calculation for No. of Shades
Represented by Bit Depth
7

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol,2001,21(6)

15

scalelcolour scanning both resolution and bit
depth combine to play significant roles in
image quality.

6.4 Compression
lmage files are evidently larger than
textual ASCII files. Lt is thus necessary to
compress image files so as to achieve
economic
storage,
processing
and
transmission over the network. A black &
white image file of a page of text scanned at
300 dpi is about 1 MB in size where as a text
file containing the same information is about
2-3 KB. Image compression is the process of
reducing size of a image by abbreviating the
repetitive information such as one or more
rows of white bits to a single code. The
compression algorithms may be grouped into
the following two categories:

6.4.1 Lossless Compression
The tzonversion Process converts repeated
information as a mathematical algorithm that
can decompressed without loosing
- any- details
into the original image with absolute fidelity.
No information is 'lost' or 'sacrificed' in the
Lossless
process
of
compression.
compression is primarily used in bitonal
images.

6.4.2 Lossy Compression
Lossy compression process discards or
averages details that are least significant or
which may not make appreciable effect on the
quality of image. This kind of compression is
called 'lossy' because when the image
compressed using 'lossy' compression
techniques, is decompressed, it will not be an
exact replica of the original image. Lossy
compression is used with gray scale/colour
scanning, and in particular with complicated
images.
Compression is necessary in digital
imaging but more important is the ability to
output uncompressed t h e replica of images.
This is especially important when images are
transferred from one platform to another or
are handled by software packages under
different operating system.
Uncompressed images often work better
than compressed images for different
16

reasons. It is thus suggested that scanned
images should be either stored as
uncompressed images or at the most as
lossless compressed images. Further, it is
best to use one of the standard and widely
supported compression protocols than a
proprietary one, even if it offers efffcient
compression and better quality. Attributes of
original documents may also be considered
while selecting compression techniques. For
example ITU G 4 is designed to compress
text where as JPEG, GIF and ImagePAC are
designed to compress pictures. It is important
to ensure migration of images from one
platform to another and from one hardware
media to another. It may be noted that highly
compressed files are more susceptible to
corruption than unwmpressed files.

6.5 Compression Protocols
Following protocols are commonly used
for bitonal, gray scale or colour compression:

6.5.f ITU-G4
ITU G4, a standard developed by
International Telecommunication Union (ITU),
is considered as de facto standard
compression scheme for storing black & white
bitonal images. An image created as a TlFF
and compressed using ITU-G4 compression
technique is called a Group4 TlFF or TlFF
G-4. TlFF G 4 is a lossless compression
scheme. Joint Bi-level lmage Group (JBIG)
(ISO-11544) is another standard compression
technique for bitonal images.

6.5.2 JPEG (Joint Photographic
Expert Group)
JPEG (Joint Photographic Expert Group)
is an ISO-10918-1 compression protocol that
works by finding areas of the image that have
same tone, shade, colour or other
characteristics and representing this area by
a code. Compression is achieved at loss of
data. It is generally observed that
compression of about 10 or 15 to one can be
achieved without visible degradation of image
quality.

6.5.3 LZW (Lenpel-Ziv Welch)
LZW compression technique uses a
table-based lookup algorithm invented by
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techrwl,2001.21(6)

Abraham Lempel, Jacob Ziv, and Terry
Welch. Two commonly-used file formats in
which LZW compression is used are the
graphics interchange format (GIF) and the tag
image file format (TIFF). L N V compression is
also suitable for compressing text files. A
particular U W compression algorithm takes
each input sequence of binary digit of a given
length (for example, 12 bits) and creates an
entry in a table (sometimes called a
'dictionary' or 'codebook') for that particular bit
pattern, consisting of the pattern itself and a
shorter code. As input is read, any pattern
that has been read before results in the
substitution of the shorter code, effectively
compressing the total amount of input to
something smaller. The decoding program
that uncompresses the file is able to build the
table itself by using the algorithm as it
processes the encoded input.

6.5.4 Wavelet and Fractal

Compression
Fractal, wavelet and flaxpix file formats
offer advantages for providing access to
digital images of oversized materials on the
web. Unlike JPEG and LZW compression that
maintain images as array of pixels, wavelet
and fractal compression convert images into
mathematical models in order to save s t o ~ g e
space. Both compression techniques are
lossy. Some applications are combination of
both wavelet and fractal compression.

(a) Wavelet Compression
Wavelet compression is a method of
mathematical modeling of images that breaks
the image down into small waves that
represent the frequency analysis of a
function. The shapes and patterns in an
image are identified and then described using
mathematical functions or formulas. The
function that models or describes the image is
contained within the compression and
decompression
software.
Wavelet
compression is very efficient, with ratio upto
50:1, depending upon the images being
compressed. In comparison JPEG images are
usually compressed between 10: 1 & 20: 1 and
LZW around 2: 1.

DESIDOC Bulktin ofInf Technoi,2001,21(6)

Wavelet compression can take a longer
time to compress images due to the complex
mathematics involved. However, the time
required to decompress wavelet or fractally
encoded image is usually comparative to
decompressing a JPG image. Wavelet
compression is used in varied digital
applications, photographic images, audio &
video recordings, 2D & 3D rendering,
multimedia, finger-prints imaging, medical
imaging (radiography MRI, etc.), satellite and
remote sensing imaging, GIs, maps &
document imaging. Multi-resolution Seamless
lmage Database (MrSID) from Lizard Tech
uses wavelet compression technique.

(b) Fractal Compression
Mathematically, a fractal describes a
structure that has many repeated forms
regardless of scale. Fractal Compression
works by using variety of methods to identify
features within an image and then breaking
down the image into mathematically modeled
series of repeating shapes and patterns.
Compression ratio of upto 250:l can be
achieved
using
fractal
compression
depending
upon
the
image
being
compressed. Fractal compression take longer
time to compress images than wavelet
compression but the decompression is
relatively quick.

6.6 lmage Enhancement
lmage enhancement process can be used
to improve scanned images at a cost of
image authenticity and fidelity. The process of
image enhancement is, however, time
consuming. It requires special skills and
would invariably increase the cost of
conversion. Typical image enhancement
features available in a scanning or image
editing software include filters, tonal
reproduction,
curves
and
colour
management, touch, crop, image sharpening,
contrast, transparent background, etc. In a
page scanned in grayscale, the textiline art,
and half tone areas can be decomposed and
each area of the page can be filtered
separately to maximize its quality. The text
area on page can be treated with edge
sharpening filters so as to clearly define the

character edges, a second filter could be
used to remove the high-frequency noise and
finally another filter could fill in characters.
Gray scale area of the page could be
processed with different filters to maximize
the quality of the halftone.

7. FILE FORMATS
The digitally scanned images are stored in
a file as a bit-mapped page image,
irrespective of the fact that a scanned page
contains a photograph, a line drawing or text.
The scanned image can be formatted and
tagged in dozens of different formats to
facilitate easy storage and retrieval depending
upon the scanner and its software. National
and international standards for image-file
formats and compression methods exist to
ensure that data . will be interchangeable
amongst systems. An image file stores
discrete sets of data and information allowing
a computing system to disptay, interpret and
print the image in a predefined format. An
image file format consists of three distinct
components, i.e., header which stores
information on file identifier and image
specifications such as its size, resolution,
compression protocols, etc.; image data
consisting of look-up table and image raster;
and lastly footer that signals file termination
information. While bit-mapped portion of a
raster image is standardised, it is the file
header that differentiate one format from
another. The display software of a raster
image picks up the details, like resolution,
compression technique, etc., from the file
header and displays an electronic replica of
the original page. File formats also define the
compression protocol used for compressing
or decompressing an image.
Most of the scanning sohare allow saving
of scanned images in a number of formats.
TlFF (Tagged Image File Format) is the most
commonly used file format and is considered
de facto standard for bitonal scanning. TlFF is
a truly multi-platform protocol and is a good
candidate for scanning projects. Some image
formats are proprietary, developed and
supported by a commercial vendor and
require a specific software or hardware for
displaying the printing scanned images.
18

Annexure - 1 lists file formats used for digital
images.
It would be appropriate to store a high
resolution image as a TlFF master (archival
format) and distribute the image as JPEGI
GIF file (access' format). Soffware are. now
available that would generate a JPEG or GIF
files 'on the fly' from a master TIFF file.

8. TOOLS OF DlGlTlSATlON
An image scanning system may consist of
a stand-alone workstation where most or all
the work is done on the same workstation or
as a par! of a network of workstations with
imaging work distributed and shared amongst
various workstations. The network usually
includes a scanning station, a server and one
or more editing, and retrieval stations. A
typical scanning workstation for a small,
production level project, could consist of the
following:
B Microcomputer-Pentium IIIIPentium IV
8 Scanner and scanning software
Storage system
Network
Display system
Printer.
This section will concentrate on scanners
and scanning software as important
components of scanning workstation.

8.1 Scanners
Digital scanners are used to capture a
digital image from an analogue media such as
printed page or a microfichelmicrofilm at a
predefined resolution and dynamic range (bit
range). There are following two types of
image scanners:

8.1.1 Vector scanners
These scanners scan an image as a
complex set of x, y coordinates. Vector
images are generally used in geographical
information systems (GIs). The display
soitware for the vector image interprets the
image as function of coordinates and other
included information to produce an electronic
replica of the original drawing or photograph.
Vector images can be zoomed in portion to
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Tihnol,2001,21(6)

display minute details of a drawing or a map.
Maps,
engineering
drawings,
and
architectural blueprints are often scanned as
vector images.

8.1.2 Raster scanners
Raster images are captured by raster
scanners by passing lights (laser in some
cases) down the page and digitally encoding
it row by row. Multiple passes of lights may be
required to capture basic colours in a
coloured image. Raster scanners are used in
libraries to convert printed publications into
electronic forms. Majority of electronic
imaging system generate raster images.
The scanners used for digitising analogue
images into digital images come in a variety
of shapes and sizes. There are following
types of scanners:
Flatbed Scanners-right angle, prism and
overhead flatbed
Sheet-Feed Scanners
Drum Scanners
Digital Cameras
Slide Scanners
8 Microfilm Scanner
Video Frame Grabber.
The type of scanner selected for an
imaging project would be influenced by the
type, size and source of documents to be
scanned. Many scanners can handle only
transparent material, whereas others can
handle only reflective materials.

8.1.3 Flatbed Scanners
Flatbed scanners are most common and
look like photocopiers and are used in much
the same way. Source material is placed face
down for scanning. The light source and CCD
move beneath the platen, while the document
remains stationary as in the case of
photocopying machine. Flatbed scanner
comes in various models like right-angle,
prism and planetaryloverhead to handle
bound volumes and books.
'

Examples: HP ScanJet 6300C, Ricoh
IS420, Bell & Howell 1000FB Fujitsu 3097G,
Minolta PS3000, Xerox Oocu CS620. Flatbed

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Tmhnol.2001 ,21(6)

scanners can accept both reflective as well as
transparent media over a glass platen.

8.1.4 Sheet feed Scanners
In a sheet-feed scanner, as is indicated in
the name, document is fed over a stationary
CCD and light source via roller, belt, drum, or
vacuum transport. Like flat-bed scanner,
sheet-feed scanner also have optional
attachment to auto feed uniformed-sized
stacks of documents to be scanned.
Example:
CCS300-SF.

Kodak

500S,

Tangent

8.1.5 Drum Scanners
Source material, in a drum scanner is
wrapped on a drum, which is then rotated
past a high-intensity light source to capture
the image. They offer superior image quality,
but require flexibte source material of limited
sized that can be wrapped around the drum.
They are specially targeted for graphic art
market as they offer highest resolution for
grey scale and colour scanning. Drum
Scanner use Photo-Multiplier (Vacuum)
Tubes (PMTs) instead of CCDs, which offer a
greater bit depth (12 to 16 bits).
Example: Juno CP-4000, Scan graphics
ScanMate5000, ColorGetter .

8.1.6 Digital Cameras
Digital cameras mounted on copy cradle
resemble microfilming stand. Source material
is placed on the stand and the camera is
cranked up or down in order to focus the
material within the field of view. Digital
cameras are most promising scanner
development for library and archival
applications.
Example: Zeutschel Ominiscan 3000,
Minolta PS 3000.

8.1.7 Siide Scanner
Slide scanners have a slot in the side to
accommodate a 35mm slide. Inside the box
the light passes through the slide to hit a CCD
array behind the slide. Slide scanners can
generally scan only 35mm transparent source
materials.

Example: Kodak PCD Scanner 4045,
Nikon LS3510, Leaf Systems Leafscan 45.

8.1.8 Microfilm Scanner
Specially targeted to librarylarchival
application, microfilm scanners have adapters
to convert roll film, fiche, and aperture cards
in the same model.
Example: Mekel MSOOXL, SunRise
SRI-50, Lenzpro 2000 Multimedia Digitiser.

8.1.9 Mdeo Frame Grabber or Video
Digitiser
Video digitisers are circuit boards placed
inside a computer, attached to a standard
video camera. Any thing that is filmed by the
video camera is digitised by the video
digitiser.

8.2 Image
CapturinglScanning
Sohare
The process of converting a paper
document into a computer-processible digital
image is done using a software variably called
document imaging system, electronic filing
system or DMS, etc. Scanning softwares also
come with the scanners. Important document
imaging soflware are:
Altris Software
http://www.aItris.com/
OPTlX
http://www.blueridge.com/
Documentum
http://www.documentum.corn/
Poweroffice
http://~ww.expower.com/
FileNet
http://www.fiIenet.com/
LAVA Systems
http://www.lavasys.com/
NovaManage
http:lIwww.novasoft.corn1
LiveLink
http://www.opentext.comllivelink/index.html
Docs Open
http:llwvuw.pcdos.com1
Parlance Ambassador
http:l/www.xyvision.com/
DMS Products from India
20

Data Scan, (Stacks Sohare Pvt. Ltd.)
http:/www.stex.com/
OmniDocs (NewGen)
http:lhrvww.newgensoft.com/

9. ORGANlSlNG DIGITAL IMAGES
A disc full of digital images without any
organisation, browse and search options may
have no meaning except for one who created
it. Scanned images need to be organised in
order to be useful. Moreover, images need to
be linked to the associated metadata to
facilitate their browsing and searching. The
following steps describe process of organising
the digital images:

(a) Hierarchical storage
Organise the scanned image files into disc
hierarchy that logically maps the physical
organisation of the document. For example, in
a project on scanning of journals, create a
folder for each journal, which, in turn, may
have folder for each volume scanned. Each
volume, in turn may have a subfolder for each
issue. The folder fur each issue, in turn, may
contain scanned articles that appeared in the
issue along with a content page, composed in
HTML providing links to articles in that issue.

(b) Nomenclature
Name the scanned image files in a strictly
controlled manner that reflect their logical
relationship. For example, each article may
be named after the surname of first author
followed by volume number and issue
number.
For
example,
file
name
'smithrkamv5nl.pdf' conveys that the article is
by 'R.K. Smith' that appeared in volume 5 and
issue no.1 of Applied Mechanics. The file
name for each article would, therefore,
convey a logical and hierachial organisation
of the journal.
(c) Description

Describe the scanned images file
internally, using image header and externally
using linked descriptive metadata files. Most
software packages provide for storing
'administrative data' regarding image, i.e.,
date of creation, format type & version,
compression technique, name of creator, etc.
in the image header. 'Structured' or
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2001,21(6)

'descriptive' metadab for images are the
keywords assigned io each image.

(d) Table of contents
The simplest and most effective method
for providing access is through a table of
contents and links each item to its respective
objectlimage. Content pages of issues of
journals, done in HTML, would offer browsing
facility. full text search to HTML pages or
OCRed pages can. be achieved by installing
one of the free internet search engines like:
Oingo Free Search
http:I/www.oingo.wmloingo~free~search/prod
ucts.html;
Swish-E
http:llwww.berke\ey.edulSWSH-€I
Whatyouseek
http:Ilintra.whatuseek.com/
Excite
http://exlcite.corn/

Large scanning projects would, however,
require a backend database storing images
or links to the images, metadata (descriptive1
administrative). Backend database used by
most DMS holds the functionality required by
most web applications. important document
management systems like File Net have-now
integrated their database with HTML
conversion tools. Further, some of the OMS
have also signed up with Adobe to
incorporate Acrobat and Acrobat capture into
their web-based DMS. These databases
entertain queries from users through 'HTML
forms' ahd generate search results on the fly.
OCR does not actually convert an image
into text but rather creates a separate file
containing the text while leaving the image in
tact. There are four types of OCR technology
that are prevailing in the market. These
technologies are: matrix matching, feature
extraction, structural analysis and neural
network.
(a) Matrixrremplate matching: Compares
each character with a template of the same
character. Such a system is usually limited
to a specific number of fonts, or must be
'taught' to recognise a particular font.
DESfDOC Bulletin of lnf Technol.22001,21(6)

(b) Nature extraction: Can recognise a
character from its structure and shape
(angles, points, breaks, etc.) based on a
set of rules. The process claims to
recognise all fonts.
(c) Structural analysis. Determinescharacters
on the basis of density gradations or
character darkness.

(d) Neural networking: Neural networking is a
form of artificial intelligence that attempts
to mimic processes of the human mind.
Combinedwith traditional OCR techniques
plus pattern recognition, a neural
network-based system can perform text
recognition and learn from its success and
failure. Referred to as intelligent character
recognition (ICR), a neural network-based
system is being used to recognise
hand-written text as well as other
traditionally difficult source material.
Neural network ICR can contemplate
characters in the context of an entire word.
New ICR combines neural networking with
fuuy logic.

fO.

Hybrid Solution

It would be imperative to consider
producing a more reliable media like microfilm
simultaneous to the process of digitisation if
archival preservation is one of the objectives.
The process of microfilming produce a
high-resolution image on the microfilm1
microfiche that equates to approximately
1000 dpi in digital binary scanning. In
comparison, a bitonal digital image can at
best be scanned at 600 dpi for archival
storage.
The microfi\m/microfiche can be used for
conversion to electronic image. format.
Moreover, future improvements in scanning
technology can be utilised by rescanning a
microfilm to obtain high-reso!ution images. It
is expected that ultimately electronic scanning
wit1 reach or exceed photographic quality.
Durability and reliability of computers, storage
media and formats used for electronic image
files may also increase and stabilise.
21

11. CONCLUSION
N t h the technology available at an
effordable cost, the libraries can initiate small
digitisation projects as individual library or as
a group of libraries. Building-up digital
collection and infrastructure required to
access them is a challenge that evei$'library
has to deal with.
Recent growth and development in digital
libraries can broadly be grouped into three
broad categories, i.e., (a) digitisation of
traditional printed-resources and their
integration with secondary sources of
information like Medline. Most of the
secondary services now incorporate link to
the full text articles on the publisher's site.
Developments of platforms l i e Crossref, Web
of Science, Silver Linker, etc. are indication of
trends towards gradual merger of full text
resources and secondary services; (b) digital
library derived from the datafiles generated as
a byproduct in the process of printing of
primary journals or major reference works.
Most of the publishers of STM journals have
launched their digital collections consisting of
electronic counter-parts of . their printed
journals; and (c) new information sources that
are created specially for the web imbibing
frills of technological advances. The numbers
and variety of resources in the last category
are expected to increase as the users
respond to technologically advanced products
and services. The meaning of digital library is
in the process of evolution as it climb along
the technological ladder. It can thus be
concluded that further advances in the area of
digital libraries would rest upon further
technological developments as well as
conceptual foundation that is being laid down
presently.

.

Unlike microfilming, digital imaging
technologies present a preservation solution
for the documents in libraries with increased
accessibility over the electronic networks,
highquality output, OCRed text, electronic
links to individual pages, etc. However,
imaging technologies are still in a continuous
flux of change. New standards and protocols
are being defined on a regular basis for file
formats, compression techniques, hardware
22

components, network interfaces, etc. The
librarian should be aware of constant threat of
'techno-obsolescence'
and
transitory
standards. Magnetic and optical discs as a
physical media are re-engineered to store
more and more data. There is a constant
threat of backward compatibility for the
products that were used in the past. Acquiring
an imaging system with all its peripherals
capable of enhancing access to the library
resources is quite a simple task specially now
that the cost of all computing systems and
peripherals are crashing down. However, the
libraries must be concerned with all aspects
of imaging technologies, as well as new
demands that the technology will place on
them as an organisation.
Digital images will have to be constantly
migrated converted to new formats computing
devices, storage media and software as new
forms of storage devices, updated formats
and software and improved computing
systems are released. lnspite of the fact that
this constant migration conversion of digital
images would not only be expensive it would
also direct valuable manpower resources into
a constant re-invention of wheel, it would be
essential to do so otherwise valuable images
data would be left behind an obsolete
machinery which will eventually break down
rendering data inaccessible.

1. Association of Research Libraries.
Proceedings of 126th ARL Annual
Meeting, 1995.
http:/larl.cni.org/arllproceedings/l26/2defn.html
2. ~esser, H & Trant, J. Introduction to
imaging: Issues in construction of an
image database. Gery Art History
Information Program, Santa Monica,
1995.48 p.

3.

4.

Boteler, J. E-mail dt Feb. 28, 2001 to
listserv:
DIG-REF@LISTSERV.SYR.EDU
Conway, Paul. Preservation in digital
world. Microform and Imaging Review,
1997, 25(4), 156-71.
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol,2001,21(6)

Cox, John E.. Publishers, publishing and
the Internet: how journal publishing will
survive and prosper in the electronic age.
Nectmnic Library, 1997, 15(2), 125-31.
Davis, Eric T. An overview of the access
and preservation capabilities in digital
technology.
http:Ilwww.iwaynet.net/-lscildiglibldigpapf
f.html
Fox, E. & Marchionini, Gary. Towards a
worldwide digital library. Communication
of the ACM, 1998, 41(4), 29-32.
Guthrie, Kevin M. JSTOR: From project
to independent organisation. D-Lib
Magazine, JulylAugust, 1997.
http:/lwww.dlib.org/dlib/july97/07guthrie.
html
Hulser, Richard P. Digital library: Content
preservation in a digital world. DESIDOC
Bulletin of Information Technology, 1997,
17(6), 7-14.
Lynch, Clifford & Hector, Garcia-Molina.
llTA Digital Library Workshop, Reston,
VA, 18-19 May 1995.
Kenney, A.R. & Chapman, S. Digital
imaging for libraries and archives. Cornell
University, New York, 1996. 198 p.
Marchionini, G; Plaisant, C. & Komlodi,
A. Interfaces and tools for the Library of
Congress National Digital Library
Program. lnformation Processing and
Management, 1998, 34(5), 535-55.
Noerr, P. The digital library toolkit. Ed. 2.
Palo Alto, Sun Systems, 2000. 186 p.
Paepcke, A.;
Chang, C-C.K.;
Garcia-Molina, H. & Winograd, T.
Interoperability for digital libraries

Contributor:

worldwide. Communications of the ACM,
1998, 41(4), 33-43.
Payette, S.; B m i , C.; Lagoze, C.; &
Overly, E.A. Interoperability for digital
objects and repositories. D-Lib Magazine,
1999, 5(3).
http://www.dlib.or~$lib/May99/payette/05
payette.html
Rusbridge, Chris. Towards the hybrid
library. D-Lib Magazine, JulylAugust;
1998.
http:llwww.dlib.org/dIib/july98/rusbridge.
html
School of Scanning, 3-5 Nov., 1997,
New York. Papers and presentations.
Northeast Document Conservation
Center, Andaver, MA, 1997.
Science Server Software. Products and
services from a company dedicated to
innovative devetopment of digital library
software. Scienceserver LLC, McLean,
1999.
http:I/www.scienceserver.corn/
Sloan, Bernard G Services perspectives
for the digital library: Remote reference
services. Library Trends, 1998,47(2).
Smith, T.R. Meta information in digital
libraries. Int.J.Digital Libraries, 1997, 1,
105-07.
Waters, D. Electronic technologies and
preservation. European Research
bbran'es Cooperation, 2(3), 285-93,
1992.
W~llis,Don. A hybrid systems approach to
preservation of printed materials.
Commission on Preservation and
Access, Washington, D.C., 1992.

Dr Jagdlsh Arora is deputy librarian at Central Library, Indian Institute of
Technology (I IT), Delhi.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf TwhnoI,2201,21(6)

23

Annexure - I
File Formats in Digital Libraries
Abbreviation

File Extention

Format

File Format for UnstructuredText
ASCII

American Standard Code for Information Interchange

File Format for Structured Text
SGML
HTMt
XML
PDF
PS
TEXT

sgml
.html or .htrn
.xml
.pdf

Standard Generalised Markup Language.
Hypertext Markup Language
Extended Markup Language
Portable Document Format (Adobe)
Postscript (Adobe)
Texture Format

.ps
.txt

File Format for Images
PDF
BMP
IMG
JPEG
JFlF
PCP
PCX
PSD
TGA
PNG

TIFF

TIFF-G4
SPlFF
PCD

Portable Document Formal
Bit Map Page (Mndaws)
Ventura Publisher
Joint PhotographicExpert Group
JPEG File Format
PC Paint (BBW Mode)
PC Paint Brush {Color & B&W)
Photoshop
True Vision Targa
Portable Network Graphic
Tagged Image File Format
Tagged Image File Format with Group 4 Fax Compression
Still Picture Interchange File Format.
Photo CD (Kodak)

.pdf
.bmP
.img
.jp9

.jfif
.PCP

.pcx

.psd
.tga
.prig

.tior .tiff
.ti
.spf
.pa

Web-Compatible lmage File Format
GIF
Graphics Interchange Format
JPEG
Joint Photographic Experts Group
Audidvideo File Format
WAVE
Waveform Audio (Microsoft)
AlFF
Audio Interchange Format
JPEG
File Format
VoC
Creative Voice
MIDI
Musical Instrument Digital Interface
SND
Sound
AU
Audio (Sun Microsystems)
Real Audio Format (ProgressiveNetworks)
RA
AVI
Audio Visual Interleave
FIA
Macromedia Flash Movie
AutoDesk FLIC Animation
FLC
MOV
Quicktime for Wlndows Movie
MPEG
Motion Picture Expert Group
MP2
MPEG Audio Layer 2
MP3
MPEG Audio Layer 3
24

.wav
.aif
.jff
.VOC

.midi
.snd
.au
.ra
.avi
.Ra

.flc
.mov
mpeg
.mp2
.mp3
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Techno!,200?,21(6)

