DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 22, No. 3, May 2002, pp. 5-13
© 2002, DESIDOC

Developing a Customer-Focus Approach to
Marketing of Library and Information Services
Dinesh K. Gupta & Ashok Jambhekar
Abstract
Philosophically, users are the central entity in all types of libraries. The
characteristics of the user body make up an essential and indeed central element
in the development of library services. In ways that are now familiar from service
industry contexts, we need to incorporate elements of client-or
customer-centeredness in our approaches to serve users. Users also expect
recognition, attention, and appreciation for their individual needs and have desire
for self-expression. In such environment, the library system triumphs, which has
more customer-focus approach in serving and meeting these needs and the
library becomes market driven in the real sense. The customer-focus
organisations accept that marketing issue is philosophical and also a strategic
one. They are concentrating on developing customer orientation. Their focus is
on distinctive competencies, value delivery, customer-defined quality, relationship
management, and a customer-focused organisational culture. In the present
paper an attempt has been made to clarify, what customer-focus approach is all
about?; how quality, customer service and marketing are closely related to each
other in customer-focus approach?; and how customer-focused culture can be
developed in library and information centres?

1. INTRODUCTION
One of the most frequent, and certainly
one of the most voluble pressures on
management in all types of organisations is to
focus on customer needs-to be customer-led,
to be market oriented, to take care of
customers, and so on. However, what is far
less clear is how managers can evaluate and
monitor, let alone change the performance of
their organisations, in terms of achieving
effective and productive customer-focus.2 1
That is, even if we are agreed on what we
should be doing about this issue, there
remains the problem of how we can actually
do it. Even the library and information service
professionals are quite aware of the need of
their focus toward the user. Such orientation
has been expressed in the library and
information science literature widely, 17 in the
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(3)

name
of
user-centred,
user-friendly,
user-based, user-oriented, user-responsive,
client-centred, human-centred, people-cent
red approaches/services, etc.
As such there is no longer an easy
acceptance of the ‘customer-focus’ existence
of a library and information delivery, simply
because it is there. If we look for such focus
in Ranganathan’s philosophy, his approach to
users heralded a new era of ‘user-focus’
services in the library world, and gave a hope
and opportunity to all users for easy and
expeditious access to pin-pointed information;
and it is incumbent upon the library staff and
information
sources—through
their
collaborative efforts—to ensure such a
system to meet users need exceedingly so
that users are delighted. 10 Now LIS
professionals discuss quality, marketing, and
5

customer service in order to achieve
customer-focus
in
libraries
in
their
professional meetings, conferences and
seminars. Various journals have brought out
special issues on application of such
customer-related concepts in libraries,
besides many textbooks and large amount of
literature published. Even various authors
view customer-focus in libraries variously,
e.g., ‘customer-focus is an imperative for
quality in library and information centres 8
(LICs), ‘customer-focus is the starting point
1
for the quality’, ‘focus on library customers:
revelation, revolution or redundancy’,1 4
‘providing customer-oriented services in
20
academic libraries, etc. To understand the
customer-focus approach, it is essential to
understand who stands at the top of priority?

2. CUSTOMER COMES FIRST,
ALWAYS?
Whatever the odds, one thing is clearbusinesses of the 21st century will have to
produce products and services which will
provide the customers with the pleasure of
self-help and do-it-yourself activities so that it
will give them a sense of achievement and
pride about what they can do. Twenty-first
century service providers should ensure that
their products and services enhance the
customer’s ability to adapt and survive under
difficult conditions. These products and
services should also increase self-esteem.
This is possible only if the LIS community
keeps up its mission to revise, criticise,

develop, synthesise, transform, and re-invest
its philosophies, concepts, procedures and
agendas, and constantly updates them to the
century ahead as shown in figure 1:
We must always remember that:5
q
q
q
q
q

Cus tomers are the most im por tant peo ple to
be served in LICs
They are not de pend ent on the li brary rather
the li brary de pends on them
They are not just tire some out sid ers but part
of the li brary
They are not just sta tis tics, but also they are
hu man be ing
They are the peo ple who bring their wants
and needs and we are there to meet such
needs ex ceed ingly.

If the libraries are clear about the place
and role of the customer in library, the next
question arises is what these customers want
from L&I centre.

3. CUSTOMERS’ EXPECTATIONS
FROM LIBRARY
Library and information professionals
should strive hard to gain a vision of who our
customers are, what they want, what are their
social character, values, desires, aspirations,
etc. The advancement in the technologies
has phenomenally increased the self-help
and do-it-yourself activities in libraries. It
comes to occupy more of our time and
energy, it too has begun to shape our lives
and mould our social character. The 21st

Cus to mer

Indivi duality
Responsiveness
Relati ons hip

Adv erti sing
Promotion
Di rect Marketing

Choice
O ffers
V al ues
Desires
A spi rat ions

Organis ation
Fig 1. Role of organisation to satisfy the customers
6

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22 (3)

century customer will definitely stress upon
what he owns but he will also place high
value on what he can do. He will place high
value on self-reliance, adaptability and
survival under difficult conditions and the
ability to do things on his own. He will have a
heightened awareness of his/her own
individuality and the unique traits. He will
demand to be treated as an individual. Hence
new service delivery systems in libraries will
require more specialised workers who are
efficient in one-to-one service to customers.

delivery, and communication efforts), or as a
customer-driven orientation for the entire
organisation. Most of the literature on
marketing of library and information services
has been geared towards the first two
approaches. However there are evidences,
which prove that the customer-driven
approach has an important place in LIS
marketing. Consider for instance, the
following:

t I n d i v i d u a l i t y: The new gen er a tion

q

customer is a global citizen who is more
ex act ing and in di vid u al is tic, change seek ing
and value con scious. He shares a con sis tent
set of taste and preferences, and growin g
com mon al ity of his taste across the globe.
t Responsiveness : It is the willingness to
help cus tomers and to pro vide prompt
ser vice. This di men sion emphasises
attentiveness and promptness in deali n g
with customers’ request, com plaints and
queries. Responsiveness is demon strated
in terms of accessible employees, least
waiting time and attention to problems. It
also captures the notion of flexibility and
abil ity to customise the ser vice to cus tom ers’
needs.

q

q
q
q

q
q
q

t Re la tion ship: To mea sure cus tomer

sat is fac tion, the re la tion ship b e tween
c u s t o m e r and the li brary m u s t b e
un der stood. A cus tomer re la tion ship
com prises a hi er ar chy of en coun ters
through facilities, resources, services, and
service providers.
Any service that must cause individuality,
responsiveness, relationship and the like
issues that are vital for the growth of a LICs in
the
time
of
faster
changes
has
customer-focused view of marketing.

4. CUSTOMER-FOCUS:
APPROACH FOR MODERN
MARKETING
Marketing can be described in several
different ways. It can be seen as a strategic
thrust pursued by top management, as a set
of functional activities performed by line
management (such as product policy, pricing,
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(3)

q
q

q

Customer-focus is es sen tial for li brar ies to
re main and pros per in com pet i tive arena
Marketing is necessary to stay alive and
thrive in 90’s 5
Mar keting is the ap pli ca tion of some
com mon sense5
Cus tomer-driven service en vi ron ment
17
brings mar ket ing into li brar ies
In te gra tion of us ers (cus tom ers) into
man age ment
cre a t e s
c u s tomer
(cli ent)-cen tered li brary 17
To be come suc cess ful, you must fo cus your
ac tiv i ties keep ing some end in mind13
customer-focus is at the core of the
22
mar ket ing con cept
The no tion of fo cus ing on the cus tomer and
iden ti fy ing and meet ing com mu nity needs is
only now emerg ing in li brary man age ment
circles 24
Marketing f o cuses on customers, LICs
strive to meet their needs 9
Li brary
ser vices
should
be
customer-focused, this approach will help
li brar i ans to re tain the at trib utes of
li brar i an ship a s a s e r vice-oriented
8
pro fes sion in the new mil len nium
’Putting the user first’, ‘give them what they
want’, ‘customer-centered approach’, are
now seen as a route to gain competitive
advantage by library and informationI
pro fes sion als be cause mar ket-led ser vices
are striv i n g to meet us e r s needs.
Customer-focus is con sid ered as the sin gle
most vi tal fac tor for suc cess.8

From these extracts it can be very well
judged that the issue of customer-focus has a
great influence in marketing of library and
information services in the time of fast
7

changes to serve the users in an improved
way.

between these elements are shown in
figure 2.

4.1

4.1.1 Quality Maintenance

Customer-focused Marketing

The satisfaction of a customer is primary
concern in the marketing approach and the
entire ethos and shared values of the library
owe the responsibility of satisfying the
customers. Everyone in the library, from top to
bottom has a role to play in rendering
maximum satisfaction to the customer. New
efforts must be directed at working with
customers to clarify their expectations. The
marketing function must be substantially more
than finding customers for existing products
and services. Among other things, marketing
people must now work with customers to form
partnerships that will extend beyond the
conventional exchanges so that customers
are considered an integral part of the
development team for new products and
services. Marketing as an approach must
become customer driven. 1 8 By focusing on
the customers means that marketing identifies
your raison d’etre - after all without customers
you have no reason to exist.13 The issue of
improving customer-focus concerns the
relationship between the service organisation
and its customers. This involves consideration
of the relationship marketing approach, which
brings quality, customer service and
marketing together. 6 The specific linkage

Several years ago operational excellence
was the dominant viewpoint of customer
value. Operational excellence involves
providing customers with reliable products or
services at competitive price and delivered
with a minimum amount of inconvenience.
Operational excellence is still necessary but is
not sufficient by itself. Today’s customers
expect convenience in purchase, after sale
service, dependability, professionalism from
employees, etc. Organisations that pursue
operational excellence concentrate on making
their
operations
lean
and
efficient.
Alternatively, organisations that pursue a
customer-focus strategy continually strive to
fit products and services to everchanging
customer’s definition of value. Gaining
knowledge of customer’s needs, value,
perceptions, and attitude can be expensive in
short run, but customer-focused organisations
are not seeking only short run success. They
are looking to develop loyalty that will produce
long-term relationships with their customers.2
Therefore, it is possible to conclude that one
fundamental
factor
for
the
quality
management of information services is the
focus on customer, which is also one of the
fundamental principles of marketing.

Ma rk eting

Cus tomer ser vice le vels shou ld be
dete rmined by resea rch ba sed
me asuremen t of custom ers nee d and
competititor s performan ce a nd mus t
rec ogn ise d ifferen t mark et segments

Qu ality must b e deter mined
from th e persp ec tives of
the c ustomer b as ed on
regu lar res earch a nd
mo nitoring

Quality

C ustome r
Ser vic e
The total quality conce pt sho uld influ ence bo th
pr ocess and peo ple ele men ts

Fig 2. Customer-focused marketing
8

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22 (3)

4.1.2 Customer Service
With the growing appreciation of customer
service in business quarters, there might be
confusion around the relationship between
concepts
of
customer-service
and
customer-focus.
The
terms
are
not
interchangeable.
³ Customer-service is the quality of the
treatment customers receive during points
of contact with the service provider. Any
kind of interaction, whether face to face,
over phone, through mail, or via fax,
qualifies a point of contact.
³ Customer-focus considers the quality of
the total customer experience. This
includes not only the points of contact with
customers but also the very nature of
products and services on offer, the policies
and procedures followed in conducting the
business, the decor within the business
premises, and an endless conglomeration
of other elements that all have bearing on
what customer will ultimately experience
when he does business with organisation.
³ Customer-service is the key component
of customer-focus, but it is not the whole
picture.

4.1.3 Customer Satisfaction
The goals of the customer-focus approach
are attraction, satisfaction and retention of
customers. Even in traditional sense of
marketing, a library can attract customers by
having an appealing facility with an easy
access that is organised properly. Amenities
such as automation, specialised tangible
services can aid in providing a higher level of
satisfaction. If customers find the physical
surroundings pleasant, and helping hands
from staff they will be more inclined to return.
The customer-oriented marketing approach in
libraries and information services aimed at
coordinating and planning the total effort of
the organisation towards customers. The
main purpose of such approach is to ensure
that the efforts of different functions of the
library, such as acquisition, organisation,
analysis, dissemination, and utilisation are
directed towards customers’ requirements
and those activities which have most closely
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(3)

to do with customers, such as users services,
references, stacking work, etc., are working
closely together with the facilities and
resources of the library.
The service is the heart of the
librarianship, if integrated with the marketing
and quality concept the customer-focus is
certain to come in. Many people consider
marketing and quality differently, if closer look
is taken marketing is an organisation wide
philosophy and quality is the heart of it;
marketing brings customers and quality
satisfies them; marketing makes promises
and quality fulfils them; marketing attract the
people to do business with the organisation,
quality retains them. 12
In service business it will not be fruitful on
the part of service provider, if they consider
each other different. They are very much
linked. The customer-focused library needs to
put this link into work.

5. MAKING A LIBRARY
CUSTOMER (USER)-FOCUSED
As discussed in the previous section it is
clear that user expects values to be gained
from the money spent and choose the
product or services of the library because it
possesses attributes and strength that other
libraries lack. They also expect recognition,
attention, and appreciation for their individual
needs and desire for self-expression. In such
environment, only that library system
triumphs, which has more user-focus
approach and rely on direct marketing and/or
relationship marketing. 11
Learning from the service strategies of the
commercial organisations, many LICs are
now concentrating and developing customer
orientation. Their focus is on distinctive
competencies, value delivery, customer
defined quality, relationship management,
continuous
improvement
and
a
customer-focussed organisational culture.
For such LICs
become important:

the

following

issues
9

5.1

Everyone Should Serve
Customers/Users

The employees of the library service can
be divided into two categories: Support
personnel (technical staff) and contact
personnel (frontline staff). The customer
seldom sees support personnel. The quality
of the technical component of the service
quality is primarily determined by support
personnel. Contact staff is the interface
between the service organisation and its
customers. These employees are the one
whom customers see and interact. Customer
contact employees primarily determine the
quality of the functional component of the
service. 4 Both kinds of employees are
responsible for the total service quality to
customers. In truly marketing oriented LICs
customer does not belong exclusively to the
frontline departments. The technical service
people are all involved in customer services,
as they are getting directions from the
customers in acquiring material, and
preparing, and organising the material in the
customer desired manner. The whole
business of the library is oriented towards
bringing the information sources and the
customer together. Here the message is that
the customer is everyone’s responsibility.

5.2

Services are Inherently
Necessary

Frontline people shape the customer’s
experience. Understanding this truth is the
first
step
towards
restoring
service
excellence. People at lower rather than higher
organisational ranks make or break service
strategies. No matter what strategy the chief
librarian devises, the service to the customers
at the frontline matters most. The library
needs to re-examine the ways in which it
serves its users. A good service is of little
benefit to the community, if it is not made
available in the most effective way. Part of this
strategy will involve the careful presentation
and packaging of services and facilities
offered to give both the best individual
service, and at the same time a clear and
effective message about the total library
services to customers. Good service is giving
10

customers a little more than they expect.
Excellent service is enjoying giving them a
little more than they expect.

5.3 Meeting Individual Needs
Efficiently
One of the major problems libraries are
facing is the conflict between what the
customer might be led to expect in terms of
service delivery and what the organisation will
expect by way of response from the library.
Customer-focused activity suggests that the
customer should be treated as an individual
and that the library should respond
appropriately to each individually expressed
need. This is at odds with an organisational
culture, which is likely to want the library to
deal with customers efficiently and quickly. 3
The conflict for the manager is that of
balancing individual demand against the need
to offer good but ‘mass’ service to users.

5.4 Customisation
The fact is that all service strategies today
is going to customisation. Customisation
implies getting customers teach you what
they want, remember it, and give it back to
19
them. LICs tend to involve a high degree of
customisation and have a strong component
of face to face interaction. In fact quite often
the degree of customisation is a measure of
services quality- a will or trust agreement that
was tailored to meet the client’s specific
needs. The creation and delivery of library
and information services involve the
participation of customers to a great extent.
Every service activity must be taken as an
opportunity to serve customers in an
improved way, it is a lot easier to satisfy and
please a person who already is in the library,
than to go and find new customers to come to
8
the library. It is the satisfied customers who
will tell others about benefits from the library
and bring new customers.

5.5 Customers Seek Benefits Not
Product or Service
Customers seek benefits or solutions, not
products. It is important therefore that any
product or service created offers the benefit
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22 (3)

that customers seek. What benefits do
customers seek from a library service? Ready
and convenient access to information, a good
stock of recent books for loan, a reliable
reservation service, lively and engaging
environment, etc.22 It is the basket of benefits
or utilities, which a customer gets while
consuming a product or a service. His rule is
simple: if he does not get value he expects
from the products or services offered by an
organisation, he/ she is not interested in the
offer.

5.6

Interaction between Service
Providers and Customers

The contact between the customer and the
service provider is the heart of the service
interaction. Whatever the business or
organisation,
it
is
ultimately
the
person-to-person contact that will make or
break the relationship between the customer
and service provider. The catalogues, letters,
newsletters, bulletins, telephones, e-mails,
and the like will help, but sometime the
people at the service and the customer will
have to come in direct contact and most
‘moments of truth’ occur when they interact.
Face-to-face contact offers the best way to
exchange information, of weighing up to other
party, of negotiating, of solving problems and
establishing a long-term relationship. It grows
and prospers with the delivery of result, time
after time.8 The willingness of the people at
service is the heart of the customer-service
provider interaction which is a constant
disposition to serve the customer.

5.7

Helping Customers

Most LIS managers believe simply putting
library resources at customers’ disposal is
sufficient. But all too often library users do not
make use of these resources. Indeed, they do
not even ask for help even when resources
exist for their use. Many a times library users
are reluctant to admit incompetence,
inferiority and dependence on others,
although they are in need for the help. The
key, therefore, is to anticipate situations in
which customers might need help and make
sure that they can get it from the library staff
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(3)

in order to make effective use of the
resources available.

5.8

Staying Close to Customers

Probably the most important management
fundamental that is being ignored today is
staying close to the customer, to satisfy his
needs and anticipate his wants. In too many
libraries, no attention is given to user’s
wishes, likings, and preferences in services.
Customer can intimate service provider to
discover how to provide complete solution to
customers’ needs. In doing so, they become
indispensable partners, often merging their
operations with those of their customers.
They take a major share in their customers’
ultimate success. When two organisations
move from a simple-and-buy relationship to
the technical and operational complexities of
a
customer
intimacy,
the
unique
responsibilities
of
each
become
unmistakable. 25 They develop a new mindseta new way of doing business—with new
structures, new strategies, and a new vision.

5.9

Communication from
Monologue to Dialogue

Communication with customer is shifting
from monologue to dialogue. LIS managers
are climbing down from the position of
all-knower and are trying to learn from
customers.
The
‘push
system’
of
communication, contrasted with a ‘pull
system’, teaming with customers to determine
what they need and then as early as possible,
creating it—a dialog approach to solve the
problems of both customers as well as
service providers. We need to equip
frontliners to answer user questions in a
proper way so that they do not hesitate to
continue the dialogue. The real value is not
something you hold in your hand, but rather a
strengthened relationship—a prerequisite for
changing the way frontline employees
communicate. Even in cases where the
primary purpose of the communication is to
‘inform’ to the customer, the emphasis should
be on ‘get informed’, so that information gap
between both parties minimises.

11

5.10 Developing a Service Culture
Successful businesses are driven by the
need to make profitable sales to their
customers. Customers can generally choose
their suppliers. You therefore have to earn the
right to service your customers if you wish to
retain them and attract new business. You
can only do this by providing products or
services your customers want, at a price they
will
pay;
ensuring
target
customers
understand the benefits of your services;
delivering what you promise; and anticipating
future needs. Developing a ‘customer service
culture’ embraces all these objectives, is the
hallmark of any organisation which is
prepared to invest the effort it takes to be
16
successful.
In an organisation where
individuals and departments internally are not
being treated with respect and dignity, one
can be pretty certain that their external
customers are not being treated with respect
and dignity either. 15 Employers, employees,
department, vendors are all customers to
each other.

6. CONCLUSION
Various authors have advocated the
user-focused philosophy for managing
libraries for a long time. Arguments in favour
of managing customers are persuasive, and
framework exists that describe conceptually
how librarians should develop user-focused
services. But, this philosophy, at best, has
been slow to work its way into practice.
Although there are many reasons for the gap
between philosophy and practice, one may be
that we are slow in adopting marketing
attitude in our strategies and every day
operations. There is an urgent need to get rid
of such an attitude so that we can face the
challenges of change more boldly and
confidently, then only one will survive in the
coming years.

REFERENCES
1.

12

Brophy, Peter & Coulling, Kate. Quality
management for library and information
managers. Aslib Gower, London, 1996,
71 p.

2.

Chonko, Lawrence B. A customer’s
perception of value. Baylor Business
Review, 1993, 1 1(1), 26.
3. Pinder, Chris & Melling, Maxine, (Ed).
Providing customer-oriented services in
academic libraries. Sconul, London,
1996.
4. Clow, Kenneth E. Services marketing.
John Wiley, 1998, 172-73.
5. Coote, Helen. How to market your library
service effectively. Aslib, London, 1994,
7 p.
6. Christopher, A. et al. Relationship
marketing: Bringing quality, customer
service and marketing together.
Butterworth- Heinemann, Oxford, 1991.
7. Gupta, Dinesh K. A focus on customers:
imperative for managing quality in library
and information services. In Delivering
Service Quality: Managerial challenges
for the 21st century, edited by M.
Raghavachari & K.V. Ramani. Macmillan,
New Delhi, 2000, 401-06.
8. Gupta, Dinesh K. Making relationship
with customers: An agenda for 21st
century librarianship. In Proceedings of
the Annual Conference of Academy of
Marketing, University of Derby, 5-7 July
2000.
9. Gupta, Dinesh K. Marketing in library and
information context: Myths and realities.
Library Science with a Slant to
Documentation and Information Studies,
(Now SRELS Journal of Information
Management), 1998, 35 (2), 99-104.
10. Gupta, Dinesh K. User focus approach:
Central to Ranganathan’s philosophy.
Library Science with a Slant to
Documentation and Information Studies,
(Now SRELS Journal of Information
Management), 1999, 36 (2), 123-28.
11. Gupta, Dinesh K & Jain, S. L. Library and
information services in new economic
environment: An overview. Herald of
Library Science,1996, 35(1-2), 41-47.
12. Gupta, Dinesh K & Jambhekar, Ashok.
On the link between marketing and
quality. In Education and Research for
Marketing and Quality Management,
edited by Rejean Sarvard, KG saur,

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22 (3)

13.
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

Munich, Germany, 2002 (IFLA
Publications Series, 99), 205-19.
Keith, Hart. Putting marketing into action.
LA, London, 1999, 7 p.
Johnson, Dine Tobin. Focus on the library
customer. Library Trends, 1995, 43 (4),
318- 25.
Khera, Shiv. How focussed are our
organisations? Financial Express Brand
Wagon, 8 July, 1997.
Munro-Faure, Malcolm & Munro-Faure,
Lesley. The making of a success culture.
World Executive Digest, May 1997,
48-52.
Nahl, Diane. User-centered revolution:
1970-1995. I n Encyclopedia of Library
and Information Science, Vol. 62, edited
by Allen Kent. Marcel Decker, 1996,
313-71.
Naumann, Earl & Shannon, Patrick. What
is customer-driven marketing? Business
Horizons, Nov-Dec 1992, 52.
Peppers, Don. Going one-to-one. World
Executive Digest, September 1995,
10-11.

Contributors:

20. Pinder, Chris. Customers and academic
library services: An overview. I n
Providing Customer-Oriented Services in
Academic Libraries, edited b y Chris
Pinder & Maxine Melling. Sconul,
London, 1996, 1-24.
21. Pierce, Nigel F. What do you do to get
customer-focus in an organisation.
Marketing Intelligence and Planning,
1995, 13 (6), 4.
22. Rowley, Jennifer. Marketing: A review
article. Journal of Librarianship and
Information Science, 1997, 29(3),
155-59.
23. Rowley, Jennifer. Knowing your
customer. Aslib Proceedings, 1997,
49(3), 64-66.
24. Weingand, Darlene E. Introduction.
Library Trends, 1995, 43(3), 289-94.
25. Wiersema, Fred. Customer intimacy:
What it is, why it wins. World Executive
Digest, 1997, 34-36.

Dr. Dinesh K. Gupta is Associate Professor & Head, Dept. of Library &
Information Science, Kota Open University, Kota 324010, e-mail: dineshkg_
in@yahoo.com; gupta_dk@datainfosys.net
Shri Ashok Jambhekar is Librarian & Head (NICMAN), Indian Institute of
Management, Ahmedabad 380015, e -mail: ashokj@iimahd.ernet.in

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(3)

13

