DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 22, No. 3, May 2002, pp. 27-34
© 2002, DESIDOC

E-MAIL AS A MARKETING TOOL FOR
INFORMATION PRODUCTS AND SERVICES
M. Natarajan
Abstract
This article deals with the definitions of marketing and the strategies for
marketing. Forward marketing, internal marketing and reverse marketing are
explained in detail with the marketing plan. The promotional aspect and
advertisement of marketing are explained. To provide quality services librarians
should consider five attributes of IT products and services. Also the use of e-mail
as a marketing tool is explained with the mailing list functions and discussion
groups. The pros and cons of the same are given in brief.

1. INTRODUCTION

2. DEFINITION OF MARKETING

In recent years libraries have taken
initiatives to introduce information technology
(IT) products and services to add value to
their services. The advent of new
technologies such as: dramatic increase of
digital storage media; convergence of
telecommunication and broadcasting, the
availability of wealth of information resources
accessible through the internet and also
increasing reduce in cost of computers in the
marketplace, make it possible for librarians to
introduce IT products and services to fulfill
information needs of their customers.

Marketing has been defined in many ways
such as:

Libraries should promote the use of IT as
an integral part of library services in meeting
the changing information needs of the
community.
Marketing
concepts
and
technologies can contribute a dynamic
approach to total strategy development, which
will ensure effective management. Library
professionals do have an affinity with
marketing philosophy concepts and practice.
Marketing requires the alignment of library
and information centre’s goals. This article
deals with the use of e-mail as a tool for
marketing the information products and
services.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(3)

©

©

©

©

©

Find ing out what the cus tom ers want and
need and chang ing when nec es sary to meet
their needs.
It en com passes all as pects of a li brary from
iden ti fy ing cli ents to de ter min ing the
ser vices one offer.
It is human activity directed at satisfying
wants and needs through an exchange
process. It has to do with finding out what
peo ple want and need, and then re spond ing
to those needs.
It is the man age ment pro cess, which
iden ti fies, an tic i pates and sup plies cus tomer
re quire ments ef fi ciently and prof it ably.
It means many things to many peo ple. While
to some it is selling, to others, it is a
pro mo tional ac tiv ity.

Innumerable definitions on marketing are
given in library literature; the following seem
to be pragmatic:
©

Marketing is plan ning that fo cuses on
prod ucts, place or mode of de liv ery,
ad just ment of cost/price to the mar ket and
pro mo tion to spe cif i cally tar geted seg ments
of the spe cial li brar i ans mar ket.
27

©

©

Marketing is the process of creating value
through the cre ation of time, place and form
utilities.
Marketing takes the focus off the product
and puts it on the user’s needs. Prod ucts are
de vel oped from the user’s point of view, not
the pro duc ers.

3. E-MAIL RULES ON THE NET
The web links us to the world, but e-mail
connects us. Web sites help us round out
picture of the world, but e-mail makes the
world go round. The web was intended to be
a communication medium for everyone
everywhere. For most of us, web sites is a
very passive medium. One can visit sites from
all around the world, but has to get pages and
bring them to his machine to view them.
However, the web as a delivery medium (http)
is highly interactive. Using the internet
protocol and a browser interface one can do
almost anything, from chat to telephony to
real-time conferencing and of course e-mail.
E-mail is the most universal application on
the internet and commercial online systems. It
is the first online tool people use and, for
many, the only tool they will ever use. People
are often introduced to e-mail through their
companies or organisations. E-mail truly
makes the world smaller. E-mail actually has
its own protocol to run over the internet,
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP), and
one does not require the web to send or
receive mail. One has to admit that e-mail
works as an interesting and different
communication tool: immediate, but not live;
stream-of-consciousness, but recorded. The
contradictory nature of e-mail (it can be formal
or informal, personal or impersonal,
immediate or delayed, and at the same time
all of the above), and interpretation is largely
at the discretion of the receiver, not the
sender. It strikes up a conversation and talk
about myriad topics and exchange advice or
suggestions. One can get mail from anywhere
like involving multiple interactions.

3.1

Use of E-mail in Marketing Mix

Electronic messages are a terrific way for
online marketers to interact with consumers.
A variety of tools exist for marketers, including
28

e-mail, forums, bulletin boards, newsgroups,
and mailing lists. These can be used to
dispense information about new products and
services, the organisation’s (including library
and information centres) background, help
files, and any other material to foster a
relationship.
The benefits of using e-mail to converse
with users include:
©
©

©

©
©

Prospecting for leads by introducing users
about the prod uct or ser vice.
Con verting pros pects to us ers by pro vid ing
them with requested information, such as
com pany
o v e r views,
prod uct
backgrounders, press releases, reports,
sur veys, and me dia re views.
Build ing re la tion ships and de vel op ing brand
loy alty by in form ing us ers of new prod ucts or
ser vices, sales, dis counts, sem i nars,
events, etc.
Conducting market research by reading
us ers' mes sages.
Cre ating and main tain ing one-to-one
re la tion ships with us ers and pros pects.

In an integrated marketing environment,
e-mail can be used as a direct
communications link with prospects. Let's
look at the steps involved in an integrated
marketing campaign.

3.2 Creating One-to-One
Relationships with Users
3.2.1 Giving Message
E-mail is the beginning point in this
building process. At its simplest, people who
have questions about your product can send
you an e-mail. They might have seen the
address on your letterhead, advertisement,
product package, business card, or your
signature file attached to a message you
posted on a discussion area. Responding to
each message individually helps develop
one-to-one relationships with consumers.
After a while, you might notice that many
people ask the same questions most of the
time. Instead of writing an individual letter,
one can access a library of texts written to
account for most situations. As you receive a
message about the product warranty, for
example, you cut and paste the prewritten
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22 (3)

answer that explains the warranty. What used
to take you five minutes to write now takes
five seconds.

4. MARKETING STRATEGIES

The next step is automation of the
process. You have a library of prewritten
answers to the most common questions.
Customers can receive those answers when
they send e-mail to a specific e-mail box. This
process can save time and money. If people
read the prewritten response and still have
questions, they can send a new request to a
company representative who can answer the
difficult questions. Thus staff spends their
time dealing with the more difficult questions
while the routine questions are handled by the
auto answer facility.

Information services that libraries offer
must fulfill information needs of their present
and future library services. Strategic
marketing requires libraries to understand
their customers changing information needs
in order to provide customer-focussed
services. Environmental changes that are
taking place at national and international
levels have and will continue to influence
information needs. Due to information
explosion, information is being published and
transmitted through electronic media also.
Libraries must take proactive measures to
introduce IT products and services to cater for
information needs of the society that are fast
transforming towards a digital society.

Any kind of file can be sent via e-mail,
whether it is text, photo, or sound. E-mail can
thus provide more information than a
customer support representative talking on a
telephone. One can also provide answers to
customers just at the moment they are most
interested in developing a relationship with
your library, even if that happens to be
holiday.

Quality marketing requires an integration
of three marketing strategies, namely:
© For ward m a r ket ing that fo cuses on
cus tom ers,
© Internal/inward marketing that focuses on
staff de vel op ment and
© Reverse mar keting whereby libraries form
stra te gic alli ances/part ner ship with IT
sup pli ers.

3.2.3 Creation of a Database

The integration of these three marketing
strategies is vital for total quality marketing of
IT products and services. Libraries should
develop long-term strategies to make their
visions to become part of the nation-wide
digital libraries a reality.

3.2.2 Automation of Process

One can create a database of valuable
information on where people can be
contacted and what their key interests are.
The tactic of using a separate mailbox for
information replies can also be used to track
the number of responses from a particular
source.

3.2.4 Sending Specific Information
You might send them specific information
about your products that entice them to order
directly from you, or lead them into one of
your distributor's stores. You might build a
relationship with them by sending a
newsletter every month or quarter that gives
them interesting new ways to use your
products and services. You could encourage
them to participate in surveys so that one can
determine where the market is heading and
what new features and benefits are sought.
You could also use this material to track the
marketing effort.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(3)

4.1

Forward Marketing

Forward marketing refers to the marketing
approach that librarians undertake to meet
information needs of their customers. Hence,
librarians provide values to their customers by
providing IT products and services that fulfill
their information needs. In developing a
customer value strategy, libraries need to
understand how the customers can be
segmented. Customers can be grouped
according to such criteria as professional,
education levels, etc. For example, a
businessman who is involved in the export
and import of goods has different information
needs compared to other professionals such
as those in the legal professions or university
students.
29

Forward marketing of IT products and
services are essential in order to attract more
users to use library facilities. IT services
offered by libraries must be inviting, and user
friendly. Libraries need to identify their
present and potential users and their
changing information needs. Identifying
customer’s needs and wants is not an easy
task as most libraries have many customers,
each with their own set of information needs.
Librarians in providing quality ser vices
should consider five attributes of IT products
and ser vices. They are:
(a) Responsiveness: willingness to help
library users with prompt services
according to the specific time needed by
the library user. Timeliness is crucial for
quality information service, as information
has value to its intended user only when it is
delivered at the time when information is
needed for decision-making.
(b) Reliability: library users have confidence
and trust that information delivered to them
is accurate and current for them to make
quality decision-making.
(c) Availability: IT products and services are
always available when users want to use
them. IT products must be arranged
systematically so that it is easy to locate.
Library users should be able to reach library
services from any locations at any time
through integrated online library systems.
(d) Caring: that the library staff is able to
provide friendly and personalised attention
to each and every library user. Library users
do not feel intimidated at the moment of
truth when they first encounter with library
personnel.
For
specialised
and
personalised information services, the
library staff should be able to search,
retrieve and consolidate information, not
available in library collection, from other
libraries or from the WWW, and repackage
the information according to the specific
users.
(e) Environmental friendly: the library
provides conducive learning environment
for its users as well as its staff. The use of IT
products and services must be made easy
and user friendly so that it will not deter
users from making full use of its services.
30

Ergonomic of IT equipment used and
facilities should be given prime importance.
Continuous maintenance of computer
systems should be given priority so those
users do not encounter frequent computer
failure. User education programs should be
systematically planned to guide users to
the wealth of resources in their subject area
of their interest.

4.2 Internal Marketing
The provision of quality information service
is very much influenced by the efficient use of
IT products by its users. In the long run,
market orientation should lead to better
services and quality IT products and services,
higher productivity among its staff and strong
customer loyalty. This involves internal or
inward marketing. Human resources are the
most valuable assets of any organisation. It is
the people in the organisation, who
individually or collectively, contribute to the
achievement of the organisation's objectives
to achieve competitive edge. As an
organisation, a library exists to deliver value
to its customers, and this is best achieved by
adapting a long-term perspective to the
development
of
its
people
for
the
achievement of quality services. With
experiences and proper training in IT, staff will
become the most knowledgeable asset of the
library.
The provisions of quality and efficient
services depend on the knowledge, skill
competencies and experiences of library staff.
These require libraries to take positive
measures to develop its human resources in
IT. The staff must be trained in the effective
use of IT products, such as navigating the
net, so that, they in turn will be able to guide
library users in the effective use of IT
products and services. Continuous training in
IT is essential as IT products have shorter life
cycle and new IT products always appear in
the marketplace. System of rewards and
recognition must be given for staff who are
committed and excel in developing IT
products and for those who are able to deliver
quality IT products and services. Librarians
who have expertise and experiences in
providing IT services can be invited to give
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22 (3)

talks to professional meetings or forums to
share their experiences.

4.3

Reverse Marketing

The quality of IT products and services
depends also on the availability of IT products
supplied by IT suppliers. To introduce
innovative products and services, libraries
should be in close contact with IT suppliers,
such as publishers of IT products, software
houses,
computer
vendors,
database
providers,
telecommunication
service
providers. IT suppliers will be able to provide
information on the state-of-the-art of IT as well
as the latest IT products in the market. This is
done through reverse marketing with
suppliers. Treating IT suppliers as customers
and partners will mutually benefit both
libraries and IT suppliers.
For sustainable IT products and services,
libraries should form strategic alliances and
partnership with IT suppliers. Establishing
partnership with IT suppliers will enable
libraries to tap skills and expertise of IT
suppliers. IT vendors can be invited to give
professional talks on IT to library communities
and can also be invited to give talk to
seminar/talk and forum organised by libraries.
This will assist in upgrading the levels of IT
knowledge among staff on the latest
development of the IT. Libraries should also
participate and attend IT exhibitions, forums
and talks organised by IT suppliers.
Partnership with IT supplier should be
encouraged.

5. MARKETING PLAN
In order to promote the use of IT products
and services, libraries must develop
marketing plans to market its services. The
marketing plan should include the following
services:

5.1

Remote Access to Library

With the availability of internet, libraries
can use their homepages to advertise their
services, such as, calendar of events, new IT
services, new collection of topical subject,
local heritage, sales of library publications in
their home pages. People can also access
library's OPAC from homes and offices.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(3)

Libraries can introduce online reference
inquiry form (ORIF) in their home page.
Library users will be able to key in reference
inquires through the ORIF or to search
libraries' databases from any locations at any
time. Hence, libraries are able to provide
24-hour services. Online reference inquiries
will ensure better and faster means of delivery
of information products and services.

5.2

One-Stop Information Centre

Libraries can be developed as a one-stop
community information centre for IT services.
By allowing library users to access variety of
online databases available through the
internet, users do not have to go to different
places to get information. They can navigate
the WWW by themselves or with the
assistance of library staff. By integrating IT
products and services with other print product
will make learning more interesting and
enjoyable.

5.3

Packaging of Information

For personalised services, library staff
should be able to response to request for
literature search on specific information. Such
literature search will include: compilation of
bibliographies on selected topics of interest to
specific user needs; compilation of addresses
for contact; compilation of data, statistic and
fact related business; compilation of profile on
business products, country profile for potential
market; developing metadata on relevant
websites, creating hyperlink of relevant
websites to cater for special user needs, etc.
The library staff should be able to search for
such information from different sources either
from available reference sources or from the
internet, and repackage that specific
information in according to specific individual
request, thus providing value-added services.
Packaging of information tailored toward
specific information needs is a mean of
providing personalised services to users.
Such services can be charged accordingly.

5.4

Hyperlinking Relevant Sites

Library will maintain a database on user
profile that includes information about their
specific subject interests. Librarian will make
regular scanning on relevant databases and
31

websites as well as from latest journal
publications that matches the interest of
registered users. Information from various
sources that match users' interests are
consolidated and repackaged in a systematic
way in accordance to specific user' needs. By
doing so, members are always exposed to
latest information relating to their subject
interests.

5.5

User Education Programmes

Systematic user education programmes on
the use of IT can be introduced. It can be
targeted to different market segments of
library users as different groups have different
information needs. By introducing such
services, a library is able to retain its existing
library users and to recruit new library users.
The programme will include basic information
handling skills, use of varieties of library
resources including IT products, literature
search by navigating the internet, search
strategies for different information resources,
use of reference sources, compilation of
bibliographies and information packaging, etc.
Guides to information search from the internet
should be developed and made available to
library users.

5.6

Forums and Seminars on IT

The library can organise regular forums
and seminars on various IT related topics.
Such forums and seminars will be opened to
library users as well as staff from other
libraries. This will benefit and gain new
knowledge on the latest development on IT.
Publishers can also launch their newly
published books on IT or IT products at the
library. This form of reverse marketing will
benefit both the staff of the library as well as
the IT suppliers.

5.7

Consultancy Services

A library can also provide consultancy and
advisory services in setting up or upgrading
library services for IT companies and other
private sectors. This is a form of reverse
marketing to library suppliers as well as
forward marketing to potential corporate
customers.

32

6. PROMOTION OF SERVICES
For effective marketing libraries must
promote its services through various forms of
advertisements so that library users are
aware of new services being offered. A
systematic and organised marketing plan will
raise the library image as innovative library
rather than as storehouse of printed
materials. The library will gain higher status
and recognition from stakeholders for funding.
Promotion of its IT products and services can
be made through the following means:

6.1 Brochures and Posters
The library should come up with attractive
and innovative brochures, leaflets and
posters, which advertise its IT services and
resources that should be distributed to all new
members.

6.2 Library and Information Month
Organising Library Month is a way of
promoting and advertising its products,
activities and services. During the month, the
library can focus a theme, which will highlight
certain aspects of IT. IT suppliers can also be
invited to participate in this festive month.
During this period, various activities can be
organised at the library such as IT exhibition,
special library tours (open house), launching
of some IT products, etc.

6.3 Advertisement
The library should advertise its services in
the newspaper, magazine, TV and radio. Staff
should be encouraged to write articles related
to new library services to be published in
professional journals, popular magazines and
newspapers. Librarians can appear on Radio
and TV highlighting the new library roles on IT
services for the community.

6.4 Participation in Exhibitions
Exhibition is one of the ways to publicising
services of the library. The library should
organise regular exhibition, which focus on
different aspects of IT with different target
audience in mind. The library should open its
door for IT vendors to exhibit its products and
services at its Exhibition Hall. At the same

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22 (3)

time, the library staff should participate in the
Book Exhibition Trade Fair and IT Exhibition.

6.5

Mailing List

Mailing
list
management
programs
(sometimes called ‘listservs’) automate
subscriptions and unsubscriptions, and the
process of mailing to each of the subscribers.
Mailing list software has many uses:

6.5.1 Newsletters
In the typical public newsletter, anyone
may subscribe freely, though only the
moderator or list owner sends mailings to
people on the list. In a private newsletter, the
moderator controls both subscriptions and
mailings. Companies use mailing lists to
power e-mail newsletters which:
© Provide for mer vis i tors with brief in for ma tion
about new articles, products, and features
on their web site
© In form with a reg u lar news let ter con tain ing
help ful con tent along with in for ma tion about
one's busi ness. Of ten such news let ters are
also ar chived on a web site, creating a n
in creas ingly valu able in for ma tion re source
© Enhance a reputation through occasional
articles of interest. A weekly or monthly
pub lish ing cy cle is not cru cial
© Nur ture po ten tial cus tom ers dur ing t h e
gestation period un til they are ready to
pur chase or sign a con tract
© Sup port existing cus tomers with on-going
information
© Solicit paid subscriptions for newsletters
with pro prietary infor ma tion not readily
avail able else where
© Earn revenue from paid sponsors of the
newsletter.

6.5.2 Discussion Groups
These are discussions carried on via
e-mail, in which each person's e-mailed
comments are echoed to every other
subscriber. In moderated lists, the moderator
filters out all the annoying ‘unsubscribe me’
requests, and only passes on the more
important, on-track contributions. To keep the
number of daily messages from the list under
control, it is often wise to subscribe to a digest
version of the discussion, which may be sent
once per day.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(3)

Discussion groups can be powerful, with
great potential for education and community
building. Some manufacturers set up a ‘user
group’ of people who are familiar with their
products. Company representatives, as well
as more experienced laymen, share
information with the less experienced. Groups
can build customer loyalty and provide
significant customer support. In addition, the
individual or company, which sponsors or
moderates the discussion, can build an
excellent
reputation-and
significant
business-from discussion group members,
who often number in thousands.

6.6

Obtaining Subscribers

One of the best ways to obtain subscribers
is to ask visitors to sign up when they first
enter your web site and also ask if they would
like to receive updated information, notice of
new articles or products, etc.

7. PROS AND CONS
©

©
©

The cost of distribut ing information via
e-mail vs. printed fli ers and post age, e-mail
is less costly.
An e-mail newsletter ex cels in send ing
information in words, not graph ics.
One has to main tain the e-mail list. E-mail
addresses are always becoming obsolete,
and mail i n g l i s t s o f t ware d o e s n't
au to mat i cally unsubscribe such ad dresses.

8. MONITORING AND REVIEW
The library should constitute a monitoring
system, which is designed to measure the
effectiveness of IT resource being used and
the reaction of library users as well as to
assess the effectiveness of the marketing
strategy to promote IT products and services.
As IT products have shorter life cycle,
librarians need to monitor its use and the
extent that the new IT services being
introduced sustain the interest of library
users. Innovative and creative ways of
marketing IT products and services must be
considered. It is also essential to monitor
changes that continue to take place in the
external environment and in the IT market
places as these changes may lead to
changes being taken in the process.
33

The review process involves feedback
from staff involved in the change process,
feedback for the library users. Collected data
is analysed and conclusion is drawn about the
effectiveness of the marketing strategy. The
information is used to shift the strategy
towards a more effective direction. Efforts and
resources should be redirected and focussed
in an area where demand is greater.
Benchmarking with other libraries to measure
and to compare its service performances with
other libraries/information centres is also
important. Having an information system
enable librarians to make quality decision
making in introducing innovative IT products
and services.

9.

REFERENCES

2.

Brandt, D Scott. E-mail makes the world
go round. Computers in Libraries, 2000,
20(10).
Catt, Martha E. The olympic training field
for planning quality library services.
Library Trends, 1995, 43(3), 367–83.

Contributor

34

4.

5.

6.

7.

CONCLUSION

Marketing is the human activity directed at
satisfying wants and needs through an
exchange process. It has to do with finding
out what people want and need and then
responding to those needs. Still it is in an
immature stage of development. One of the
reasons being the relatively low level of
knowledge and lack of agreement on users’
requirement. In the digital era, IT products
and services must be made as an integral
part of library services. Libraries that have
introduced IT services should promote its use
to the society. Libraries must have marketing
strategies
to
connect
libraries
and
communities through IT and services.
Marketing strategies of IT products and
services act as a driving force in achieving
quality library services that meet information
needs of the community. Proper design and
execution of marketing plans can help to
achieve satisfactory utilisation of
LICs’
resources and also to improve its image.

1.

3.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.
15.
16.
17.

Cram, Laura. The marketing audit:
Baseline for action. Library Trends, 1995,
43(3), 326–49.
De Suez, Eileen Elliot. Marketing
concepts for libraries and information
services. 1993.
Hammond, John. Marketing program.
http://www.libsci.sc.edu/bob/class/
clis724/Special Libraries Handbook/
marketing.htm
Jaafar, ShaharBanun. Marketing
information technology (IT) products and
services through libraries: Malaysian
experiences. Paper presented at the 64th
IFLA General Conference during 16-21
August 1998.
Janal, Dan. Online marketing handbook:
How to promote, advertise and sell your
products and services on the Internet.
Chap. 18.
Johnson, Diane Tobin. Focus on the
library customer: Revelation, revolution,
or redundancy? Library Trends, 1995,
43(3), 318–25.
Marketing of library and information
services in India. Papers presented at the
13th National Seminar of IASLIC,
Calcutta during 20-23 December 1988.
Muir, Robert L. Marketing your library or
information service to business. Online,
1993, 17 (4).
Powers, Janet E. Marketing in the special
library environment. Library Trends,1995,
43(3), 478–93.
Weingand, Darlene E. Preparing for the
new millenium: The case for using
marketing strategies.
Library Trends,
1995, 43 (3), 295–317.
Wilson, Ralph F. Marketing via e-mail
newsletters and mailing lists. Web
Marketing Today, 1996, 17.
www.infotoday.com/mls/jun99/how-to.htm
www.sla.org/chapter/cwcn/wwest/v1n3/ca
vilb13.htm
www.sla.org/pubs/serial/io/1998/feb98/str
icker.html
www.wilsonweb.com

Shri M. Natarajan is Scientist-in-Charge, INSDOC Regional Centre, CSIR
Madras Complex, Taramani, Chennai – 600 113.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22 (3)

