DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 22, No. 3, May 2002, pp. 35-38
© 2002, DESIDOC

BARRIERS TO MARKETING OF INFORMATION
PROUCTS AND SERVICES IN LIBRARIES
G. Mahesh
Abstract
In the present information age, wherein information and knowledge are key to
societal development, libraries and information centres are potential source of
revenue generation if the resources of the libraries and information centres are
marketed. Ever since the concept of marketing was introduced to libraries,
certain barriers have prevented the libraries in implementing marketing
programmes. This paper attempts to look at the barriers that impede the libraries
and information centres from adopting marketing.

1. INTRODUCTION
That information is a marketable
commodity and libraries and information
centres can be revenue earning units rather
than revenue consuming ones have long
come to be accepted. In the present era of
globalisation, subsidies are on the decline
and libraries have to become self-sustainable.
Marketing can enable self-sustenance and
could even lead to profitability.
Marketing in libraries and information
centres has been discussed for over three
decades now. Library professionals are today
aware of the advantages of marketing and the
library literature is teeming with concepts of
marketing, marketing strategies, marketing
plans and case studies on marketing of library
and information services. But libraries and
information centres in India are yet to adopt
the tenets of marketing. There apparently
seem to be factors that still hinder marketing
of information products and services in
libraries.
Haravu2 has noted that “there is no
significant private sector profit oriented
information industry as yet in India, and as
such Indian libraries do not face the same
threats that libraries in the west are facing”.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(3)

The information industry in India has however
undergone significant changes during the last
one decade. There are many commercial
firms that sell information products and
services. Vyasamoorthy 8 gives the scenario
of database industry in India and lists several
private sector firms that are in the business of
information products and services. Shah 7
states that ‘’information service industry in
India is a million-dollar business” and
propounds the idea private commercial
libraries (PCLs). These apart, in the
unorganised sector there are information
brokers who are selling information services.
Information sector in India today thus is a
profit-oriented business.
In such a scenario, it is surprising that the
libraries, which are a storehouse of
information, find it difficult to sell information
or are not in the business of information
marketing though infrastructure-wise they are
well equipped to do so. This clearly indicates
that there are barriers in libraries that prevent
them to carry out marketing activities.
Kaur 4 has pointed out four hurdles
obstructing transition from free information to
fee information which include ‘user’s
unwillingness’, ‘doubtful status of information
35

as a commodity’, ‘inability to make information
customer-based’ and ‘lack of measuring
standards’.
The first barrier relating to user’s
unwillingness to pay was foreseen even as
the concepts of marketing were introduced in
libraries in the early seventies. This
unwillingness of user’s to pay for information,
referred to as the Carnegie’s syndrome, and
is one of the major obstacles in marketing of
library and information services. The second
hurdle is about the ‘doubtful status of
information as a commodity’. For a clear
understanding, the difference between
marketing of information and marketing of
information products and services needs to
be elucidated.
Information needs are specific to
individuals and there will be no mass market
for specific information. Therefore, information
in itself may not be treated as a commodity,
but information products and services are.
The commodities in an information market are
information products and services because
these can be designed for mass information
1
markets.
Cornella’s
theorisation
of
commoditisation of information in the form of
information products holds true. What is
required is identifying suitable markets and
producing information products for the mass
markets. The last two hurdles also may not
hold true when it comes to marketing of
information products and services, which are
more defined and tangible than information
per se.
6

Rao also discusses four broad barriers to
the adoption of the marketing approach in
libraries and information centres. The four
barriers are:
(a) Attitudinal—Information professionals are
inward looking and for marketing an
outward looking approach is needed
(b) Structural—Organisation and library
structure does not permit
(c) Systemic—System in the library in general
does not permit, and
(d) Environmental—Culturally, the giver and
taker are not used to free-based services.

36

2. BARRIERS IN MARKETING
INFORMATION PRODUCTS AND
SERVICES
2.1

Carnegie’s Syndrome

Carnegie’s syndrome still exists. Users still
view libraries as a place to obtain free
services. Many libraries have a nominal
membership fee which hardly amounts to any
significant revenue generation. Very few
private libraries have a charging policy for
library use. Charging in Government
supported
libraries
are
considered
sacrilegious even for external users.
Earlier studies in the case of information
products and services have shown that as
long as information products and services are
free, users are interested in availing it. The
moment a price tag is attached to the product
or service, there is a significant drop in the
3
users . However, this situation is fast diffusing
in the free market economy of today and
consumers are now aware that information
products come with a price and are willing to
pay for it. There seems to be a gradual
change and it is a matter of time when
Carnegie’s Syndrome will fade away from
libraries.

2.2 Lack of Needs Assessment
Many times librarians are not able to
assess the requirements of the users. The
libraries are mainly involved in developing
and managing resources in the library without
realising what information product or service
will be of value to the users. The libraries will
have to carry out a needs assessment survey
through formal and informal means. This will
enable libraries to bring out products and
services that are customer specific.

2.3 Lack of Trained Manpower
Libraries in India lack trained marketers.
Normally, the library staff holds qualifications
in library and information science along with
graduation or post graduation in other
subjects. With the application of information
technology (IT) in libraries and information
centres, library staff have been quick to
acquire the necessary skills for working in a
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22 (3)

computerised
environment.
However,
marketing management skills, which are
essential for a commercial approach in the
library are lacking in library professionals.
Therefore, inculcation of a marketing
orientation to the library staff is very essential.
Library science curricula should be suitably
changed to widen the subject of management
in greater detail giving importance to topics on
marketing, PR and quality management to
equip future library professionals.
Who in the library is to be trained on
marketing or, will hiring a marketer solve the
marketing problem is a debatable issue. In
the case of applications of IT, staff members
who have been identified to look after IT
issues are trained. However, customer
orientation applies to everybody in the library
and staff members at all levels have to be
trained on marketing. The situation perhaps is
not so today. It is the head of the library or the
other senior staff members who are sent for
such training programmes and the lower level
staff members who many a times are the
frontline staff interacting with the customers
are left out.
Therefore, short-term training for all levels
of staff is required for imparting marketing
capabilities in library staff.

2.4

Pricing

Pricing of information products and
services has been a much discussed issue.
There is no one standard way to price
information
products
and
services.
International online services, for example,
though available in India come with prohibitive
costs that most users cannot simply afford.
This is particularly true of databases that are
available from abroad, which sometimes even
libraries cannot afford to procure though they
are of value. An alternative would be to
develop more indigenous databases at
relatively lower costs.

2.5

Low Library Budget

When library budgets are pruned,
librarians fret about the strain on the library
and its resources. However, libraries have
learnt to live with budgetary cuts and in fact
the libraries expectantly gear up to the
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(3)

adversity by compromising on much-needed
journals and books. Libraries have to learn to
take up the adversity as a challenge and use
the situation to turn around the library as a
revenue-earning centre.

2.6

Photocopying: Is it Marketing?

Many libraries render photocopying which
is an invaluable service to the users. The
libraries charge a nominal fee for the service
and claim that the library is involved in
generating
revenue.
Mere
providing
photocopies hardly amounts to marketing. In
a larger perspective, this activity is done to
dissuade users who would otherwise queue
up for free photocopies.

2.7

Lack of Management Support

This is perhaps the most serious barrier in
the marketing of information products and
services in libraries. If a marketing
programme has to be introduced in the library,
the top management’s support to the
programme is of utmost importance.
Administrators and the top management in
the organisation generally look upon the
library as an ancillary activity and due
attention is seldom given to the library. With
an active and interested management, it will
not be difficult to implement the marketing
programme in the libraries.

2.8

Poor Quality of Service

Quality is a key factor that determines the
use of the service by the customers. A
product or service that has a high degree of
quality is likely to be used by customers.
Information products and services have to
meet all the requirements of the users.
Factors such as delay in rendering the
service, poor response to customers, not
meeting the customer requirements, etc., can
turn away prospective customers.

2.9 Lack of Sharing Touch
Some special libraries do not want to part
with information. This is especially true for
many media libraries and libraries of
specialised nature, like defence institute
libraries. Though such libraries are a rich
repository of information, as a policy the
37

libraries do not provide services to external
users, even though users are willing to pay for
the information. Information seekers are
sometimes even turned away from these
libraries or fees are exorbitantly high that
common users such as students cannot
afford to use these libraries.

2.10 Librarians Lack PR Skills
Public Relations (PR) is simply a matter of
doing good and telling about it5. Librarians are
innately service oriented and are in the habit
of ‘doing good’. The problem is the habit of
not talking about the ‘good work’. Librarians
need to carry out PR work not only externally
but also internally. Internally, a PR exercise is
the best defence against budget cuts and to
convince the management that the library is
indispensable. For this the library has to
primarily become an indispensable source of
information. In addition, the library should
involve in special activities such as providing
training programmes, bringing out newsletters
and taking part in activities outside the library.

4. CONCLUSION
Libraries have enormous potential to earn
revenue by marketing of information products
and services. A systematic approach to adopt
marketing practices in libraries and
information centres is essential. Identifying
and overcoming the barriers to marketing can
facilitate
implementation
of
marketing
programmes in libraries.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

Kaur, Amrit Pal. Information services:
transition from free-based services to
fee-based services. I n Information:
Management, Sources and Other
Studies, Vol. II, edited by Ashu Shokeen,
I.V. Malhan, T.D. Tilwani, & M.P. Satija.
Ess Ess Publications, 2001, 59-67.

5.

Pertell, G.M. Selling the business library.
Special Libraries, 1981, 72 (4), 328-37
Rao, S.S. Introduction to marketing of
information products and services. I n
Marketing Information Products and
Services: A Primer for Librarians and
Information Professionals, edited by
Abhinandan K. Jain et al. Tata
McGraw-Hill, Delhi, 1999, 1-19.
Shah, P.C. Information service: Million
dollars business. In In Search of
Excellence–Librarianship, edited by D.N.
Phadke, Multi-tech Pub, 1999, 182-94.
Vyasamoorthy, P. Database industry in
India: a current scenario. DBIT, 1995,
15(4), 11-22.
Waaijers, Leo. End-user’s hopes and
expectations. Interlending and Document
Supply, 1994, 22 (1), 7-14.

3. IMPACT OF IT ON MARKETING
The impact of IT applications in libraries
has been very profound. Computerisation of
library facilities, access to remote information
sources and faster communication have
augmented the use of libraries. It is easier
and quicker to provide information services
with the help of computers. At the same time,
users also now have access to computers
and internet. This will enable the user to go
global from behind his desk for the best
performance in reliability, ease and timeliness
9
and the lowest price . The user can obtain
information directly from publishers and
database hosts rather than obtaining the
same from the libraries. This will have a
impact on the users of the libraries.
Therefore, the IT has both a positive and
negative influence on the marketing
programme. To bring the users back to the
libraries and retain them, libraries have to
produce innovative products and services that
are designed to meet customers needs.
Contributor
38

Cornella, A. Cost, value and price in
fee-based information services. Paper
presented at 46th FID Congress &
Conference, 22-30 October 1992,
Madrid.
Haravu, L.J. Marketing of library and
information services. IASLIC Bulletin,
1988, 33 (4), 139-47.
Kar D.C. Information services and
products: A marketing approach within an
Indian context. Library Review, 1992,
41(5), 42-47

6.

7.

8.

9.

Shri G. Mahesh is scientist at INSDOC, 14-Satsang Vihar Marg, New Delhi –
110 067
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22 (3)

