DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 22, No. 4 & 5, July & September 2002, pp. 3-8
© 2002, DESIDOC

Video Digitization and Editing: An Overview
of the Process
Vinod Kumari Sharma, RK Bhatnagar & Dipti Arora
Abstract
Digitizing video is a complex process. Many factors affect the quality of the
resulting digital video, including: quality of source video (recording equipment,
video formats, lighting, etc.), equipment used for digitization, and application(s)
used for editing and compressing digital movies. In this article, an attempt is
made to outline the various steps taken for video digitization followed by the
basic infrastructure required to create such facility in-house.

1. INTRODUCTION

2. ADVANTAGES OF DIGITIZATION

Technology never stops from moving
forward and improving. The future of media is
constantly moving towards the digital world.
Digital environment is becoming an integral
part of our life. Media archival; analogue
audio/video
recordings,
print
media,
photography, microphotography, etc. are
slowly but steadily transforming into digital
formats and available in the form of audio
CDs, VCDs, DVDs, etc.
Besides the
numerous advantages of digital over
analogue form, the main advantage is that
digital media is user friendly in handling and
manipulation of data using minimum man and
machine (system) time. With the evolution of
digital technology, time required on editing of
one hour cine-film in analogue form has
reduced from weeks to few hours. Moreover,
the creativity can be extended to any limit
within no time for better and better output
which may not be possible while working with
analogue media. Latest video editing software
packages and systems have made the
complex and complicated video editing simple
and easy.

A digital video movie consists of a number
of still pictures ordered sequentially one after
another (like analogue video). The quality and
playback of a digital video are influenced by a
number of factors, including the number of
pictures (or frames per second) contained in
the video, the degree of change between
video frames, and the size of the video frame,
etc. The digitization process, at various
stages, generally provides a number of
parameters that allow one to manipulate
various aspects of the video in order to gain
the highest quality possible.
Digital video has several advantages over
analogue video:

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(4 & 5)

t Flex i ble interactivity
t Easy to edit
t Mul ti ple cop ies with out qual ity loss
t Easy to ma nip u late
t Ease of use in additional features (titling,

visual mixing, sound in ser tion, editing,
spe cial ef fects, tran si tion, etc.)
t Trans mis sion through e-mail
t Video conferencing
3

t Can be used as an im pressive way of

in for ma tion dis sem i na tion ef fec tively on web
sites/multimedia programmes.
Quality of digital video output de pends
upon var i ous fac tors such as the source video
as Betacam, U-matic, Hi–8. These can give
better quality than VHS recording. Some time
must be in vested to find the best set tings for a
par tic u lar video source. Fur ther more, the best
settings for one particular video source may
not necessarily pro duce the best re sults for a
dif fer ent video source.

3. VIDEO DIGITIZATION PROCESS
Steps of video digitization are as follows
(Fig.1& 2):
(a) Capturing the source video
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

Editing the captured video
Assembling of edited video
Special effects like titling, transition, etc.
Sound
effects,
narration,
speech,
commentary, music insertion, etc.
(f) Compression and final output.

The analog video signal is normally
transferred through an S-Video (or composite
video) cable to the input of a digitizer board or
to an AV machine with a built-in digitizer. The
hard disk speed, whether the hard disk is
internal or external (an internal hard disk
generally has a faster connection to the rest
of the computer), and the speed of the
machine and the digitizer board inside the
machine will determine the possible number
of frames per second and picture size of the
movie.
Before starting digitization, the hard disk
should preferably be defragmented and the
machine should be booted in a minimal
system configuration (in particular, network
software should be off). There are software
utilities,
called
disk
optimizers
or
defragmenters that defragment a disk. For
best system performance, one should
defragment the hard disks periodically.
The video capturing software chosen
should provide at least few features, like start
and stop recording during editing, style titling,
sound effects, transitions, audio insertion,

Sou rce V ide o
An alo g Video
Video Capt ur e
Card

Computer (Editin g So ftw are)

Test Run

If, No

Sati sfie d ?

If , Ye s
Burn th e CD

Figure 1. Flow chart rep re sent ing the video ed it ing pro cess
4

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 2 2(4 & 5)

Sh oot in g/Re cor ding

Capturing Har dw are

Editing

O utput

Figure 2. Video editing setup
compression and output in required file
formats.

3.1

Capturing Source Video

The process of creating a movie starts with
capturing source video clips. Before
capturing, spend some time to decide which
part of the video is to be digitized, better note
down the approximate counter reading of the
source player. Connect the source to the
digitization machine, and establish the
digitization parameters within the appropriate
program. We can set the desired frame rate
and picture size according to the desired
output quality. If audio components are not
required, one can turn off the audio
component, so that any audio contained in
the source video will not be digitized. To
digitize the video, one starts recording in the
capturing software program (for example,
Pinnacle Studio MP10 (fig 3), Adobe
Premiere, etc.). Once the source video
frames are captured, these are ready for

further video editing. Image quality of the
captured video can be improved by changing
the following parameters:
t Video bit rate
t In put fil ter/sharp ness
t Using S-video output.

3.2

Editing of Video

There are two types of video editing:
t
t

Linear editing
Non-linear editing

In linear editing, the editing is performed
directly from one tape to another. In this case,
PC only controls the source and recorder. In
non-linear editing, sequences to be edited are
transferred back to tape. Here the video
capture card transfers the video to the PC’s
hard disk and the editing is then performed
entirely within the PC.
Normally, editing involves few or all of the
following steps:
t Working with video scene
t Open ing the cap tured video
t Re viewing video scenes in the al bum
t Trimming scenes
t Split ting clips
t Com bining and sub di vid ing scenes
t Re-detecting scenes.

3.3 Assembling

Figure 3. Editing screen of studio
MP 10
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(4 & 5)

After opening the captured video, we may
review the scenes and make adjustments
before placing them on the video track. we
can decide to combine, split or detect new
scenes within specific scenes.
5

One can select and/or combine the best
video frames or can drop unwanted frames.

3.4 Special Effects
Videos can be made more impressive by
using features like transitions, titles, sound
effects, etc.

3.4.1 Titling
‘Titling’ is an integrated title editor program
of the editing software that allows quick and
easy creation of professional quality titles and
graphics. Titles can contain words, shapes,
background colors, and photos or graphics
imported from other programs. This feature
offers a preset, professionally developed
styles for quickly making titles, along with
virtually endless custom styling. Titles can be
modified by adding transitions for a wide
variety of effects, such as, fading in sliding,
and adjusting duration of the title appearing in
the movie. Overall the title should be
informative, describing the contents of the
movie and awaken interest.

3.4.2 Adding Transitions
Transitions are used according to the
content of the video. Properly used transitions
subtly reinforce the meaning of the movie and
how it plays without the audience becoming
aware that a transition is used. In
professionally produced video on television,
one can see many ways to improve tapes.
Generally, it is advisable to refrain from
overusing transitions that tend to cause
abrupt changes or otherwise draw attention to
themselves. There is a big difference between
a subtle dissolve from one clip to the next,
and employing a heart-shaped wipe.

3.5

Working with Audio

While appropriate music can add touch to
a movie, a professional finishing and can do a
lot to reinforce the message of a video. The
music selected, however, should always be
appropriate to the massage of the film. This is
sometimes a time consuming matter and a
challenge, but it is worth the effort, since well
chosen music is usually greatly appreciated
by the viewer. A great deal of polishing and
depth can be generated by adding
6

background music, recording voice-overs,
and inserting audio effects such as applause,
bells, seawaves, etc. Such sound effects can
be picked up from clip art gallery supplied
with editing software. A huge number of
pre-recorded or created sound effects are
available as sound files in clip art CDs.
Similarly the music audio files stored in hard
disk in sound file format can be inserted along
with the videos or we can import audio
directly from an audio CDs. In addition, the
audio track of all video clips is captured along
with the video, and is always available which
can be manipulated according to the visual
demand.
Voice-overs and other audio can be
recorded into the movie directly from
computer, (any length and type of background
music can be inserted).
Audio clips are selected and placed on
their tracks in the same way as video clips.
Once an audio clip is placed on its track, it
can be edited in the same way as a video clip
like play duration, volume adjustment,
trimming, beginning or end, dissolve, fade-in,
fade-out, etc.

3.6 Video Compression
Video compression is the process of
reducing the file size of digitized video by
removing the redundancy. To reduce the
amount of space needed to record or transmit
the information, compression is a must.
Uncompressed video and audio data take a
lot of memory. PAL (Phase Alteration by Line)
has a resolution of 768X576 pixels and is
transmitted at 25 (full) screens per second.
Thus one second of PAL video requires
768X576X25X2 bytes, that is approximately
22MB. This means that 30 seconds of
uncompressed video will fill up a CD (650
MB). 30 seconds of CD-quality audio would
amount to 176 KB. Reducing the video
resolution to one-fourth (SIF) or even
one-sixteenth of full resolution would still
result in a data stream of more the 1 MB.
The
technology
by
which
video
compression is achieved is known as a
‘Codec’ an abbreviation of compression/
decompression.
‘Codecs’
can
be
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 2 2(4 & 5)

implemented in hardware and software or a
combination of both. Hardware codecs are
generally more powerful. They are used to
compress multimedia files for transfer and
storage and then to reverse the process for
playback. Codecs are constantly being
upgraded for higher compression without
loosing quality during playback. In plain terms
codec is just another module of the
multimedia control interface (MCI) and the
MCI makes it available to other software.
There are number of audio compression
codecs and video compression codecs.
For compression, streams of symbols are
transferred into codes. If the compression is
effective, the resulting stream of codes will be
smaller than the original symbols. Video is
compressed using a process called variable
bit rates encoding which allots a changing
number of dots to enhance resolution in a
given scene. Scenes with lots of light or little
action require less bits than dark scene or
those with lots of action. The case where
information is relayed more efficiently and
recovered exactly as it was before
compression with no loss of fidelity is called
‘lossless compression’, as opposed to lossy
compression, in which same information is
irretrievably lost during encoding, decoding
process. Lossless compression discard only
redundant information. The higher the
compression ratio, the worse the resulting
image.
Some compression formats are; AVI,
MPEG, CINEPAK, IVI, INDEO and RLE.
Different compressors are capable to
compress the data from 2:1 to 200:1.
Commonly used formats are AVI and MPEG.
The MPEG file format is supported on all
Windows 95, 98, NT. In some instances, one
may wish to output the movie in AVI file
format. Generally AVI files are larger and not
of as high quality as MPEG files. There may
be two reasons for using AVI format because
one may require importing the video into the
application that doesn’t support MPEG files or
some viewers will be running Windows 3.1.
Despite its age and numerous problems,
the
AVI
format
is
still
used
in
semi-professional video editing cards. Many
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(4 & 5)

TV cards and graphic boards with a video
input also use AVI format. These are able to
grab video clips at lower resolution (mostly
320X240 pixels). The compressed video files
are ready for playing, saving on CD, sending
via e-mail, using on web, inserting in
multimedia presentations, etc.

4. TIPS FOR VIDEO EDITING
t Do not string to gether scenes in which
t
t
t
t

t
t

cam era is mov ing.
Di a logue should al ways be shot al ter nately
from vary ing an gles of view.
Make cuts when per sons are in mo tion.
Make har mo ni ous cuts, avoid vi sual
disjunction.
Shots with less movement should be of
shorter du ra tion and shots with fast
move ment can be lon ger.
Long shots have more content, so they
should be shown lon ger.
Do not edit a video file after compressing it
as the editing process may cause
degradation of the video data.

5. BASIC SET UP FOR VIDEO
EDITING
Minimum System Configuration:
m Intel Pentium 133 MHz or equivalent

processor
m Windows 95 or Windows 98 OS
m VGA card, DirectX 5.0-compatible; 256

colour minimum
m At least 32 MB of RAM
m Hard disk with sufficient free space for

m
m
m
m
m
m

studio software and MPEG files (30 MB to
install software, and 100 to 300 MB for
every 10 minutes of captured
audio/video)
CD-RW drive
Parallel interface support for ECP or
EPP-mode
Sound card, DirectX 5.0-compatible
Speakers
Microphone to record voice-overs
Video capturing card (internal or external)
with latest video editing software.

7

Video Equipment:
m Any source with a composite or S-video
output (e.g. camcorder, VCR, laser disc,
or TV tuner)

6.

CONCLUSION

In digital media, the creativity can be
extended to any limit within no time for better
output. However, few factors certainly effect
the final outcome, like availability of free
space on hard disk, defragmentation, and
RAM, etc. There should be sufficient space in
the hard disk, it should be defragmented
frequently, and minimum RAM should be 128
MB.
Adding effects like transition, titling, etc.,
give realistic beauty to the video. The file
format chosen is very important, but it also
Contributors:

depends on the application where the final
edited video files are to be used. Commonly
used formats are ‘AVI’ and ‘MPEG’. But, now
a days ‘dat’ format is widely used.
Video is a very important part of
multimedia
presentation
as
it
gives
effectiveness to the show. A lot of video
editing software are available in the market.
Let us hope, in future, we will have more and
more video editing software which will give
more flexibility in editing to make our video
more impressive.
It is hoped that the topic discussed in this
article will be well received and critically
examined by other experts in the profession.
Possibly some useful comments will be
forthcoming, so that in due course of time
good amount of literature is available to us for

Smt Vinod Kumari Sharma is Scientist D at Defence Scientific Information
and Documentation Centre (DESIDOC), Delhi - 110 054.
Shri R K Bhatnagar is Tech Officer ‘B’ at DESIDOC, Delhi - 110 054.
Smt Dipti Arora is STA at DESIDOC, Delhi - 110 054.
following new and up-to-date methods for
video digitization and editing.

8

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 2 2(4 & 5)

