DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 22, No. 4 & 5, July & September 2002, pp. 17-27
© 2002, DESIDOC

Compact Disks: What, Why and How
Alka Bansal & Dipti Arora
Abstract
This article introduces the basic concept of compact disks (CDs), their types and
uses. The technology behind CDs and CD burner is discussed in brief. It
describes in detail how to use CD burning software Adaptec Easy CD Creator 4
to burn various types of CDs like data CD, audio CD, and multisession CD. Other
features of the software are also introduced.

1.

INTRODUCTION

The compact disks (CDs) were introduced
in 1980’s to hold music in a digital format.
Now CDs are everywhere. They have
become the standard medium for distributing
not only large quantities of music, but data,
video,
computer
software,
multimedia
presentations, etc.

2.

RECORDING INFORMATION
ON CDs

According to their recording behaviour,
there are mainly two type of CDs (a) CD
ROMs and (b) Recordable CDs. In
CD-ROMs, user can’t change data in
CD-ROMs itself, he can only download it to
computer hard disk and make changes but
can’t save back on CD-ROMs. Recordable
CDs are also of two types:
q
q

CD-R (CD-Recordable) or writable
CD-RW (CD-ReWritable)

CD-R media can be read by virtually all
CD-ROM,
CD-Recordable,
and
CD-ReWritable drives. CD-R is excellent for
permanent data storage and is used if one
does not need to erase the data. They are
less expensive per CD than CD-RW. But
unlike tapes, floppy disks and many other
data-storage
mediums,
users
cannot

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(4 & 5)

re-record on CD-R disc once they have filled
it up.
CD-RW media can only be used in
CD-ReWritable drives or newer MultiRead
CD-ROMs. It can be used when users need
to erase the data and re-write new information
(for example, updating files). It can be used to
make a practice CD or to test the contents of
a CD before making a permanent one.
Blank recordable CD-R and CD-RW are
currently available in two capacities: 74
minutes (both CD-R and CD-RW) and 80
minutes (CD-R only at this time).
The actual capacity of blank CDs can vary
slightly; some 74-minute CDs can hold up to
two minutes more than their stated capacity.
CDs of all types share certain features:
they all have the same physical dimensions,
are made at least partially from clear
polycarbonate plastic, and have a metallic
layer to reflect the laser beam that reads the
data. All CDs are ‘groovy’— they have a
microscopic spiral groove pattern molded into
the polycarbonate plastic. The lines of this
spiral are so small and close together that
they act like a diffraction grating. The spiral
groove is continuous on writable CDs
because it’s needed to guide the laser during
writing.

17

The major identifying difference between
currently manufactured read-only discs
(CD-ROM) and writable CD discs can be
seen at first glance: CD-ROMs have a silver
metallic sheen on both sides, whereas
writable CDs are typically metallic gold on the
top and green or green-golden on the bottom.
The top of a CD bears a label, logo, or other
printed information. The bottom has no
markings except in the area near the center
hub. The laser reads the disc from the
bottom, so the bottom is always unobstructed,
its overall color—whether silvery (CD-ROM)
or green/green-golden (writable CD or
CD-Recordable)-provides quick identification.

CD-ROMs:
A CD-ROM is a simple piece of plastic,
about four one-hundredths (4/100) of an inch
i.e., 1.2 mm thick. Most of a CD-ROMs
consist of an injection-molded piece of clear
polycarbonate plastic. During manufacturing,
this plastic is impressed with microscopic
bumps arranged as a single, continuous,
extremely long spiral track of data. Then a
thin, reflective aluminum layer is sputtered
onto the disc, covering the bumps. Then a
thin acrylic lacquer layer is sprayed over the
aluminum to protect it. The label is then
printed onto the acrylic. (Fig 1)
A CD-ROM has a single spiral track of
data, circling from the inside of the disc to the
outside. The data track is approximately 0.5
microns wide, with 1.6 microns separating
one track from the next. (A micron is a
millionth of a meter.) The elongated bumps
L acqu er Layer

Chrome
Alumin ium Layer

Bumps
L ase r Be am

La nd

Polycarbona te
Substra te

Figure 1. Cross section of CD-ROM
18

that make up the track are each 0.5 microns
wide, a minimum of 0.83 microns long and
125 nanometers high. (A nanometer is a
billionth of a meter.). If users could lift the
data track off a CD and stretch it out into a
straight line, it would be 0.5 microns wide and
almost 3.5 miles (5 km) long.
Users will often read about ‘pits’ on a
CD-ROM instead of bumps. They appear as
pits on the aluminum side, but on the side the
laser reads from, they are bumps.
The molded polycarbonate substrate layer
is on the bottom of a CD (the side from which
the laser reads the data). The pits must be
read through it. This part of a CD’s design
helps make it tolerant of scratches. The lens
of the reading laser focuses the beam directly
on the pits, through the 1.2-millimeter
thickness of the polycarbonate. The beam
‘looks past’ scratches on the bottom of the
disc, unless they are really deep. This first
line of defense against scratches is not the
only one. There is a second in the software
that decodes the data stored on the disc.
Known as ’error detection and correction,’ this
technology is able to deal with errors in the
data because some degree of redundancy
and cross-checking is built into the encoded
data in the first place. This technique is
generally more effective for images and
music.
Together, the acrylic layer, the out-of-focus
scratches, and software error correction adds
more life to CDs.

Writable CDs or Recordable CDs:
The physical structure of a writable CD
differs from that of a CD-ROM. A writable CD
is molded from polycarbonate too, but without
pits. Like a long-playing phonograph record, a
writable CD has a smooth spiral groove
running over most of its surface. This groove,
molded into the top side of the polycarbonate
substrate, serves to guide the powerful laser
beam that does the writing.
Just as in a CD-ROM, the bulk of the
substance of a writable CD is a clear
polycarbonate substrate about one millimeter
thick. The layer above this one is something
writable CDs have but CD-ROMs don’t have:
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 2 2(4 & 5)

a layer of light-sensitive green organic dye.
Above this dye layer is a thin film of metallic
gold. The gold layer has the same purpose as
the aluminum-chromium layer in a CD-ROM,
namely, to reflect the reading laser beam
back into the photodetector (Fig. 2). In its
original state, the dye isn’t dark enough to
block light reflection from the gold layer
above. But when the dye has been ‘zapped’
by the writing laser (which has about ten
times the power of the reading laser), a dark
discoloration is created that blocks reflections
and forms a permanent, readable mark. The
dye molecules absorb enough energy during
the writing process to break down physically
and chemically, leaving an area that no longer
reflects light. The marks made by the writing
laser follow the same encoding scheme as
the pits in a CD-ROM, so writable CDs can be
read by CD-ROM drives.

CD-ROM, but it takes a fair bit of energy for
the laser beam to make a ‘mark’ on a writable
CD. That’s why scratches, fingerprints, dirt,
etc., are much more dangerous to a writable
CD before writing than afterward. The
fingerprint, dirt, or smudge can scatter the
beam of the writing laser, perhaps weakening
it to the point where the mark it makes is too
small or too light to be read. So extra care
must be taken in the handling of writable CDs
before the data is written.

A writable CD starts out blank. A laser
‘writes’ data on it by creating discolored areas
in a layer of greenish dye. The areas of
discolored dye on a writable CD act like the
pits in a CD-ROM: they interrupt the beam of
the reading laser. Writable CD technology
makes it possible for people to create their
own CDs, which then can be read by
computers equipped with CD-ROM drives or
(providing the data is written as music) on
home audio CD players.

On CD-RW discs users can erase old data
and record new data. These discs are based
on phase-change technology. In CD-RW
discs, the phase-change element is a
chemical compound of silver, antimony,
tellurium and indium. As with any physical
material, this compound’s form can be
changed by heating it. When the compound is
heated above its melting temperature (around
600 degrees Celsius), it becomes a liquid; at
its crystallization temperature (around 200
degrees Celsius), it turns into a solid.

Both reading and writing are done from the
bottom side of the disc, through the full
thickness of the polycarbonate substrate. This
provides scratch resistance as it does for the

Me ta llic Gold Layer

Green Or ganic
Dy e

Bumps
La se r Be am

Land
Dis c Substrate

Figure 2. Cross section of CD-Recordable
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(4 & 5)

All writable CD products are made with a
unique factory-applied serial ID number. They
are used in managing a collection of digital
information. Located near the center hub of
the disc, this number is both human-readable
(alphanumeric) and machine-readable (bar
code).

Erasable CD-RW Discs:

In a CD-RW disc, the reflecting lands and
non-reflecting bumps of a conventional CD
are represented by phase shifts in a special
compound. When the compound is in a
crystalline state, it is translucent, so light can
shine through to the metal layer above and
reflect back to the laser assembly. When the
compound is melted into an amorphous state,
it becomes opaque, making the area
non-reflective.
In the compound, used in CD-RW discs,
the crystalline form is translucent while the
amorphous fluid form will absorb most light.
On a new, blank CD, all of the material in the
writable area is in the crystalline form, so light
will shine through this layer to the reflective
metal above and bounce back to the light
sensor. To encode information on the disc,
19

the CD burner uses its write laser, which is
powerful enough to heat the compound to its
melting temperature. These ’melted’ spots
serve the same purpose as the bumps on a
conventional CD and the opaque spots on a
CD-R: They block the ‘read’ laser so it won’t
reflect off the metal layer. Each non-reflective
area indicates a 0 in the digital code. Every
spot that remains crystalline is still reflective,
indicating 1 in the digital code.
As with CD-Rs, the read laser does not
have enough power to change the state of the
material in the recording layer — it’s a lot
weaker than the write laser. The erase laser
falls somewhere in between: While it isn’t
strong enough to melt the material, it does
have the necessary intensity to heat the
material to the crystallization point. By holding
the material at this temperature, the erase
laser restores the compound to its crystalline
state, effectively erasing the encoded 0. This
clears the disc so new data can be encoded.
CD-RW discs do not reflect as much light
as older CD formats, so they cannot be read
by most older CD players and CD-ROM
drives. Some newer drives and players,
including all CD-RW writers, can adjust the
read laser to work with different CD formats.
But since CD-RWs will not work on many CD
players, these are not a good choice for
music CDs. For the most part, they are used
as back-up storage devices for computer files.
The reflective and non-reflective patterns
on a CD are incredibly small, and they are
burned and read very quickly with a speeding
laser beam. In this system, the chances of a
data error are fairly high. CD burners
compensate for various encoding problems.

t A drive mo tor spins the disc. This drive mo tor

is pre cisely con trolled to ro tate be tween 200
and 500 rpm depending on which track is
be ing read.
t A la ser and a lens sys tem fo cus in on and
read the bumps.
t A tracking mechanism moves the la ser
as sem bly so that the la ser’s beam can fol low
the spi ral track. The track ing sys tem has to
be able to move the la ser at mi c r o n
res o lu tions.
The fundamental job of the CD player is to
focus the laser on the track of bumps. The
laser beam passes through the polycarbonate
layer, reflects off the aluminum layer and hits
an opto-electronic device that detects
changes in light. The bumps reflect light
differently than the ‘lands’ (the rest of the
aluminum layer), and the opto-electronic
sensor detects that change in reflectivity. The
electronics in the drive interpret the changes
in reflectivity in order to read the bits that
make up the bytes.
The hardest part is keeping the laser
beam centered on the data track. This
centering is the job of the tracking system.
The tracking system, as it plays the CD, has
to continually move the laser outward. As the
laser moves outward from the center of the
disc, the bumps move past the laser faster—
this happens because the linear, or tangential,
speed of the bumps is equal to the radius
times the speed at which the disc is revolving
(rpm). Therefore, as the laser moves outward,
the spindle motor must slow the speed of the
CD. That way, the bumps travel past the laser

L ase r L ens

The established form for music CDs,
called ISO 9660, was the foundation for later
CD formats.

3. CD EQUIPMENT
3.1

CD Player

The CD player has the job of finding and
reading the data stored as bumps on the CD.
The drive consists of three fundamental
components (Fig. 3):

Disk
Drive

L ase r P ick- up Assem bly
Figure 3. Internal view of CD drive

20

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 2 2(4 & 5)

at a constant speed, and the data comes off
the disc at a constant rate.
Data storage on a normal CD is simple.
The surface of the CD contains one long
spiral track of data. Along the track there are
flat reflective areas and non-reflective bumps.
A flat reflective area represents a binary 1,
while a non-reflective bump represents a
binary 0. The CD drive shines a laser at the
surface of the CD and can detect the
reflective areas and the bumps by the amount
of laser light they reflect. The drive converts
the reflections into 1s and 0s to read digital
data from the disk. Normal CDs can’t be
modified—they are read-only devices.
When users write data to a CD-R, the
writing laser (which is much more powerful
than the reading laser) heats up the dye layer
and changes its transparency. The change in
the dye creates the equivalent of a
non-reflective bump. This is a permanent
change and both CD and CD-R drives can
read the modified dye as a bump later on.
It turns out that the dye is fairly sensitive to
light—it has to be in order for a laser to
modify it very quickly. Therefore one should
avoid exposing CD-R disks to sunlight.

3.2

CD Burner or CD Writer

CD Burner is an external writable CD drive
with which user can take music or data files
from their computer and make their own CDs.
A CD burner’s job is to burn the digital pattern
onto a blank CD. Now writable CD drives (CD
burners) are standard equipment in new PCs,
and more and more audio enthusiasts are
adding separate CD burners to their stereo
systems.
CD burning is very simple. once users
have the right software and know the general
procedure. The CD burner has a moving laser
assembly, just like an ordinary CD player. But
in addition to the standard ‘read laser,’ it has a
‘write laser.’ The write laser is more powerful
than the read laser, so it interacts with the
disc differently: It alters the surface instead of
just bouncing light off it. Read lasers are not
intense enough to darken the dye material, so
simply playing a CD-R in a CD drive will not
destroy any encoded information.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(4 & 5)

The write laser moves in exactly the same
way as the read laser: It moves outward while
the disc spins. The bottom plastic layer has
grooves pre-pressed into it, to guide the laser
along the correct path. By calibrating the rate
of spin with the movement of the laser
assembly, the burner keeps the laser running
along the track at a constant rate of speed. To
record the data, the burner simply turns the
laser writer on and off in synch with the
pattern of 1s and 0s. The laser darkens the
material to encode a 0 digit and leaves it
translucent to encode a 1 digit.
The machinery in a CD burner looks pretty
much the same as the machinery in any CD
player. There is a mechanism that spins the
disc and another mechanism that slides the
laser assembly.
Most CD burners can create CDs at
multiple speeds. At 1X speed, the CD spins at
about the same rate as it does when the
player is reading it. This means it would take
users about 60 minutes to record 60 minutes
of music. At 2X speed, it would take users
about half an hour to record 60 minutes, and
so on. Actually 2X, 4X, 8X, etc., are data
transfer rates. To convert data transfer rates
into kilobytes, the number with X should be
multiplied by 150. For example, if we have 4X
drive then data transfer rate will be 600kb/s.
For faster burning speeds, users need more
advanced laser-control systems and a faster
connection between the computer and the
burner. users also need a blank disc that is
designed to record information at this speed.
Blank CD-R of 8x speed and CD-RW of 4X
are available in the market.
The main advantage of CD-R discs is that
they work in almost all CD players and
CD-ROMS, which are among the most
prevalent media players today. CD-Rs are
relatively inexpensive also.
These days, most burners are packaged
with one or more music programs which
convert songs to the correct format for
burning. It controls the encoding process for
writing to the CD, but users can also buy
programs or download them over the Internet.
Some CD burning software packages are:
21

t Titanium Gear Pro 5.0

storage. It can also be played on just about
every computer that has a CD-ROM drive
using a program such as the Windows CD
Player, etc. It can typically hold up to 74
minutes of music.

4. ADAPTEC EASY CD CREATOR 4

Mixed-Mode CD

Easy CD Creator 4 (Fig. 4) lets users
record as much data or audio as the CD can
hold. To see a blank CD’s capacity in sectors,
megabytes, or minutes, insert the CD into
their CD-Recorder and select CD Information
from the CD menu.

A Mixed-Mode CD is a single session CD
that contains both computer data and audio
tracks, and is typically used for entertainment
and educational programs. Data is written to
the first track on the CD followed by one or
more audio tracks. Mixed-Mode CDs are used
with CD-ROM or drives only and cannot be
played in home or car stereo CD players.

t Nero Burning ROM
t Adaptec Easy CD Creator 4
t Platinum Toast 5

When we create a Mixed-Mode CD, the
CD Layout contains both a data and an audio
section. First add files and folders to the Data
CD Layout section; then add the tracks, WAV
or MP3 files to the Audio CD Layout section.

Multisession CD

Figure 4. Adaptec Easy CD Creator 4

4.1

Types of Burned CDs

Using Easy CD Creator 4, we can create
the following four types of CDs:

Data CD
A Data CD is used to store computer data
such as the files and folders. Unlike an Audio
CD, it is used for data storage only and
cannot be played on home stereo CD player
or car CD player. It can typically hold upto 650
MB of data and can be accessed on any
computer that has a CD-ROM or
CD-Recorder drive. It is used for backing up
and archiving files such as spreadsheets, tax
records, and financial data, multimedia
presentations, graphics, CAD files, internet
downloads, etc.

Au dio CD
An Audio CD is used to record music from
tracks and audio files (WAV, MP3, etc.) that
can be played on home or car stereo CD
player. An Audio CD can’t be used for data
22

A multisession CD contains both audio
files (tracks, WAV, or MP3) and computer
data. The first session contains the audio
files, so a home or car stereo CD player can
play them. The second session contains data
intended for CD-ROM drive. Many music CDs
are created as multisession CD to provide
music CD tracks and a music video all on the
same CD.
When users add files or tracks to a Data or
Audio CD Lauserst, the Status Bar shows the
amount of data or audio in the CD Lauserst,
and how much space remains on the CD. The
‘Estimated space free’ amount is based on a
74-minute CD; however, users can still record
80 minutes on an 80-minute CD. For Data
CDs, the space is shown in MB; for Audio
CDs, it is shown in minutes:seconds.

4.2 Using CD Creator 4
To create any type of CD, users must
select the files, folders, or tracks that they
want to record from the Explorer section and
then add them to the CD Lauserst (as
explained below).

« Explorer Section
The Explorer section in Easy CD Creator
Program is where users select the files,
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 2 2(4 & 5)

folders, and tracks users want to add to the
CD Lauserst. In the Explorer section, users
can see how folders are organised on their
computer and all the files and folders in each
selected folder. If users click a hard disk or
folder in the left box of the Explorer section,
the right box displays its contents. If users
click a CD-ROM drive that has a music CD
inserted, the right box displays the tracks.

« CD Lauserst
The CD Lauserst in Easy CD Creator is
where users assemble and organise the files,
folders, or tracks that they want to record. The
CD Lauserst must contain all of the files
and/or tracks before users can create a CD.
When creating a Data CD, the CD Lauserst is
called a Data CD Lauserst (Fig. 5). When
creating an Audio CD, the CD Lauserst is
called an Audio CD Lauserst.
Users may want to save their CD Lauserst
so that users can use it to record the same
CD at a later time. Once saved, users can
add or remove items from the CD Lauserst.
This is especially useful if users want to
create the same CD at a later time.
A Data CD Lauserst can consist of files
and folders, as well as audio files (such as
WAV or MP3 files, but not music CD tracks).
To create a CD that includes files and folders,
as well as music CD tracks, use the advanced
features of Easy CD Creator for creating a
Mixed-Mode CD or a CD Extra CD.
An Audio CD Lauserst can contain tracks
from multiple music CDs. Insert their music
CD into their drive and then add the track

CD Browser

CD Lauserst

CD Gu ide

from the Explorer section to the Audio CD
Lauserst. Repeat for each track users want to
record. When the actual recording begins,
Easy CD Creator prompts users to insert the
appropriate music CD in their drive.
The CD Lauserst acts like a pointer only it
does not store the actual data. When users
add files or tracks to the CD Lauserst, the CD
Lauserst keeps track of where the information
is located and uses this information when
recording a CD.

« CD Guide
The CD Guide is the animated character
that assists users in creating their CDs. When
displayed on their screen, the CD Guide
offers instructions or tips for the specific task
users are performing . To show or hide the CD
Guide, click the CD Guide button on the
toolbar.

4.3

Creating Data/Audio CDs

(a) Open Easy CD Creator from the Start
menu. Click Start, point to Programs, point
to Adaptec Easy CD Creator 4. Screen in fig
4 will appear.
(b) Click the Audio or Data button accordingly
whether to create audio or data CD
(c) Data/Audio browser and lauserst screen
will appear
(d) Users can use any of the following two
ways to add the files, folders, and music
tracks from the Explorer section to the CD
Lauserst:
m Se lect the item us ers want to re cord in the
Explorer sec tion, and then click the Add
but ton on the toolbar. The item is added to
the CD Lauserst or
m Se lect the item us ers want to re cord in the
Ex plorer sec tion, and then drag and drop
it into the CD Lauserst
(c) Once all the files are added in Lauserst that
we want to add in our CD, click Create CD.
The CD Creation Setup box appears. ( Fig.
6)
(d) Click OK to start recording
(e) When CD is created ‘CD Created
Successfully’ appears on the screen.

Figure 5. Data CD Browser and Lauserst
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(4 & 5)

23

4.4

Creating a CD Extra CD

When users create CD Extra CD, the CD
Lauserst contains both an Audio and a Data
section. First add the tracks, WAV or MP3
files to the Audio CD Lauserst; then add files
and folders to the Data CD Lauserst.
(a) Open Easy CD Creator from the Start
menu. Click Start, point to Programs, point
to Adaptec Easy CD Creator 4, point to
Features, and then select Easy CD Creator.
(b) Open an CD Extra CD Lauserst. Click the
small arrow next to the New button on the
toolbar and select CD Extra from the
drop-down list. A CD Extra CD Lauserst
appears.
(c) Insert a blank CD into the destination drive
(d) Add the audio files users want to record to
the audio section of the CD Extra Lauserst.
m Select the Audio CD Lauserst icon in the

left pane of the CD Extra Lauserst
window.
m If users are recording tracks from an
existing music CD, insert the music CD
into their CD-ROM drive (the source
drive). If users are recording WAV or MP3
files, continue with the next step. Note:
users can record any combination of
tracks, WAV, or MP3 files to an Audio CD.
m In the left pane of the Explorer section,
select the CD-ROM drive containing the
music CD; a list of the tracks on the CD
appears to the right. If users are recording
WAV or MP3 files, select the folder where
their files are located.
(e) In the right pane of the Explorer section,
select the track, WAV, or MP3 file that users
want to record, and then click Add. Repeat
until the Audio CD Lauserst contains all of
the tracks and files that users want to
record.

m After adding all the audio files that users

want to record into the Audio CD
Lauserst, click the Data CD Lauserst icon
in the left pane of the CD Extra Lauserst
window. The icon is labeled with the date
(year:month:day).
m In the Explorer section, select the data
files or folders users want to record, and
then click Add. Repeat until the Data CD
Lauserst contains all of the files and
folders that users want to record.
(g) Click Create CD. The CD Creation Setup
box appears.
(h) Click OK to start recording.

4.5 Write Method on CD
When we click ‘Create CD’ (Fig. 6), one of
the following options can be chosen for
creating a CD:
Track-at-Once: Click this option to record a
single track at a time. Tracks recorded in
Track-at-Once mode are separated by gaps.
If a data track is followed by an audio track,
the gap is 2 or 3 seconds. The gap between
audio tracks is usually 2 seconds.
m Leave Session Open: Click this option to

add more songs to the CD at a later time.
By keeping the session open, we can
record additional songs to the first
session at different times. Once all the
songs are added, for listening to it on a
home or car stereo CD player, we must
close the session. (For Audio CDs only)

Note: If users have tracks on other music
CDs that users want to record, repeat steps
3-5 for each music CD from which users want
to record from. During the actual record
process, Easy CD Creator prompts users to
reinsert the appropriate music CD for the
music track being recorded.
(f) Add the data files users want to record to
the data section of the CD Extra Lauserst.
24

Figure 6. CD creation setup
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 2 2(4 & 5)

m Close Session and Leave CD Open:

Click this option to close the session so
that audio tracks (if in the first session)
can be played back in home or car CD
players. This option is the default option
and is applicable for most CD recording
purposes. Because the CD remains
open, we can continue to record
additional sessions to the CD until it is full.
m C l o s e C D : Click this option to
write-protect the CD. When this option is
selected, no more data can be recorded
to the CD.
Session-at-Once: Click this option to record
a single session and leave the CD open. For
example, we can use Session-at-Once to
make CD Extra CD. First record the audio
tracks in the first session and leave the CD
open. Then record a second (data) session
and close the CD.
Disc-at-Once: Click this option to write and
close a CD in one operation without turning
the writing laser on and off between tracks.
This eliminates the two second-gap between
tracks and write-protects the CD. We can
select this option if we are recording WAV or
MP3 files stored on hard disk, or music CD
tracks.
Set as Default: We can click this button to
change the CD Creation Setup default
options.

4.6

Erasing Contents of a CD

To erase the contents of a CD disc, follow
these steps:
³ Open CD Eraser Menu (Fig. 7)
³ In Windows Explorer, select the files to be
erased
³ Select Delete from the File menu, or press
the Delete key.
³ Click Yes to confirm erasing of the files
from the CD.

Figure 7. CD-RW Eraser

4.7

Making Copy of a CD

To copy directly from a source CD to a
blank CD in CD-Recorder, users must have a
CD-R drive to use.
t In sert the orig i nal CD from which cop ies are

to be made into CD-ROM, CD-R, or CD-RW
drive.
t Select the drive con tain ing the orig i nal CD in
the Copy from drop-down list box. (Fig. 8)
t Click Copy (CD Copier tem po rarily re cords
the CD contents to hard drive as an image
file, then a mes sage prompt ing to in sert the
destination drive appears, insert the blank
CD then it will re cord all data to the blank CD.
CD Copier au to mat i cally re moves the im age
file af ter the CD has been cop ied).
t When the CD is finished, a final message

box appears notifying that the copying is
complete.

DirectCD erases the selected files from the
CD.
Note: Only CD-RW drives can read from,
write to, and erase data from CD-RW discs.
Figure 8. CD Copier
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(4 & 5)

25

4.8

Creating Label for a CD

Jewel Case
A jewel case feature is provided by the
Adaptec CD creator to indicate the contents
of a CD. Both the front and inside covers of
the insert are printed on a single sheet of
paper that is folded in half and slides into the
top lid of a jewel case (a plastic case that
holds the CD). (Fig. 9)

6. HANDLING OF CDs
t Do not fold, spindle, or mutilate
t Use good en clo sures. Cheap plas tic sleeves

(those some times used to hold CDs in the
backs of books or in some types of mul ti ple
CD holders) are not suitable for long-term
storage. Upon exposure to extremes of
temperature, direct sunlight and humidity,
the disc and sleeve may adhere to each
other.
t Pro tect the in di vid u ally cased CDs fur ther by
placing them in a closed box, drawer, or
cabinet. This gives additional protection
from light, dust, and cli mate fluc tu a tions.
t Never allow CDs to remain out of their

en clo sures for long pe ri ods of time.
t Al ways han dle discs by their edges.
t Don’t eat, drink, or smoke around CDs.
t Don’t write with sharp point to the top

Figure 9. Jewel Case

surface. These actions wipe out pits and
caus ing ar eas of the disc to become
un read able. This can hap pen to both
CD-ROMs and writable CDs
t Don’t peel off a la bel.

5. CD RECORDING TIPS

t Don’t ap ply sol vents.

t No run ning pro grams in the back ground

t User-applied la bels of any kind may

If we have Windows 9X, we can check this
by pressing and holding Ctrl+ Alt + Del which
will bring up a close program window.
t Disable power management

Ensure that all power management is
disabled on the computer. If the computer or a
computer component goes into power saving
mode during the recording process this can
cause issues.
t PC defrag and scandisk hard disk drive

Run defrag and scandisk on hard drive
recently which will help prevent the computer
from having to search the hard disk drive
longer.
t De vice con flicts

Get to device manager by clicking Start/
Settings/Control panel/double click the
System icon/click the Device manager tab.
Ensure within device manager there are no
conflicts.
26

un bal ance the CD and make it dif fi cult for the
player to read. La bels may peel off in hu mid
con di tions.
t To clean a CD, use lens cleaner and lens

tissue from a qual ity man u fac turer. Al ways
wipe from the cen ter hub to ward the out side
edge. The motion should be in a radial
di rec tion, not in a cir cumfer ential di rec tion.
t Store CDs in cool and moderately dry

environments for greater life expectancies.
In general, storage temperatures for CDs
should not be any warmer than about 25°C
(77°F) when archival permanence is
desired. Cooler temperatures (down to
about 10°C or 50°F) will help ensure the
longest possible life expectancy. At present,
no national or international standards for
long-term storage conditions for CDs have
been published by ANSI or the International
Standards Organization (ISO).
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 2 2(4 & 5)

7. CONCLUSION
Introduced in 1980, CDs were intended for
musical recordings; but now with their ability
to hold large amount of music, data, audio,
video, etc., they have brought revolution in
library and information science field,
multimedia industry, education, entertainment
industry, and so on.
CDs as a storage and dissemination
medium have become a necessity in library
market all over the world. This technology has
provided new avenues to store and retrieve
library’s vast bibliographical as well as full text
data. CDs have been extensively used by the
library professionals in numerous services
such as cataloguing support (bibliofile), online
public
access
catalogue,
collection
development (bibliographical sources, full text

journal articles, reports, standards, patents,
etc.) and reference services, and so on.
With the growth of CD manufacturing
industry, we may expect compact disks which
will be less vulnerable of temperature,
humidity, etc., and can store larger amount of
data.

FURTHER READINGS
1.

http://www.kodak.com/global/en/professio
nal/products/storage/pcd/techInfo/perma
nence2.shtml

2.

Samsung CD-RW Drive Manual

3.

http://cds.com/cdtypes.htm

4.

Neelima Vaid. Born to Burn. PC Quest,
May 2002, 36-42.

5.

http://www.cdconnection.com

6.

Inventors.about.com/library/blcompact
disk.htm
http://www.footslog.com

7.

Contributors:

Smt Alka Bansal is Scientist C at Defence Scientific Information and
Documentation Centre (DESIDOC), Delhi - 110 054.
Smt Dipti Arora is STA at DESIDOC, Delhi - 110 054.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(4 & 5)

27

