DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 22, No. 6, November 2002, pp. 3-12
© 2002, DESIDOC

Networking of CD/DVD-ROMS–An Overview
K. Satish Kumar & P.O. Jayaraman
Abstract
As the collection of CDs/DVD ROMs increases in a library, it becomes important
for the librarian to manage and share them effectively. This article discusses the
benefits of sharing CD/DVD-ROMs over a network and introduces device called
CD libraries/servers for sharing CD title discs over a network. It takes a look at
architecture and available technologies for above purpose and concludes by
giving an overview of technologies and facilities available at LRDE library.

1. INTRODUCTION
Today CD-ROM has become a popular
e-media for archival, retrieval and distribution
of information. Now every possible title on
commercial
and
technology
products,
entertainment, databases, education and
business applications are available on
CD-ROMs.
The
raising
demand
for
multimedia applications, due to easy
accessibility of PCs is also fuelling its growth.

2. BENEFITS OF CD/DVD ROMS
The success of CD/DVD-ROM over
traditional removable storage media such as
floppy disks, tapes can be attributed to
following key factors:
Cross-Platform Standard—The ISO 9660
format for CD-ROM and Universal Data
Format (UDF) for CD/DVD provides common
file system specifications for these media to
be read from multiple platforms and operating
systems (Windows, Mac, Unix flavors, etc).
Capacity—A single CD-ROM can store up to
700-MB of data equivalent to 486 floppy discs
and DVD storage capacity range from 4.7 to
17 GB.
Durability—Due to its physical write once
nature; CD/DVD-ROM media are very durable
and have extremely long shelf life. It can store
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(6)

data for significant period of time and are
stable media for future access.
Portability—CD/DVD-ROM
media
is
removable, compact and lightweight and can
be transported inexpensively making it
extremely cost-effective for software and data
distribution.
Inexpensive— CDs
are
cheaper
and
replicating media is also simple and
inexpensive making it most favourable media
for software marketing.
Random Access— CDs/DVD ROMs provide
random and quick access to information.
Multimedia
Capability—CD/DVD-ROM
allows different data types such as text, audio
and video to be played in synchronized
fashion. For example, an encyclopaedia
CD/DVD-ROM can simultaneously show text
and video clip while playing sound track.
As collection of CD-ROMs increase with in
an organisation, for example in a library, the
question now arises on how to effectively
manage
and
control
its
information
dissemination. The conventional method is to
lend the disc to user or member to work on
his PC, but this approach poses a number of
problem such as keeping track of large
number of users, to whom, and when it is
issued, when to recall, replace the disc if
3

damaged
or
lost,
etc.
From
librarian/administrator point of view, important
aspect is of effective utilisation of disc
information.
The objective of this article is to introduce
CD/DVD networking technology and solutions
to overcome above problems. By libraries,
which are automated and have Local Area
Network (LAN).

3. TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Definitions of some terms used in this
article are from Microsoft Press Computer
Dictionary, Ed.3.
File server—file-storage device on a LAN
that is accessible to all users on the network.
Unlike a disk server, which appears to the
user as a remote disk drive, a file server is a
sophisticated device that not only stores files
but manages them and maintains order as
network user requests files and make
changes to them. To deal with the tasks of
handling
multiple
requests
for
files
(sometimes simultaneous), a file server
contains a processor and controlling software
as well as a disk drive for storage. On LANs,
a file server is often a computer with a large
hard disk that is dedicated only to the task of
managing shared files.
IDE—Acronym
for
Integrated
Device
Electronics. A type of disk-drive interface in
which the controller electronics reside on the
drive itself, eliminating the need for a
separate adapter card. The IDE interface is
compatible with the computer but offers
advantages such as look-ahead caching.
SCSI—Acronym for Small Computer System
Interface, a standard high-speed parallel
interface defined by the X3T9.2 Committee of
the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI). A SCSI interface is used to connect
microcomputers to SCSI peripheral devices,
such as many hard disks and printers, and to
other computers and LANs.

4. CD/DVD NETWORKING
4.1

Benefits

The benefits of CD/DVD networking are as
follows:
4

« Accessibility
By networking, the CD/DVD-ROMs, are
made accessible on local area network (LAN)
or intranet and the users/members have no
longer to wait for their turn for using the disc
until available as in the case of books in a
library.
Users
on
a
network
can
simultaneously
access
the
same
CD/DVD-ROM and a single user can
concurrently
access
multiple
discs.
CD/DVD-ROM networking solution provides
the convenience of accessing multiple discs
under single network.

« Management and Control
CD/DVD-ROMs are managed from one
central location and upgrades or revisions can
be administered easily and quickly.
Administrator has full control over the data
that network clients are accessing. Periodic
updates of discs are instantly available to
everyone at the same time.

« Security
As stated above central management
gives
administrator
full
control
over
CD/DVD-ROMs that provides increased
security. Expensive discs and important data
is not lost as the disks remain in charge of
administrator and as a result damage, loss or
theft can be avoided. By storing and sharing
discs through CD/DVD-ROM libraries, the
administrator can also control the access to
information regarding whom to permit or not
to permit.

« Cost Sav ing
CD/DVD-ROM networking eliminates the
requirement of multiple copies of same disc.
An organisation can save money by
purchasing
‘n’
network
licenses
to
CD/DVD-ROM database or software instead
of ‘n’ individual copies. The hidden benefits
include cost savings from having individual
disc-drive at each PC, reducing the need to
replace the damaged or lost discs and hence
increase in user productivity.

« Productivity
Productivity of a user is increased, if he no
longer has to wait for his turn for using the
disc until available. A single user can access
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22 (6)

multiple discs simultaneously without having
to swap discs (as in his local CD-ROM drive).
A single title may require multiple discs, for
example some encyclopaedias require two
discs and Bureau of Indian Standards require
more than two discs depending on what
standards library has purchased; imagine the
time spent on changing discs for browsing
each standard.

« Performance
With available high speed network
hardware
and
increased
bandwidth,
networked CD/DVD-ROMs are capable of
achieving higher performance than the local
disc drives by providing multiple users
simultaneous access at hard disk speeds.
The data on disc are mirror copied on to hard
disk of a file server or imaging server
(discussed later) and this data is accessible to
user over the network.

4.2 Copyright
Not all CDs come with network license,
hence license should be read before using
the disc. Sharing disc on a network should not
violate single user disc license agreement, if
required extra network license should be
purchased. Single-user license agreement
allows using the disc information on a single
computer by one person at a time and copy it
solely for backup purposes. Also some
CD-ROM applications may not run from
CD/DVD-ROM library as they may rely on
calls, which require access to an internal
CD-ROM drive.

5. LIBRARY APPLICATIONS
Few examples of shared disc resources
for library applications are:
t S u p p l e m e n t of doc u ments s u c h a s
t
t
t
t
t
t

books/journals/conference, etc.
Encyclopaedias
Courseware/tutorials
Prod uct manuals/catalogues
Photos and clip art collections
Stan dards
Vendor information.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(6)

6. CD/DVD NETWORKING
ARCHITECTURE
The hardware and software technology
together for sharing CD/DVD-ROMs are
called CD/DVD libraries or CD/DVD servers.
The solution for CD networking can be
differentiated by the way they are attached to
a network and the technology that they
deploy in order to deliver data across the
network. There are basically two methods of
connecting a CD/DVD-ROM networking
solution to a network. These are: Server
Attached Storage (SAS) and Network
Attached Storage (NAS).

6.1 Server Attached Storage (SAS)
In SAS technology CD-libraries are
connected to a network via general-purpose
machine for file serving purpose (Figure-1).
The clients then have to communicate with
this file server for accessing information from
CD-libraries. In this architecture, CD-libraries
can be connected easily to existing servers
via the SCSI interface. The benefits include
high performance as the hard-disk is used to
cache the CD/DVD-ROM contents hence the
information is shared at hard-disk speed, i.e.,
the shared CD/DVD-ROM act as the
extension of hard-disk. Maintenance and
control is easy as the user is already familiar
with the network operating system. As it
depends on the general-purpose server, user
requests have to compete with the server
tasks, such as database serving, mail serving,
print serving and many other house keeping
functions, which may slow down the file
serving. But this problem can be eliminated if
the general-purpose machine is solely
dedicated for file serving purpose. The
CD-library has to be located close to the file
server, and library software may be tightly
coupled with a particular network operating
system, which a user may not be
having/using, for example we may be using
Unix operating system but CD-library software
could have been designed for Windows
operating system. Also the CD-libraries
become inaccessible when the file server is
down.

5

Figure 1. Server attached storage architecture

6.2

Network Attached Storage

In NAS technology, CD-libraries can be
directly connected to the existing network as it
is designed solely for file serving purpose
(Figure-2). It comes with its own operating
system, hardware and file system software for
sharing storage resources. These are
plug-and-play devices, which can be
connected to any network port on LAN. NAS
is optimized for only serving, storage, and
protecting files. As it is not dependent on any
other system, the control and management of
CD-libraries can be done from client system
on the network via a web browser. Client
license for using CD-libraries is built-in with
usually no restrictions on number of users but
as in case SAS it depends on the file server
(for example a Windows NT server with
license of 20 users allows not more this
number for accessing discs, extra license has
to be purchased).

7. CD/DVD NETWORKING
TECHNOLOGIES
A variety of approaches to CD/DVD-ROM
networking solutions have been developed
over the years. They can be broadly classified
6

as optical disk and more recently hard disk
based solutions. These are internal CD-ROM
drives, Changers, Towers, Jukeboxs, Towers
of Changers and Caching Servers.

7.1 Internal CD-ROM Drives
This is the most basic and the simplest
possible approach. Librarians can connect a
CD/DVD-ROM drive to computer via IDE,
SCSI, EIDE or parallel port. There are two
IDE drives on a computer’s motherboard, first
allocated to hard disk and second IDE can be
used to connect two CD/DVD drives. The
more reliable SCSI adapter card can support
up to seven disc-drives. These disc-drives,
when shared acts as a host for other
computers on the network. Today’s popular
operating system supports these many drives.
It is an inexpensive method and all the disc
titles are available instantly and response is
fairly good. Using internal CD/DVD-ROM
drives is generally not a complete solution for
networking as it lacks standard management,
control and security. Multiple users may slow
down the system and it is quite cumbersome
to handle so many drives on a single system.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22 (6)

Figure 2. Network attached storage architecture

7.2

Changers

It is similar to multiple audio/video
changers, the same technology has migrated
to computer based discs. It is a physical unit
with single disc drive and can hold a small
number of CDs internally in slots for example
five to six. These devices are typically
connected to a SCSI or EIDE interfaces.
These devices avoid shuffling of discs
manually and they are fairly economical and
reliable where the requirements are not too
demanding. The disadvantage is that despite
holding multiple discs there is still one drive
and so only one disc title can be read at a
time. There are time delays in swapping the
discs in drive and performance can degrade
in network environment with several client
trying to accessing different discs.

7.3

Towers

It is separate unit with fixed number of
individual CD/DVD-ROM drives arranged
vertically or horizontally enclosed with power
supply with drive-to-disc ratio 1:1. It is one of
the popular solutions for sharing several CD
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(6)

titles. These tower supports discs in multiples
of seven. These are excellent for networks
since
all
the
discs
are
available
simultaneously to the clients on the network.
These towers are connected to networks in
two ways first connecting to server via SCSI
controller and second directly connecting to
the network. The tower comes in two physical
shapes with drives arranged horizontally or
vertical. The drives arranged horizontal are
called racks, the advantage of this is that it
takes less space and user can stack rack one
above another with growing requirement
(similar to left picture in figure 6). The
network-ready
towers
are
plug-n-play
devices, which are connected directly to
network
port
(Figure-3).
These
run
independently from file server as it has in-built
hardware and software for sharing devices
and administration and management of a disc
can be done remotely via web browser.
Disadvantages of towers include limitations in
number of discs and poor access time when
more than one user tries to read the same
disc. The head has to constantly move to
different locations of the same disc resulting
7

in thrashing. Internally towers are provided
with caches (RAM) to minimize this thrashing.

7.4 Jukebox
This is an excellent technology for
accessing large number (over 200) of
CD/DVD-ROMs. These are similar to
changers except that they have more number
of drives/readers and can store support up to
600 discs in a single enclosure (Figure-3).
These devices provide the cost-effective
means
of
handling
large
storage
requirements. Jukebox are connected to
computer by a special CD-server software for
controlling the robotics that move discs from
slot (also called cartridge) to drive or reader,
providing single volume for multiple discs and
hard disk caching for speeding disc access
time. Pioneer jukebox comes with optional
in-built CD/DVD-recorder for archiving
purpose and JVC jukebox with optional disc
label printer. As it is connected to the network
server it can slow down the server with
increased number of users because its
performance depends on network server
resources. Maximum number of users who
can access the jukebox depends on the
network server license (Windows NT, Novell,
etc).

Figure 3. JVC jukebox and Todd’s CD
tower at LRDE library
8

7.5 Towers of Changers
This device contains multiples of five
disc-changers with a reader (Figure 4). These
are available in various configurations from 7
changers and 35-disc combination to 58
changers and 280-discs. A tower of changers
with 280-disc capacity has 58 readers
allowing 58 users to access simultaneously
58 unique disc titles. As these are
combination of tower and changers hence the
name. Having a relatively high drive-to-disc
ratio (1:5) allows a large number of clients on
network to use discs without waiting for along
time and by providing many-to-many
accessibilities to users. The difference
between tower of changers and jukebox is
that the former places the disc to drive in its
respective changer where as later can place
disc to any drive. Jukebox software is
complex and expensive, which controls the
robotics and manages a large number of
discs. A tower of changers does not require
expensive software for management. Tower
of changers can be connected to network in
two ways—connecting to server via SCSI
controller; directly connecting to the network

Figure 4. Towers of changers from M/S
Kintronics CD-ROM technology
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22 (6)

port. The cost/performance ratio of this device
falls between the jukebox and tower.

7.6 Caching Server
With falling cost of hard disks, hard disks
can be utilised for sharing CD/DVD-ROM
information and this is what these systems
do. They provide most cost-effective and
highest performance solution for CD/DVD
networking as they dramatically increases the
speed, which facilitates multiple users on a
network to access disc concurrently. Network
client need not wait for disc to come to
reader/drive as in the case of jukebox and
towers of changer and there is no limitation
on number of readers as in towers. Here
sector by sector of CD/DVD is copied to hard
disk and then it is used to deliver the disc
information over the network. After copying
the disc information on hard disk, discs can
be locked for safekeeping. Access time and
data transfer rates of hard disk are higher
than that of optical solutions. Caching server
technology is limited by capacity of hard disk
rather than the number of CD/DVDs.
Hundreds of users can concurrently access
the same or multiple disc information without
adversely affecting its performance. These
devices
usually
consists
of
single
CD/DVD-ROM drive and IDE or SCSI
compatible hard disk with disc caching facility
from 20 to 1000 CD/DVD volumes (Figure 5).
Some vendors provide multiple disc drives
(Figure 6), which can be attributed to: user
can load several CD/DVD titles concurrently
at a time; user may require combination of
readers like CD drive, DVD drive, etc. These

devices provide complete scalability, as
storage requirements grow over time, this
type of servers is readily expandable. These
are network ready plug-n-play devices,
operating
independently
from
server.
Management and control can be done from
remote workstation via browser or client
software. Physical space is required by bulk
CD-tower and jukeboxes. The only down side
is the time required copying the entire
CD/DVD-ROM content to the hard disk.
Approximately 2-5 minutes is the copying time
for each CD, which is also a one-time
process.

8. TECHNOLOGY AT LRDE
Electronics Research & development
Establishment (LRDE), Bangalore library has
collection of more than 450 CDs. CD
collection keeps growing every year
(Figure-7). Most of the CDs come as

Figure 6. Cyclone Z from M/S Excel
Meridian Data, Inc.

Figure 5. ServStation from M/S Prime
Array System, Inc.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(6)

supplement to books and journals. Apart from
this, the library has a good collection of CBT
CD-ROMs, standard/specifications like BIS,
JSS,
ITU,
conference
proceedings,
encyclopaedia, catalogues, etc.
As the
collection of CD-ROMs grew, the need for
the jukebox, which helps any one connected
to LRDE intranet to access any of the CDs,
9

Figure 7. Year wise CD-ROM collection for books and journal supplements
there by eliminating the physical issue, was
felt.
Some of jukebox’s features are discussed
below to know the working principle rather
than to promote the product, this shall help
readers appreciate technology much better.
t Jukebox is designed as a peripheral of a

com puter. The fea tures in clude: Six
CD-ROM drives, high-speed disc chang ing
op er a tion, com pact de sign and large
ca pac ity al lows max i mum of 600 discs to be
l o a d e d . J u k e box is soft w a r e - b a s e d
CD-ROM server, re quir ed to be con nected
to Win dows NT work sta tion (or server) via
SCSI con trol ler. Spe cial CD-server soft ware
is required to be in stalled on Win dows NT
PC, which in turn con verts it to a ded i cated
CD-ROM server. SmartStor Ac cess ver sion
3.0 from M/s Smart Stor age is the soft ware
that came along with Jukebox. It creates a
file sys tem from all the avail able discs (from
the juke box) and this file sys tem is avail able
to network clients as a sin gle drive. This
makes jukebox full of discs looking like a
very large net worked hard disk.
t Caching - SmartStor Ac cess soft ware al lows
data to be cop ied from disc to the hard disk,
and sub se quent re quests are quickly ful filled
from the hard disk as data transfer rate of
hard disk is faster than the CD-ROM. This
facility also allows the disc-drive to fulfil
request for other CD ti tles. Given be low are
the types of caching supported by this
soft ware:
m File system cache—Here the files and

directory listing of CD-ROM contents are
stored statically on hard disk for faster
10

information retrieval without loading disc
on to drive, avoiding unnecessary delays
and swapping.
m Read-ahead caching—Here additional

amount of data is cached on the hard
disk along with requested data as user is
likely to retrieve information that is
located near his previous requests.
m Express caching—This feature speeds

up access to most frequently used or
popular disc by caching its entire
contents to hard disk
m Selective slot caching—Software allows

overriding the default cache settings of
the disc that is not required to cache or to
change the read-ahead amount.
t Statistics report helps in monitoring the

sys tem, pin point the prob lems and mod ify
the soft ware set tings. The fea tures in clude
num ber of times disc mounted/dis mounted
on disc-drive, mounting and dis mounting
er rors, e t c . T h e s e f e a tures help in
generating disc-usage re port on num ber of
time a disc is used, most used disc, etc.
which can be generated daily, weekly or
monthly ba sis as per re quire ment.
Our director, who is very much-concerned
about user interface, suggested to make CDs
accessible via web browser. So we created a
web site with search and browsing
capabilities as shown in figure 8. VB Script
was used to design web site and MS Access
for database. CD catalogue is stored in MS
Access with each record having link to
jukebox corresponding to its title. If the CDs
are browser compatible means that the
contents of the CDs can be viewed from
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22 (6)

Figure 8. CD-ROM library website at LRDE
Internet Explorer or Netscape Navigator) then
contents are accessible by clicking on the
hyperlinks as shown in figure 9. Some CDs
require installation on client PC to view its

contents (like database, tutorials, etc.). The
procedure for CD installation is to logon to
remote PC, that acts as a CD server by
searching the CD server in network

Figure 9. CD-ROM listing of standards
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(6)

11

neighbourhood. Browse the CD server
contents, which shows the CD titles. Map the
required CD title to local drive by right clicking
on the CD title. Unallocated drive letter is
automatically selected. Then we can start
using that mapped drive as local CD-ROM
drive, computer allows us to map up to 26 CD
titles (out of which first few are utilised for
local disk drives e.g., A: floppy disk, C: for
hard disk D: for local CD/DVD drive, etc).
Mapped drives are available only when the
host computer/CD server is available. You
can assign a mapped drive to a different drive
letter by disconnecting from the drive and
then re-mapping it to a new drive letter.

9. CONCLUSION
Networking of CD-ROMs provides
significant
benefits
such
as
easier
accessibility, management and control, cost
savings with increased security and
productivity and so on. Libraries can benefit
from CD libraries with their increasing budget
and familiarity with automation. Librarians
should understand their requirement, which is
crucial in selecting the right technology; even
combination of products can be used.
Vendors can also help in choosing the
product. Please note that we had shown each
product from different vendor unbiased, these
vendors actually sell all products (7.3-7.6)
discussed, some of them are manufacturers
themselves. Hence giving customer more
room for customising.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We are grateful to Mr. Abdi Bazleh of M/s.
Excel/Meridian Data, Inc., Mr. Bob Mesnik of
M/s. Kintronics, Inc. and Mr. Willard K Rice of
M/s. PrimeArray Systems, Inc., for providing
information and granting permission of using
the photographs of their products for this

article. We also thank Col. MN Kadapatti,
LRDE for his detailed comments and
suggestions, that has enabled us to
substantially improve this article.

REFERENCES
(1) www.smartstorage.com
(2) www.kintronics.com
(3) www.primearray.com
(4) www.amsstorage.com
(5) Gary N. Walker. Evolution of a PDS
jukebox architecture. Science Information
Systems Interoperability Conference. 8
November, 1995.
www.ddl.jpl.nasa.gov/ddl/technology/juke
box.pdf
(6) Brainard, Robert.
Microtest CD-ROM
networking overview. SMS White Papers
www.itpapers.com
(7) The evolution of CD-ROM and DVD
networking technology. White Paper.
www.nas.uk.com/html/info_pages/Evoluti
on_of_CD_DVD_Technology.htm
(8) CD Jukebox systems–market sizing.
www.netwokbuyersguide.com/search/105
322.htm
(9) CD technology–The standard for
secondary storage. Strategic Research
Corp. Jun 1996.
http://access.globalknowledge.com/
(10) SmartStor access & archive Windows N–
administrator’s Guide.
(11) Michael Nadeau. Byte guide to CD-ROM.
Osborne Mcgraw-Hill, Berkeley, 1995. p
631.
(12) Microsoft Press Computer Dictionary.
Ed.3. Microsoft Press, Washington,
1997, p 539.

Contributors: Sh. K.Satish Kuma r is Senior Technical Assistant ‘A’ at Information Processing
Group, LRDE, C.V. Raman Nagar, Bangalore-560 093. E-mail: lrde@vsnl.com
Sh. P.O. Jayaraman, Technical Officer ‘C’ is head of Information Processing
Group, LRDE, Bangalore-560 093. E-mail: lrde@vsnl.com
12

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22 (6)

