DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 22, No. 6, November 2002, pp. 13-19
© 2002, DESIDOC

Problems in Transition to a Digital Library: An
Indian Perspective
V.K.J. Jeevan & S.M. Dhawan
Abstract
This paper highlights the problems and issues in the transition to a digital library
environment. The problems and issues relate to integration of information
technologies in libraries and information centres, in particular to relevant aspects
such as IT infrastructure planning, digital library tools and software, models for
resource development, IT training needs, resource development, content
development, and copyright management, etc. The paper also reflects on the
changing roles of the libraries and librarians in the context of emerging digital
library environment.

1. INTRODUCTION
The libraries and institutions in developed
World are building digital libraries for
providing digital information on the web. The
trend is picking up fast. On the other hand
libraries in India are slow in their march
towards digital library environment. As per
details available on the INFLIBNET site, at
present there are only 26 libraries and
institutions in the country which have put up
their OPACs on the web. Given the fact that
India is one of the IT leaders in the world, the
pace of digital library development in the
country is rather very slow. The paper
attempts to undertake micro analysis of the
current situation with a view to identify the
problems and issues coming in the way of
emerging into digital library environment.

2. DIGITAL LIBRARY:
NOMENCLATURE CRISIS
The concept underlying digital library is
being expressed in the literature by several
different terms such as electronic library,
automated library, computerised library,
cybrary, virtual library, hybrid library, and
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(6)

internet library. These variants of digital
library are not totally unrelated and isolated
terms. They do bear close relationships since
they, in a way, stand to characterise different
stages in the evolution of digital library
concept. However, divergent interpretation of
these terms across different platforms is a
source of constant confusion for the
professionals especially when it comes to
planning, implementation, and evaluation of
digital library projects. To an extent, it also
reflects our own lack of conceptual
understanding of these terms. It is, therefore,
important to evolve a common understanding
on various digital library variants and the
ideas they imply. Even otherwise it is
important
to
address
digital
library
nomenclature crisis since it is a hot topic for
research in the IT intrinsic library and
information environment. Several experts in
the
subject
such
as
Lynch
and
Garcia-Molina 1, Seamans and McMilan2,
Fox 3, and Clevland4 have tried to address this
issue in depth. Yet consensus on a
single/standard definition of digital library and
its variant forms is still elusive.
13

3. IT INFRASTRUCTURE
PLANNING
Digital library projects are cost intensive
and as such require extensive funds for the
acquisition of necessary hardware, software,
netware, and humanware. At present, there is
no national programme on digital libraries in
the country which could offer support for IT
infrastructure planning. Libraries interested in
pursuing digital library projects have to
struggle hard for financial support. They have
to plan innovative strategies with a view to
sensitize the parent management for budget
planning and allocation. Not all libraries are
able to succeed in such endeavours and as
such planning funds for establishing digital
library infrastructure is still a barrier. The
country, therefore, needs a national
programme
on
digital
libraries
for
transforming traditional libraries into digital
library environment.

4. DIGITAL LIBRARY SOLUTIONS
Typically, digital library resources include
on-line catalogues, electronic journals, all
types of materials in digital formats: from bit
mapped
page
images
to
Standard
Generalised Markup Language encoded texts
and page images stored in proprietary
formats, available on the intranet, internet and
the web. A digital library has also to offer tools
and interfaces for providing intranet access to
CD-ROM databases, for archiving digital
assets downloaded from internet, accessing
and searching locally generated digital
assets, creating web-based bibliographic and
full-text
databases,
creating
OPACs
supporting the metadata standards like Dublin
Core, RDF and Z39.50 web client protocol,
etc. Besides, it must also offer tools for
digitising print material for access and
archival purposes.
Internet is offering several public domain
databases for access to journal information.
They allow access to table of contents,
bibliographic information, abstracts, etc.
These databases are from commercial as well
as association publishers such as Academic
Press, ACM, American Chemical Society,
A merican Institute of Aeronautics and
14

Astronautics, American Institute of Physics,
Cambridge University Press, Kluwer, Royal
Society of Chemistry, Wiley Interscience, etc.
The main difficulty in using such databases is
that the information is scattered across
various sites. One has to visit to all the sites
one by one for retrieving information on a
subject. Immediate desktop information from
such databases is not feasible. Such
solutions are, therefore, not user friendly.
A digital library has also to offer unified,
open interfaces to make searches on all the
library’s digital collections, whether these
material originate from a commercial
publisher such as Elsevier, an association
publisher such as American Physical Society,
or internally generated online catalogues.
Such a common, open interface certainly
helps in freeing the user from working within
several different proprietary softwares and
ensures thereby seamless access.
Digital library solutions available in India
are few and their scope of operations is
limited to select few functions such as library
management
systems,
OPACs,
and
documentation. They have yet to offer
intranet-based solutions for accessing and
searching locally generated digital assets,
CD-ROM databases, archiving digital assets
downloaded
from
internet,
creating
web-based
bibliographic
and
full-text
databases, and for digitising print material for
access and archival purposes. Besides they
have yet to offer tools for seamless access to
information scattered across publishers’ sites.
At present, digital library software
solutions are marketed from abroad. But they
are expensive, and many a times they even
fail to provide effective customer support for
software implementation, trouble shooting
and customization. Free digital library
software solutions have just started beginning
to appear on the internet. They promise to
provide tools for information organisation and
publishing on the web but they have yet to
establish their credibility.
If digital library movement is to pick up in
the country, there is a need to pool efforts to
produce indigenous, inexpensive digital
library solutions. This is not a tall order, and
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22 (6)

leading national organisations like the
NISSAT, INFLIBNET, and INSDOC could
very well come forward to take a lead in this
regard. Digital library offers a lucrative
market. Entrepreneurs in the private sector
could take advantage of the vacuum and
come up with attractive solutions. In India,
Informatics (India) Ltd., a Bangalore based
company, has offered a gateway on the
Internet for providing seamless access to
table of contents of 10000 journals. However
this is not a public domain database. Its
access is limited to the clients only.

5. MODEL FOR RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT
An increasing number of traditional
publishing
houses
and
professional
associations have embarked on the electronic
publishing of academic journals. They are
now providing electronic versions of material
previously issued only in print. They are also
developing new products entirely in electronic
form. Secondly, there is a growing trend
towards uploading such electronic journals on
web sites or making titles available from a
variety of publishers. Initiatives in this regard
are coming forth from commercial publishers,
scholarly societies, and platform providers.
They are collaborating with libraries for
project implementation and evaluation. A
sample of such initiatives includes Project
TULIP, Project MUSE, OCLC’s First Search
Electronic Collections Online, the Association
for Computing Machinery’s Digital Library, and
ISI’s Electronic Library project. Currently
available products include Springer Verlag’s
LINK, Elsevier’s ScienceDirect service, IOP
journals, ACS journals, SAE journals, Web of
Science, American Physical Society journals,
A merican Institute of Physics journals, and
JSTOR. The ultimate mission of these
projects has been to provide access to
research material primarily via electronic
form.
Commercial
publishing
houses
are
marketing their electronic journals under
various pricing models. They are offering
attractive offers to institutional subscribers.
These are bundled offers comprising internet
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(6)

access to all of their journals at a fractional
cost of library print subscriptions. They are
also offering attractive offers which are
comparatively cheaper for consortia users.
Libraries interested in broadening access to
journals are resorting to such new offers and
have started subscribing to such online
solutions. For example, several libraries
under the CSIR system have subscribed to
Elsevier’s ScienceDirect service. IIT libraries
are able to avail web access options for over
60% of the subscribed journals.
Although
accessing
digital
library
resources via internet is an excellent solution,
but not all libraries are still coming forward to
take advantage of such new opportunities.
They are still debating whether to go for
access model or continue to maintain the
holdings in print form. Digital asset
management is another issue which must
concern libraries. In the context of access
model, libraries do not store digital resources
on their servers. All the resources in
electronic form reside on the servers of the
publisher and are accessed online on the
internet. In the event libraries decide to
discontinue the subscription to electronic
journals they are bound to suffer heavily since
they do not own any digital asset in their
collection. Access model amounts to
compromising with archival role of the
libraries. The choice of model for resource
development in libraries continues to be an
issue of major concern to librarians.

6. IT TRAINING AND EDUCATION
Developing digital library environment
requires
adequate
knowledge
and
understanding about elements such as
clients, servers, networks (LAN, WAN),
internet
technologies,
and
digital
technologies. It also requires adequate
knowledge and understanding of bibliographic
and metadata standards and formats.
Traditional
library
professionals
lack
understanding of these concepts and such
limitations are coming in the way of planning
and implementation of digital library projects.
There are several agencies in the country
which are engaged in IT training and
15

education. These include the library
associations and library networks, NISSAT,
INSDOC, DESIDOC, INFLIBNET, DRTC,
NASSDOC, NIC and NSIC. Their training
programmes are focused largely on library
management systems. There are less number
programmes which focus on electronic library
solutions or digital library solutions, covering
topics such as XML, HTML, imaging, OCR,
web designing, CD databases for access over
web, LAN and intranet, web integrated
databases, and selection and indexing of
materials for digitising. The list of topics is
only illustrative and not exhaustive. Such
digital library topics are also needed to be
covered in the university course curricula.
But, it is too much to depend on university
education system for training and education in
the IT. Secondly, the training programmes are
usually of short term duration, from one week
to two weeks, and the duration is not
sufficient to provide adequate hands on
experience. Such training programmes do
serve the purpose of giving exposure to IT
concepts but fail to equip the working
librarians with adequate training and
knowledge that should enable them to lead
digital library revolution. Thirdly, such training
programmes are expensive and not all
working
librarians
and
information
professionals can always afford them.
The impact of any IT training programme
must be judged from its outcomes. It should
enable librarians to publish their products and
services on the web, share their resources on
internet, and manage their digital assets for
long term use. In reality, it is hard to visualise
such outcomes. This is because we lack
content and hands on practice in the course
curricula of training programmes, lack trainers
and the training agencies, lack infrastructure
and funds for the purpose, and also lack
motivation on the part of the working
librarians to undergo training. We need to
evolve a well structured programme for filling
up the vacuum. The country needs to take
initiative in case we want make visible impact
in digital library revolution.

16

7. COPYRIGHT MANAGEMENT
Commercial publishers are offering online
access to their subscribers through password
validation or through IP address validation.
For this the commercial publishers require
subscribing institutions to sign license
document. The license document is an
instrument to protect copyright interests of the
publishers. As a responsible social service
institution, it is the prerogative of libraries to
effectively guard access to its collection and
to ensure that no copyright content is
misused by anyone through its services.
Therefore the librarians have to ensure that
copyright document is honoured. However, of
the commercial and association publishers
insist that the signatory to license document
has to be head of the subscribing institution.
They do not regard the authority of the
librarian as sufficient enough in this regard.
Many a times, meeting such stipulated
requirements lead to delays and unnecessary
interruption in online service to e-resources.
Commercial publishers are using copyright
as an instrument largely for commercial gains.
For example they regard multiple access to
e-products from a single site as copyright
violation unless so permitted against
additional payment. The charges for single
site multiple access are higher than those for
the single site single user access. Secondly,
copyright conditions are coming in way of
utilising digital resources for the purpose of
resource sharing and information marketing.
Libraries are being prevented from giving
e-resources for a fee as otherwise they will
invite punitive action under the copyright law.
For subscribing libraries this is still a puzzle
How to get over such copyright restrictions is
still a puzzle for subscribing libraries.

8. INFORMATION STORAGE &
PRESERVATION
The storage and preservation of contents
are the two key issues that have to be closely
monitored in the digital library development.
The contents once digitised are to be stored
on the servers for a sufficient duration to
stabilise the confidence of clients. The basic
motivation behind preservation is not only to
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22 (6)

ensure the permanency of contents, as is the
case for printed contents, but also to make
them amenable to the latest software to
guarantee the persistent use. Preservation is
the aspect of archival management that
preserves the content as well as the look and
feel of the digital object 5. The data migration
dictated by hardware/software upgrades or
changes is another underlying concern in
preservation. The intricacies of digital
preservation are further complicated due to
the presence of different formats and diverse
systems to achieve similar tasks, and even
the multiplicity of standards. After briefing
about the virtues of formats like TIFF, PDF,
and markup languages (HTML/SGML),
Hodge observed that “the key preservation
issue is the format in which the archival
version should be stored”.

9. RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
The
main
concern
in
resource
development is about the rising costs of
e-journals and e-databases and on the other
hand about the shrinking purchasing power of
the libraries to afford such high rising costs.
The other concern is about the approach
libraries continue to follow with regard to
resource development. There are hardly any
efforts in evolving cooperation between
libraries for developing comprehensive
collections. Put together libraries in India are
spending over Rs.150 crore per year on
journal
subscription
in
science
and
technology. They are still not able to offer
comprehensive information in this area. At the
best they are getting not more than 3000 to
4000 journals in science and technology
whereas the country needs more than 15000
journals.
The libraries need to follow a
multi-pronged
strategy
to
ensure
comprehensive access. This may involve
adopting consortium approach to journal
subscriptions or digitisation of print resources
on cooperative basis or adopting new access
model which should allow access to electronic
journals and books for a fee. The can also
establish subject information gateways such
as in physical science, biological and medical
science, and agricultural sciences. These
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(6)

information gateways will have the mandate
to build digital library resources and make
them available country-wide via internet. The
issue is who should give leadership in
resource development.

10. CONTENT DEVELOPMENT
Our
current
efforts
aimed
at
retro-conversion of cataloguing records at the
library level have not succeeded in
converging and pooling the outputs into a
national union catalogue of books and
journals available in the country. Identifying
book availability at the individual network level
might have become feasible but it is certainly
not so feasible at the national level. The
problem lies in our failure to eliminate
duplication in our efforts in retro-conversion,
Organise
coordinated
efforts
in
retro-conversion at national level, and the end
less multiplicity in our opinions on standards
and formats for retro-conversion. Content
development activity at local library level has
been the current approach to developing
OPACs. This alone may not lead us to a
digital library environment. There is an urgent
need for a national bibliography utility in the
country charged with the responsibility to offer
bibliographic records of books and journals as
per standard record formats. The utility may
also offer facilities for data conversion into
various record formats and meet thereby
libraries demands without embroiling itself
into any record format controversy.
The
technical
reports,
conference
proceedings, theses, etc., constitute an
important institutional resource. They need to
be preserved and archived for current and
future use. The libraries should digitise them
and make them accessible via internet
without any fear of copyright infringement. In
this regard the libraries will have to focus on
standards for content creation, identification,
organisation, storage, and hosting. For
succeeding in such endeavours, the libraries
will have to acquire high level skills and
expertise in bibliographic and full text
database development activity.

17

11. ROLES OF LIBRARIES AND
LIBRARIANS
Publishing on the web is a highly visible
activity with relatively little investment, as the
software is available absolutely free or for a
nominal charge, and the main overheads are
hardware and personnel costs. The libraries
may now be required to adopt this new role.
This should be in addition to their role of
computerising their routine tasks by using
library management systems. They will also
be required to use CD-ROM systems as an
alternative medium for information access
and delivery. These activities are going to
make the role of libraries and librarians even
more challenging.
In the evolution of digital libraries the
professionals in the field have started
apprehending a threat to their survival. They
consider specialists from the computer field
as their competitors who might eventually
take their roles. They also fear threat from
publishers and content aggregators who are
offering online access via internet to
electronic journals and journal archives.
Some open access archives on the internet
are making many primary materials available
at no cost 6. Admittedly, web has enabled us
to accumulate a large quantum of digital
contents. It is demonstrating the viability of
paperless systems that could compete with
the traditional setup. While such threat
perceptions to the professionals are logical,
what is not being understood is that digital
library solutions are still very expensive and
not affordable by all libraries outside the
developed world. Even otherwise library skills
in knowledge management are time tested
ones. It is erroneous on our part to perceive
that librarians could be replaced by computer
specialists. Computer specialists are indeed
capable of writing software for managing
information overload. But it is only the library
professionals who with their knowledge
management skills are able to reduce noise in
information retrieval and also improve
precision in searching information from
databases on the internet.

18

We have to understand that digital libraries
are adding new dimensions to activities
pertaining to information organisation and
management. It is about managing digital
contents including multimedia products and
publishing them on the internet and intranet.

12. CONCLUSION
The digital revolution offers tremendous
potential to add value to the process of
information creation, dissemination, and
access. It is soon going to reshape the roles
of libraries and librarians. At present, the
libraries and information centres are
responding as intermediate users to the
initiatives taken by commercial publishers,
scholarly societies, and platform providers.
This alone is not enough. They must also
respond as platform providers. They should
coordinate their activities in creating new
information gateways and aim at providing
access to their resources on the internet and
other networks. They need to publish on the
web, use IT as a tool for expanding their
scope of the services from document delivery
to information delivery and gradually graduate
to address issues of knowledge management.
In achieving this objective they must first
address the issues and problems highlighted
in this paper.

13. REFERENCES
1.

Lynch, Clifford, & Garcia-Molina, Hector.
Interoperability, scaling, and the digital
libraries research agenda: A report on the
18-19 May 1995, IITA Digital Libraries
Workshop, 1995.
http://diglib.stanford.edu/diglib/
pub/reports/iita-dlw/ main.html#2
(accessed on 17 June 2001)

2.

Seamans, Nan, & McMilan, Gail. Digital
library definition for DL12, June 16, 1998.
http:// scholar.lib.vt.edu/DLI2/defineDL.
html (accessed on 15 June 2001)

3.

Fox, Edward A., et al. Digital libraries.
Communications of the ACM, 1995,
24(4).
Cleveland, Gary. Digital libraries:
Definitions, issues and challenges. (UDT
Occasional Paper #8), March 1998.

4.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22 (6)

http://www.ifla.org/VI/5/op/udtop8/
udtop8.htm (accessed on 25 June 2001)
5.

Hodge, Gail M. An information life-cycle
approach: Best practices for digital
archiving. Journal of Electronic
Publishing, 2000, 5(4).

Contributors:

http://www.press.umich.edu/jep/05-04/ho
dge.html (accessed on 7 July 2001)
6.

Arms, William Y. Key concepts in the
architecture of the digital library. D-Lib
Magazine, July 1995.
http://www.dlib.org/dlib/July95/07arms.
html (accessed on 8 July 2001)

Shri V.K.J. Jeevan is Assistant Librarian at Central Library, Indian Institute of
Technology, Kharagpur-721302, West Bengal. E-mail: vkj@library
Shri S.M. Dhawan

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2002, 22(6)

19

