DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 23, No. 1, January 2003, pp. 13-18
© 2003, DESIDOC

Electronic Books (eBooks): Current Trends and
Future Directions
Lynn Silipigni Connaway
Abstract
As a greater number of electronic resources becomes available, retrieving
relevant and authoritative information has become progressively more
challenging and time consuming. Locating relevant information in a timely
manner is critical for both the researcher and the information professional.
Electronic books (eBooks) are one way to enhance the digital library with global
24-hours-a-day and 7-days-a-week access to authoritative information, and they
enable users to quickly retrieve and access specific research material easily,
quickly, and effectively.
It is crucial to not only provide these electronic resources, but to integrate them
into library systems to streamline library operations, as well as promote user
adoption. As an eBook provider, netLibrary, a division of OCLC, Online Computer
Library Center, has been involved in the selection, cataloguing, and distribution
of eBooks. Library users are able to remotely search, locate, and checkout
eBooks from the library’s online public access catalogs (OPACs).
As with any new opportunity, new challenges emerge and utilising the internet to
deliver book content is no exception. Integrating eBooks into the digital library
has created challenges and opportunities for librarians, publishers, and eBooks
providers.

1. INTRODUCTION

2. LIBRARY CHALLENGES

When discussing the societal and cultural
changes
created
by
available
new
technologies, Paul Hoffert, Director of Cultech
Collaborative Research Centre at York
University (Canada) and Executive Director of
Intercom Ontario, stated the context has
changed.1 The new context is affecting how
people communicate and how they seek and
use information, as well as how and why they
use libraries.

In addition to this changed context,
librarians are facing several other challenges
in providing information. These include, but
are not limited to, shrinking budgets; limited
shelving and space; reduced or no funding for
additional space; new buildings and
resources; rising costs to repair or replace
damaged, lost, and stolen books, some of
which are out of print; users’ dependence
upon and demands for resources in electronic
format; the rising costs of interlibrary loan
services; the increased need for developing
resource-sharing and purchasing groups to
increase buying power; and the demand to
support distance or distributed learning and
other remote user needs.

In this new context, library users have
varied expectations for accessing and
acquiring information. The context of the
information and the technology environments
in which we function has changed.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(1)

13

Libraries are moving from a warehouse
perception to an information gateway or
portal. Libraries are also being required to be
more relevant to institutional and community
objectives, or in other words, libraries must be
accountable to university, state, or local
governing bodies.

3. eBOOK OPPORTUNITIES
The internet has caused an evolution in
the book publishing industry with the
emergence of the eBook. The advantages of
eBooks for libraries are straightforward and
include
t Easy access to content
t on-demand availability
t Prevention from being lost, stolen, or

damaged
t Capability to search within a book and

across a collection of books
t Ability to be linked to other resources,
t
t
t
t
t
t

including dictionaries and thesauri
Absence of physical space requirements
Device independence for accessing the
content
Access to content using standard web
browsers
Customizable search interfaces
Easy transportation, and
Access from anywhere.

eBooks create new opportunities for
publishers and have revived the scholarly
monograph. They also provide an opportunity
for publishers to maintain a competitive
position in the marketplace. The emergence
of the eBook has given publishers new ways
to serve customers by re-purposing content
and creating living books, which incorporate
text, audio, video, and other resources, such
as dictionaries, thesauri, etc.2

4. eBOOK DEFINITION
An eBook is based both on emulating the
basic characteristics of traditional books in an
electronic format, as well as leveraging
internet technology to make an eBook easy
and efficient to use. An eBook can take the
form of a single monograph or/a multi-volume
set of books in a digital format that allows for
viewing on various types of monitors, devices,
14

and personal computers. It should allow
searching for specific information across a
collection of books and within a book. An
eBook should utilize the benefits of the
internet by providing the ability to embed
multimedia data, to link to other electronic
resources, and to cross reference information
across multiple resources.
An eBook collection should be accessible
anytime, anywhere via the internet, requiring
no device but a personal computer to access
the content. An ideal eBook should provide
content of value, the ability to view online, the
ability to download to a PC or view offline,
and the ability to view on a handheld device
or personal digital assistant. Users should be
guaranteed privacy for the content they
access and use and should be able to
aggregate and customize items and content
regardless of format.
Copy and print capabilities for portions of
the eBook should be permitted within
copyright and fair use guidelines. Copyright
protection must be ensured regardless of
whether the content is accessed via the
internet or via a downloadable reader that
allows access to the book offline.
The netLibrary model is based on the
belief that an eBook = Content. Therefore, a
netLibrary eBook is neither a device; nor can
be defined as one dedicated source of
content. An eBook is the content itself. It is
the intellectual property of the author who
develops it and is owned by the copyright
holders. Based on this premise, the content,
even in an electronic world, should be
available to share between and among users,
as content produced on paper has been and
is
currently
used,
while
maintaining
compliance with fair use and copyright
regulations. netLibrary has taken the
approach to leverage the internet and the
electronic environment for what they do
best—provide more efficient and effective
means of aggregating, organising and making
content accessible, while retaining the
integrity and essence of the traditional book
industry and the use of content that is easily
accessible and not restricted by devices or
technical environments.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(1)

5. eBOOK CHALLENGES
(a) For Librarians
The integration of eBooks into the digital
library has not only created opportunities for
librarians,
but
also
created
several
challenges. Full-text access and retrieval of
eBooks combine library-based theories and
principles with web search and retrieval
techniques.
Librarians
must
develop
innovative
policies,
procedures,
and
technologies to accommodate the publication
of and access to eBooks.
eBook challenges for librarians can be
grouped into three categories—(a) acquisition
and collection development, (b) standards
and technology, and (c) access. Within each
of these categories are subcategories.
Acquisition and collection development
challenges include budget allocations; usage
and distribution models; purchase models;
and collection development strategies.
Standards and technology challenges include,
not only cataloging and metadata standards
and schemes, but also eBook hardware and
software
technologies,
digital
rights
management software, and user and staff
training. Access challenges include the
cataloguing and indexing of eBooks,
circulation models for the electronic
environment, and preservation and archiving
of eBooks and the resources linked to them.

(b)

For Publishers

Since the internet knows no boundaries,
publishers must also contend with challenges
created by the emergence of the eBook.
These include securing both electronic and
territorial contractual rights for content and
permission clearance. Publishers must
become involved in the development of
format identifiers, such as International
Standard Book Numbers (ISBNs), digital
object identifiers (DOI), International Standard
Text Code (ISTC), and Online Information
eXchange (ONIX). “ONIX” refers to a
standard format that publishers can use to
distribute electronic information about their
books to wholesale, e-tail and retail
booksellers, other publishers, and anyone
else involved in the sale of books.”3 (e-tail is a
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(1)

shorthand for electronic retail). eBook
metadata creation and distribution, as well as
eBook file delivery are new publisher venues
that require additional resources. Editorial
and production workload, quality assurance,
and sales reporting and accounting, including
royalties for electronic content, require
publishers to revise policies and procedures,
to hire personnel with these knowledge and
skills, and to train personnel in this new
publishing venue. Publishers must also
develop methods for the storage and
transmission of eBook files for re-purposing
content. The marketing for and the publicity
and sales integration of eBooks also require
publishers to revise current practices or to
develop new practices.
In spite of these challenges, progress has
been made in the production and distribution
of eBooks during the last two years.
Librarians, publishers, eBook providers, and
integrated library system vendors have
worked together to implement and integrate
acquisitions systems; test various collection
development strategies; propose and adopt
new, revised, and combined standards;
provide new eBook hardware and software;
identify and test new indexing and retrieval
methods for full-text eBooks; test new access
and usage models; and initiate archiving
policies and procedures for eBooks. Several
models have emerged for providing,
distributing, accessing, and retrieving eBooks.

6. eBOOK MODELS
Publisher relationships are the key to
ensuring a steady flow of vetted content.
netLibrary currently provides content from
more than 300 publishers and provides
access to an additional distribution channel
for these publishers’ content. netLibrary’s
publishers are evenly divided between
academic and commercial publishers.
netLibrary
primarily
is
offering
a
one-to-one user model, which means that
only one person can access each title at one
time. This may seem contradictory in an
electronic environment, but users have not
identified this as a problem since they are not
directly aware of the restrictions of the model.
In an effort to transition from the one-to-one
15

user model, netLibrary is offering new access
and purchase models for designated
publisher offerings.
There are several commercial eBook
content providers. These include Questia,
ebrary, ED (Baker & Taylor), and Books 24 x
7, in addition to publisher-specific eBook
offerings, such as Safari. The pricing and
access models vary. Several companies
provide multiple, simultaneous use of all
content for an annual fee while others only
allow viewing, copying, and printing of specific
portions of text, with charges based upon the
amount of text viewed, copied, or printed.
eBook pricing and access models are
continually being reviewed and developed,
while content remains the distinguishing
feature of eBook distributors. Quality content
is one of the key factors in providing an
effective eBook model and publishers are
instrumental in identifying the content that will
be available electronically. netLibrary has
more than 47,000 titles that are identified as
academic, public, school, and special library
collections. There are librarians on staff who
have subject-area expertise in collection
development, as well as staff from the
publishing industry who are familiar with
publishers’ areas of specialisation.
Economics, business, management, social
sciences, literature, medicine, religion,
American and world history, philosophy,
education, technology and engineering are
currently netLibrary’s largest and strongest
collections. The majority of netLibrary’s
current titles were published between 1998
and 2002.
It is also possible to copy and print
portions of content while complying with
copyright and fair use guidelines. Copyright
compliance is of great importance to
publishers since they are obligated to protect
the intellectual property of their authors.
netLibrary’s digital rights management
software provides the secure rendering of
digital content both on site via web browsers
or via the downloadable Adobe eBook reader,
soon to be available through netLibrary.
The delivery and distribution of netLibrary
content is customizable to meet each library’s
16

needs. netLibrary eBooks are one of the
library’s assets, platform independent,
accessible worldwide, can be accessed
online, and can be integrated into the library’s
online public access catalog (OPAC) through
MARC records provided directly by OCLC via
WorldCat or collection sets.
Management of content, whether paper or
electronic, is critical to libraries’ collection
development, budget, user services, and
circulation
decision-making
processes.
netLibrary provides usage reports, as well as
reports of titles that are not used, which
enable librarians to monitor and adjust their
collection strategies and circulation models. It
is possible to assign circulation periods by
title and/or collections and to access
netLibrary’s collection development tools,
TitleSelect and TitleDirect. TitleSelect enables
librarians to access netLibrary’s entire eBook
catalog and TitleDirect provides automatic
notification
of
new
titles
matching
library-specified content profiles.
Librarians also are able to acquire
netLibrary eBooks through book distributors in
order to streamline and accommodate the
libraries’ acquisition
processes.
Some
distributors that are currently cooperating with
eBook providers in distribution agreements
include Blackwell’s Book Services, Baker &
Taylor, YBP Library Services, Fedlink, Best
Books (serving India & Thailand), DA
Information Services (serving Australia and
New Zealand), Edutech (serving Bahrain,
Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Oman, Qatar, and
the United Arab Emirates), Bibliotekstjänst AB
(serving Sweden, Norway, Finland, Denmark,
and Iceland), Flysheet (serving Taiwan),
IMINE (serving South Korea), and Kinokuniya
(serving Japan). netLibrary provides customer
services, such as technical support, collection
development assistance, and marketing
materials through the eBook Tool Kit. These
services provide the conduit between libraries
and publishers, who are the source of the
eBook content.

7. eBOOK TRENDS
eBooks have become more popular with
publishers, librarians, and vendors within the
past two years. This is evident by the number
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(1)

of eBook initiatives. There are eBook readers,
which can be divided into the following
categories: eBook hardware, Personal Digital
Assistants (PDAs), and eBook software.
There are also electronic ink and paper, print
on demand, and online eBook providers.
The major eBook hardware providers are
Rocketbook, now known as REB 110, and
Softbook, now known as REB 1200, which
have become increasingly popular in public
libraries. The most commonly used PDAs that
allow for downloading eBook content are
being introduced in the market by Palm Digital
Media, Casio, Compaq, and Hewlett Packard.
The major eBook software companies include
Palm Digital Media, Adobe, Microsoft, and
netLibrary. There are numerous online eBook
providers. These include publishers, such as
Gale, Bowker, O’Reilly (Safari), and UMI;
libraries, such as the University of Virginia;
and content providers, such as ED (Baker &
Taylor), Books 24x7, netLibrary, Questia, and
ebrary. National Academy Press reports that
providing its titles free of charge on the Press’
web site has increased print book sales. The
Press views this free electronic offering as a
successful marketing strategy.4

8. FUTURE DIRECTIONS
We, librarians, must think beyond the
paper book and utilise the capabilities of the
eBook. It is more than an alternative to a
paper book. Let us not make the mistake that
we made when moving the paper card
catalog to the online environment by simply
digitising the catalog card, without considering
the new possibilities for search and retrieval.
We should include links from the eBook to
dictionaries,
thesauri,
related
images,
photographs, electronic text, and, audio and
video segments.
Now is the time to enhance the
bibliographic record. We should utilise the
table of contents and book indices in the
bibliographic record since these are already
digitized in the eBook format. We should also
include links to book reviews, electronic
resources that are referenced in the book,
and book summaries. We need to work with
publishers, technology providers, and eBook
providers to not only map standards and
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(1)

schemes, such as the Dublin Core,
International Standard Text Code (ISTC), and
Online Information eXchange (ONIX), but to
integrate these into the MARC format. The
full-text search capabilities of eBooks should
be integrated into our library OPACs to
enable users to search within the library’s
electronic collection, as well as across other
electronic materials available on the web.
Library systems should also enable the
integration of semantic searches that map
and retrieve concepts and ideas in addition to
keyword and known-item searches.
These advances will move libraries into
the digital world. People are becoming more
comfortable using technology and the internet
for meeting their information needs. Several
internet use studies have been completed
and recently made available for review.
The Pew Internet & American Life Project
completed a study in the United States
involving middle- and high-school students
and another study involving college students.
The researchers surveyed approximately
2,000 middle- and high-school students to
learn if and how they use the internet for their
school assignments. Seventy-eight percent of
the students stated that they prefer to use the
internet to do their research for schoolwork5.
Approximately 2,000 college students were
surveyed, other college students were
observed using the internet in public settings,
and others were interviewed via telephone.
Three-quarters (74%) of college students use
the internet four or more hours per week,
while about one-fifth (19%) uses it twelve or
more hours per week.6
Outsell, an information industry research
company, completed a study of the
information-gathering habits of U.S. students
and faculty. The researchers conducted more
than 3,000 interviews with faculty, graduate
students and undergraduate students. The
results are based on the interviews and reflect
the respondents’ perceptions. Eighty-eight
percent of the respondents stated that they
use online indexes and abstracts and 82%
reported using online databases. Online
information usage varied between disciplines,
as does eBook usage. The law, business, and
17

biology researchers tended to depend upon
electronic information more than the
humanities researchers. The subject areas of
business, economics, management, computer
science, and social sciences have the highest
number of accesses among netLibrary
academic library eBook users.7
Library users’ expectations are changing
as they become more wired and more
dependent upon technology as wireless
technologies have become more advanced
and readily available. E-cars, high-tech
automobiles with internet access, allow
individuals to check e-mail, monitor stocks,
and keep up with sports scores without taking
their hands off of the steering wheel because
of telematics, a wireless technology that
transmits information to and from a vehicle.
Telematics has been available since 2001 in
automobiles from Mercedes-Benz and
General Motors and includes voice-activated
features.8 The popularity of napster and MP3
has given users the capability to aggregate
their electronic content into private digital
libraries. The popularity of peer-to-peer
file-sharing networks, which allow multiple
users to share text, audio, and video, is
enabling individuals to aggregate content.
If individuals are aggregating content to
create their own information stores, will
libraries and librarians become obsolete? The
literature indicates that librarians will be
needed to assist individual users with the
retrieval and evaluation of electronic
information. John Lombardi,9 professor of
history, University of Florida (USA), also
anticipates that the role of the librarian as
gatekeeper will change as individuals become
their own gatekeepers. He believes that
librarians will digitise unique special
collections and maintain and manage these
collections. He also envisions librarians
creating a mega library union catalog and
developing library portals to compete against
commercial services.10
Contributor:

18

If we, as librarians, do not provide new
methods for library users to access electronic
resources, we may become obsolete. As
stated by Toffler, “Tomorrow’s illiterate will not
be the man who can’t read; he will be the
man who has not learned how to learn.”11

REFERENCES
1.

Hoffert, Paul. The Bagel Effect. Netspeed
99 Conference, 23-25 September 1999,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
2. Franklin, Kelly. Presentation at netLibrary,
Inc. 4 January 2001, Boulder, Colorado.
3. http://www.editeur.org
4. Pope, Barbara Kline. National Academy
Press: A Case Study. Journal of
Electronic Publishing, 1999, 4(4)
http://www.press.umich.edu/jep/04-04/po
pe.html.
5. Minkle, Walter, Ed. Pew study: Students
prefer ‘virtual library’. School Library
Journal, October 2002, 48(10), 28-30.
6. Pew internet and American life internet
project, 2002.
http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/
7. Carlson, Scott. Students and faculty
members turn first to online library
materials, study finds. The Chronicle of
Higher Education, 18 October 2002,
XLIX (8), A37.
8. Hales, Dianne. E-Cars take to the road.
Parade Magazine, 1 October 2000,
18-19.
9. Keller, Larry. Looking it up. 28 November
2000.
http://www.cnn.com/2000/CAREER/
trends/11/28/librarians/index.html.
10. Lombardi, John. 20/20 vision for the
future. American Library Association,
University Libraries Section and The
College Libraries Section of ACRL,
Chicago, July 2000.
11. Toffler, Alvin. Future shock. Random
House, New York, 1970. p. 367.

Dr. Lynn Silipigni Connaway, Division Vice President, Research and Library
Systems, netLibrary, a Division of OCLC Online Computer Library Center,
Boulder, CO. e-mail: lynnc@netLibrary.com.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(1)

