DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 23, No. 1, January 2003, pp. 19-24
© 2003, DESIDOC

Portable Document Format (PDF): Standardizing
Document Files for Publication
John R Craft
Abstract
Just a few years ago, publishers used to send camera-ready copies of their
manuscripts to printers who then used process cameras to copy those pages
onto film, make proofs, create plates, and print the books. That scenario has now
completely changed. Publishers are presently sending what would be considered
‘print-ready’ manuscripts files on diskettes or CD-ROMs or uploading the files
electronically to commercial printing companies. The printing companies work
with those files in creating proofs and producing the final products. In this
scenario, the Portable Document Format (PDF) is playing a significant role in the
production and distribution of both electronic and printed books. The PDF is
emerging as a stable standard file format for the publishing industry.

1. INTRODUCTION
One of the problems with electronic
document files is that publishers tend to use a
variety of platforms, multiple word-processing,
layout, and graphics softwares in creating
their press-ready files. Examples of the
platforms include Windows, Macintosh, and
Unix operating systems. Word-processing
software include Microsoft Word or Corel
WordPerfect;
layout
software
includes
PageMaker,
Adobe
FrameMaker,
QuarkXPress, etc.; graphics software include
Adobe Photoshop; and illustration software
include Adobe Illustrator and MacroMedia
FreeHand,
etc.
This
complexity
is
compounded by the fact that different
publishers are likely to have different updates
or versions of these tools. In addition,
publishers
employ
virtually
unlimited
hardware configurations, which include
different computer processors, computers,
printers, and associated peripherals.
Such complexity creates headaches for
the printers. Some of the print-ready files, for
instance, behave differently with different
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(1)

hardware—e.g., page breaks may occur at
different places than intended or the images
may be misaligned. Because of these
problems, there is a need for standardising
the print files that will remain robust when
loaded into different computer platforms and
configurations.
One of the solutions for this dilemma is the
development of a standardised and stable file
format that facilitates the management of
information. One of these stable file format
standards is the Portable Document Format
(PDF) file. PDF was developed in 1985 by
Adobe Systems, Inc. as a means to produce
electronic documents that are device
independent. The PDF was derived from
another Adobe innovation, PostScript, a page
description language. PDF is highly effective
as a prepress tool for managing files for
printing production.
PDF files are created from Acrobat Distiller
or PDF Writer. Once a PDF file is created, it
can be distributed electronically via the web
or as a file accessible from storage media.
The file can then be opened in Acrobat
19

Reader, a program that can be downloaded
free from Adobe (http://www.adobe.com). In
contrast, Acrobat Distiller, PDF Writer (both of
which are used to produce PDF files), and
Exchange (a PDF editing program) are
licensed programs. Purchasing the full
version of Acrobat presently costs about $180
or more for a single license. For educators
and students, the current price is slightly over
$100. The package also includes an easy to
follow tutorial.
Version 5 is the most recent version of
Adobe Acrobat. This version includes Acrobat
Distiller, which is used to produce PDF 1.4.
The source of the PDF file can originate from
a word-processed document, a desktop
published document, a CAD drawing or a
graphic image file and PDF maintains the
quality of the original form containing text and
pictures.
The PDF file facilitates publishing in a
number of ways. These include document or
book production, eBook production, archiving,
and exchange by e-mail or fax. Another
capability of PDF documents is in adding
hyperlinks to extend the content options. For
instance, in a technical document containing
specific terms or references to other
documents, the reader would have the option
of using a mouse to point to the hyperlink.
The browser icon (in the shape of a hand)

appears on the computer screen when the
mouse pointer cursor passes over the
hyperlink. Clicking on the link would take the
reader to a web page, a presentation, a
video, another PDF file or any file that is
compatible with Acrobat’s system of access.

2. DOCUMENT PRINTING OR
BOOK PRODUCTION
Commercial printing companies have
specific expectations in the preparation of
files. The condition of the file must be
‘print-ready’ or ‘press-ready’. Ideally, that
means having a file prepared with all of the
fonts and graphics included. The state or
condition of the file should be in a completed
form so that it can be RIPed (where RIP is a
Raster Image Processor, a hardware that
digitally produces the layout directly on film,
plate or press) without additional files. Most
printing companies prepare guides that
provide recommendations for electronic
document preparation for printed reproduction
when using Adobe Acrobat Distiller.
When distilling a file in page layout
programs, there are optimization options for
the preparation of files for printed
reproduction. By choosing the Job Options
command in the Settings menu, preset
options from Adobe or customized settings
can be applied to the distilled file. (Figure 1)

Figure 1. Dialog box after starting Adobe Distiller and clicking on the Settings menu
command—Job Options.
20

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(1)

Figure 1 displays the dialog box that
appears after starting Adobe Distiller and
clicking on the Settings menu command, Job
Options. The other options—Press, Print,
Print-Book, and Screen are pre-set by the
software manufacturer. Custom settings can
be applied based on the equipment being
used at the printing plant.

3. DOCUMENT DISTRIBUTION AS
eBOOKS
Acrobat, version 5.0.2, also provides an
option for the production of eBooks, thus
making it possible to store electronic
publications. When producing a document
using page layout applications such as
QuarkXPress, Adobe PageMaker, Adobe
InDesign, or Adobe FrameMaker, options for
converting the document file into an eBook
file (or other PDF files) are present since
Acrobat Distiller is included in the software
package. The Acrobat version 5.0.2 prepares
documents for access from Palm Pilots
computer technology also.
The portability and storage of eBook
documents provide enormous flexibility to the
publishers, authors, users, and libraries.
eBooks allow the publishers to save on
printing costs especially on books containing
fast-changing information. For instance, it is
expensive to anticipate the demand for
manufacturers’ catalogs, print thousands of
paper copies, and distribute them by mail.
Typically, information contained in those
catalogs is outdated by the time they are
printed. On the other hand, making those
catalogs available as eBooks allows the
manufacturers to keep their catalogs current.
The same is true with book publishers. Book
publishing is risky from the perspective of
anticipating the demand. More often than not,
publishers overestimate the demand for the
publications and end up having to discard
unsold copies of their books. eBooks help the
publishers avoid that problem. In addition, at
a nominal cost, the eBooks can be updated in
terms of changing obsolete information and
correcting errors. For the authors, eBooks
provide an independent avenue of making
their publications available to the public. They
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(1)

can load the files on their own websites and
make them available for free or for a fee.
eBooks offer significant benefits to the
libraries also. Some of these benefits are:
q

Reduced need for physical infrastructure in
the form of buildings and square footage for
ever-growing print information

q

Accessibility of information to users on
twenty-four-hours-a-day and seven-days a-week (24/7) basis

q

Ability to access information from remote
location by internet–i.e., freedom from
having to be present in a physical location

q

Improved search and retrieval capabilities

q

Improved ability on the part of users to
integrate the information from multiple
sources (cut and paste of information)
Flexibility in meeting the needs of library
clientele. For instance, specific content
could be made available to the users on
internet.

q

4. DOCUMENT SHARING
THROUGH E-MAIL AND FAXING
Many libraries offer document delivery
services to their clientele such as mailing or
faxing journal article or book chapters.
Likewise,
many
corporations
and
governmental organisations need to share
their documents with their customers. For
instance, US taxpayers have a need to
access US Internal Revenue Service forms at
the tax-filing time. PDF allows individuals and
institutions to make such documents easily
accessible to those who need them. In many
instances,
fill-in-the-blanks
forms
are
available on the internet making it easy to
fill-in the forms and mail or e-mail them to the
appropriate offices.
PDF files containing high quality text and
graphics can be sent as efficiently as an
e-mail attachment and just as easily as a fax.
Anyone who has access to Adobe Acrobat
Reader can easily open the PDF e-mail
attachment. Upon opening the PDF file in
Acrobat Reader, he or she may read it on the
screen or print it directly. Notably, the
versatility of the PDF file is evident in viewing
it from a web browser. This efficiency of
21

preparing and sending PDF files as an
attachment to e-mail messages, in fact,
supersedes the necessity of sending them by
fax.
Once a person receives a PDF file, it is
viewable from Acrobat Reader directly or
viewable from a web browser containing
Acrobat Reader as a plug-in. (The plug-ins
are additional files that extend the capabilities
of the existing software program.) When
viewing on a Web browser, such as Microsoft
Explorer or Netscape Navigator, the Acrobat
Reader plug-in becomes active, allowing the
person viewing the document to read it
on-screen, save it as a file or print it on paper.
Organisations, such as the Digital Printing &
Imaging Association (DPIA) are distributing
news to their members on the web as a PDF
file. Archives of past issues are also available
as PDF files that show the layout, text,
graphics and color as they appeared in print.

5. CREATING PDF FILES
Following are the three methods for
generating PDF files:
(a) Generation from the application directly
(b) Creation from a Postscript file, and
(c) Printing to a PDF printer driver.
Some of the softwares needed for
producing PDF such as Acrobat Distiller and
PDF Writer must be installed on the computer
hard drive. PDF files can also be produced
from Web browsers such as Microsoft Internet
Explorer and Netscape, Computer-Aided
Design (CAD) software, and word and image
processing applications. Any program that
features a Print command can produce a PDF
file.
For preparing a PDF file, the following
three methods can be used:

5.1 Adobe PageMaker
(a) PageMaker has a useful plug-in for quick
imposition of book layout files. Located in
the Utilities menu, the Build Booklet
command can be used to apply book
imposition settings. Once the book file is
prepared and ready for conversion to PDF,
the Build Booklet utility can be applied to
22

the book layout file. If the production is done
in-house, customised or specific settings
that are necessary to achieve high quality
must be determined through a series of
pre-production tests. Using the most recent
version of PageMaker (version 7), save the
completed layout file and choose, from the
File menu, the Export command.
(b) The Export command launches Acrobat
Distiller—an application that will generate
the PageMaker layout into a PDF file. It
should be noted that in the dialog box, we
will see a Save command button. Be alert
for the drive and directory our PDF file will
be saved to. This makes it easy to locate
the PDF file when sending it as an e-mail
attachment.
(c) The Distiller dialog box opens.
(d) Preview the PDF version of our page layout
in Acrobat Reader to make sure that our
document is formatted properly.

5.2 Adobe InDesign
Adobe InDesign features the quickest
solution to producing a PDF file.
(a) Choose the Export command from the File
menu.
(b) Point and click on the PDF option. This will
produce the PDF file directly without having
to have Acrobat Distiller. Notice the drive
and directory where the PDF file is saved.
(c) Preview the PDF version of InDesign layout
in Acrobat Reader.

5.3 QuarkXPress
(a) While the Quark document is open, click
open the Chooser dialog box from the
Apple System’s menu.
(b) Point and click on the Acrobat PDF Writer
printer driver icon in the Chooser dialog
box. Doing this will make PDF Writer the
active printer driver whenever choosing the
Print command from QuarkXPress.
(c) Choose the Print command and examine
the contents of the Print dialog box. We can
see an Acrobat PDF Writer dialog box
appear over the QuarkXPress Print dialog
box.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(1)

(d) Decisions about the number of pages
needed and options such as automatically
launching Acrobat reader to view the PDF
file or naming it using the DOS file naming
conventions are presented in the PDF
Writer dialog box. The DOS file naming
conventions are useful when sending files
from the Macintosh to Windows users.
(e) After naming the PDF file and saving it to
the hard drive, open the file in Acrobat
reader to make sure the document
formatted properly. Then we can close
QuarkXPress and send the PDF file as an
e-mail attachment.

6. PRODUCING PDF FILES
For the time being, PDF files produced
today are distributed and accessed in a
variety of methods—downloads from a web
server or accessed from CD-ROM.
The Job Options setting in Acrobat Distiller
presents four options: eBook, Press, Print,
and Screen. Each has Adobe’s recommended
settings that are accessible from the Distiller
menu bar by choosing the Job Options menu.
The first step in preparing PDF files for use as
an eBook is set the Acrobat Distiller Job
Options section of the Distiller dialog box.
Adobe recommends using the eBook PDF
Job Options setting instead of the Screen
option for a higher quality display setting.
Once we have installed Acrobat, producing
a PDF file becomes quite easy using tools
that are part of our daily routine. Most of us
are using word processors, desktop
publishing programs, drawing programs, or
other applications running on graphical
systems such as Windows or Macintosh.
PageMaker features an Export command that
will launch Acrobat distiller to produce a PDF
file. Adobe’s latest page layout program,
InDesign, produces a PDF file directly when
using the Export command without having to
have Acrobat Distiller. Adobe also has
FrameMaker 7.0. This page layout application
has been around since 1987 and offers
WYSIWYG authoring as found in current
publishing applications. It is designed for
commercial publishers that produce extensive
documents for the web, print, CD-ROM and
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(1)

PDA. Since FrameMaker is an Adobe
product, PDF file generation is included as an
option.
Quark includes a PDF file option available
with QuarkXPress (versions 5 and 6). This is
indicative of the trend that other software
manufacturers outside of Adobe are
accepting PDF as a file format standard.
Aside from archiving documents as a
purpose for producing PDF files, the PDF files
would be a source to pull files from archives
for the production of books as needed. The
concept of on-demand printing works
hand-in-hand with the PDF file. Frequent
revisions of books or overstocked inventories
contributed to high expense areas that can be
minimized by storing books as PDF files.

7. CONCLUSION
The PDF file is an effective method of
preparing documents that are independent
from the original program used to create
them. For instance, a file, which was originally
created in PageMaker, when distributed as a
PDF version, can be viewed and printed
without having access to the PageMaker
program.
Moreover, the PDF format provides
researchers a means to store, retrieve, and
distribute reports and increases the efficiency
of electronic document handling.
As Acrobat matures, it will be useful in
reproducing high quality colour documents for
the printing industry. It is currently effective for
soft proofing colour page layouts from the
computer monitor or highly effective for
archiving and distributing books. Another
application is in the production of documents
for cross media publishing. This is an
emerging segment of the printing and
publishing industry. For example, softwares
such as InDesign, FrameMaker, or XPress
not only are capable of producing PDF
documents but also are capable of preparing
files for web distribution by having Extensible
Markup Language (XML) as an option. The
repurposing of electronic documents for cross
media publishing as a means for distribution
using print on paper, CD-ROM, PDA, and
23

web, is now in place in the software design of
each of these major page layout programs.
There are user groups that deal with such
issues as providing digital content from the
web. Open eBook Forum is an excellent
resource for those managing digital content.
However, the question persists—will the
PDF file created today be readable from
computer systems in the future? The answer
to this question is dependent on Adobe
maintaining a system that recognizes
generations of PDFs with a ‘fail safe’ plan that
will maintain the integrity of historical
electronic documents and publications for
future viewing and printing.

REFERENCES
1.

Adobe Systems, Inc. PageMaker 7.0
user manual. Adobe, San Jose, CA,
1996.

3.

Craft, J.R. The fax about PDF: Why send
a fax when you can PDF it! Tech
Directions, 2002, 61(8), 23-26.

4.

Dennis, A. Real world PDF with Adobe
Acrobat 5. Peachpit Press, Berkeley, CA,
2002.

5.

Deubert, J. PDF: The coming evolution.
High Volume Printing, 1998, 16(1),
18-25.

6.

Romano, F. Delmar’s dictionary of digital
printing & publishing. Delmar Publishers,
Albany, NY, 1997.

7.

Romano, Richard. Press ready: PDF is
firmly ensconced in the print production
workflow. CrossMedia,
September/
October 2001, 1(2), 28-9.

8.

Vincour, M.D. PDF: Is it soup yet?
American Printer, 1998, 221(1), 36-42.

Adobe Systems, Inc. Acrobat 5.0 user
manual. Adobe, San Jose, CA, 1999.

Contributor:

24

2.

Dr John R Craft, Appalachian State University, Boone, North Carolina 28608.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(1)

