DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 23, No. 1, January 2003, pp. 37-42
© 2003, DESIDOC

Variable Printing
Benjamin L Lee
Abstract
Publishing technology has brought the graphic communications industry to a new
frontier which is one-to-one variable printing or personalised printing. The
principle of one-to-one micro-communication is different from mass
communication as the one-to-one communication identifies a recipient first and
provides individualised information for that recipient. This communication
process will improve the effectiveness of communication and will be the trend for
the 21st century.

1. INTRODUCTION
An effective communication is based on
the communicator having the ability to
generate an appropriate message and the
recipient willing to receive it. The critical
factors in effective communication include, in
addition to recipient’s willingness to receive
the message, recipient’s interest in the
message, recipient’s capacity to understand
it, and, most importantly, recipient’s ability to
act in response to the message.
One-to-one micro-communication treats
recipients as individuals with unique
preferences and needs and customizes
message and information to meet those
needs. Micro-communication focuses on each
recipient’s value and will own the recipient
relationship. Studies have shown that the
response rate of personalised mailings to
qualified buyers have been ten times higher
than those of blind mass mailings.1,2,3
The fundamental technology and major
medium for micro-communication is variable
printing—the combination of full-colour digital
printing and database technology. The
concepts of variable printing started around
1970. Major financial firms such as American
Express and Citibank NA have been using
target-marketing technology to find potential
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(1)

customers. Because of the improvement in
database
technology,
the
increasing
availability of databases containing consumer
data, and most people’s preference for
personalised direct mail instead of mass
mailings, variable printing has became a new
trend for the graphic communications
industry.
Based on content and the degree of
variation, variable printing can be divided into
two generations. The first generation variable
printing process prints minimum variable
information.4,5
The
second-generation
variable printing has fully employed variable
data and digital presses to customize an
entire page including colour graphics and
photos. Romano (1998) further classified
variable printing into twelve different levels,
from the lowest level of “Addressed to
‘resident,’ same contents; every piece the
same” to the highest level of “Every pixel on
every part of a piece or mailing personalised
to the recipient.”6
The current developments of database
technology, online technology, and digital
press technology have built a solid foundation
for variable printing. Database and software
systems allow printers to create and
personalise multiple copies of a document. By
37

analysing information collected online about
customer preferences, purchasing patterns,
income
and
other
demographics,
e-businesses could cater with precision to
individuals. Digital presses can print
personalised copies with stable quality. With
database technology, online technology, and
digital press technology, every print can be
highly personalised making variable printing a
powerful tool for target marketing. Because of
the growth of direct marketing and high
degree of effectiveness and acceptance,
variable printing will keep growing and
generate more revenue opportunities in the
future.7,8,9,10

2. OVERVIEW OF VARIABLE
PRINTING TECHNOLOGY
Variable printing is a powerful tool for
direct marketing activities. Its goal is to deliver
the right information to the right target. A
higher degree of the variable information
based on customers’ preferences will improve
customer communication and increase
response rates. It is different from mass
communication and broadcasting. The
starting point for one-to-one communication
process is the target customer which is
opposite from that of traditional printing. The
one-to-one communication workflow starts
with target identification. After generating a
target list, content information is generated.
The information shown on each print is based
on the target recipient’s preferences and
needs. Therefore, the message is highly
personalised and targeted.
In order to deliver appropriate information
to the right target, database analysis and
database management are the most
important tasks when dealing with variable
printing. of the importance of the database
for
variable
printing,
database
preparation11,12,13 demands more attention
from the printers. The variable printing allows
the printers to position themselves as
information service providers instead of print
product manufacturers.

38

3. CONSIDERATIONS FOR
VARIABLE PRINTING
Important considerations for successful
variable printing include:

3.1 Effective Database Analysis,
Management, and Maintenance
The most important process for variable
printing is database analysis. The function of
database analysis is to study the
project/activity, familiar with the relationship
between activities and business goals, and
identify resources in order to reach business
goals. Database analysis for variable printing
includes intensive research regarding the
purpose of the publishing/printing, the
available data, each object and method,
content information, and more importantly, the
database needed to accomplish this project.
The next step is to organise available data,
sort the relationship between databases, and
out-source necessary databases. After
databases are established, a definitional
program is needed to define and manipulate
the objects, methods, and classes of the
database structure in order to manage and
maintain them. A well-managed database
system allows printers to collect, store, and
retrieve data and information effectively for
variable printing.

3.2 Value-Added Designing
The most important feature of a
personalised mailer is to make the receiver to
open it. Because most mailers get discarded
without even being opened. Therefore, both
the outside and inside of the mailer shows
something personalised that’s truly eye
catching.
The contents of the mailer are
receiver-oriented. A word or a picture is
chosen because of something specific that
designer knows about the individual. To show
something the customer will like, the designer
has to know something genuinely significant
about each receiver in the database.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(1)

3.3 Variable Printing Planning
The majority of the printing cost of a
variable printing project lies in the supply and
parts of a digital press such as toner. The
appropriate way to minimize cost is preprint
non-variable information on an offset press
then print personalised information on a
digital press.
The postpress spoilage could cause
problems for variable printing because the
spoilage means someone won’t receive the
message. A preplanned re-do or recover
production process is necessary to deliver the
information to 100% of the target population.

3.4 Software Selection
It is necessary to utilise the appropriate
software to integrate variable information and
digital printing devices in order to produce
actual print copies. There are many software
programs available; each having its specific
function. Today’s variable-data software tools
offer a wide range of capabilities and are
targeted toward various types of applications.
The most appropriate variable-data software
depends upon the application or type of
document it will use to produce. Within a
particular variable-data application class,
there are numerous tools from which to
choose. One of the best ways to differentiate
among programs is to assess the level of
flexibility and scalability that each program
offers.
Flexibility is the measure of a software’s
ease-of-use and ability to support a wide
range of variable-data printing applications
such as ease-to-use graphical interfaces and
complete control over the placement,
orientation and properties of variable
elements, including text, graphics and
layouts. Scalability is the measure of a
software’s ability to accommodate large
variable-data jobs, in terms of the PostScript
file size and the number of variable records.
In addition, a scalable software can support
multiple client and server platforms.
The process of selecting a variable-data
software starts with assessing the complexity
of variable printing application, then
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(1)

determining how much flexibility and
scalability the application demands. Low-end
applications require a moderate level of
flexibility, but because output can range
anywhere from low to high volume, they
require
greater
scalability.
High-end
applications
involve
complex
graphic
placement and multiple platforms as well as
high-volume output. Therefore, require high
levels of both flexibility and scalability. The
software should be flexible enough to carry
out the project and scalable enough to carry
out the volume of output.
Beside software’s flexibility and scalability,
users also need to be aware that some
softwares are tied to a certain front end or
output devices, and some softwares can
export variable-data files as PostScript files,
which can be sent to any digital printing
device.

3.5 Digital Press Selection
Printing performance still is an important
consideration when producing final prints for
variable printing. Different digital presses
have different capabilities as well as costs.
Choosing the appropriate digital press is
critical when dealing with a high-level of data
variability. Some major considerations for
printers in selecting digital presses are:
(a) Cost—The cost range for digital presses
starts
from
mid-$200,000
(Canon
CLC-1000) to the high end (Indigo’s Ultra
Stream and Xerox Docucolor 400 DI) both
cost more than $500,000.
(b) Speed—The high-speed digital presses
such as Ultra Stream, Agfa’s Chromapress
32Si, Canon’s CLC 2400, and Xeikon
DCP/50D can perform high-speed printing.
(c) Multicolour
capability—Most
digital
presses have colour capability. Some
high-end digital presses (such as Indigo’s
UltraStream) have seven-colour printing
capability.
(d) Format—The large format ink jet printers
can print up to 72” wide. Some
manufacturers such as CreoScitex, Raster
Graphics, and Sign Tech have grand size
ink jet printers can print up to 196” wide.
39

The selection of digital presses will be
based on the considerations of cost, speed,
multicolour capability, and format. Printers
determine the priority of these four factors in
order to make appropriate selection
decisions.

4. DEVELOPING A DISTRIBUTED
OBJECT-ORIENTED DATABASE
FOR VARIABLE PRINTING
The major driving force for variable printing
is database technology. There are four major
database models: the hierarchical model, the
network model, the relational model, and the
object-oriented model. Each model has a
different way of representing relationships
between record types. Databases have
become more complex in response to
expanded
organisational
and
variable
database printing needs and the inclusion of
more sophisticated types of data and
information. The latest trend is toward the
object-oriented database which provides a
structure capable of defining complex data
relationships. An object is a focal point about
which data and information are collected. An
object-oriented database presents conceptual
data relationships so that database designers
and printers do not need to be concerned with
how to physically link records.
With other database models, all the
customer records have the same record
structure. An object-oriented database
provides the flexibility to create variations of a
single record type. For example, a database
designer can identify potential customers by
using information from a variety of sources,
such as income information available from
voluntary customer questionnaires, household
credit risk information available from credit
bureaus, food purchase information available
from sweepstakes coupon redemption and
scanning technology, clothing preference
information available from department store
charge accounts, and subscription information
available from magazines’ subscriber lists,
etc. An object-oriented database allows
database designers to define a variation of
the customer record that provides a related
field. With the object-oriented database, the
40

record type for each information is only a
variation of customers and does not require a
separate series of commands.
Database management is a critical task for
variable
printing.
The
object-oriented
approach is used to manipulate or manage an
object-oriented database. Because each
object that forms the database includes a
method for performing actions on the data.
The object-oriented model requires an
approach that provides a way to define and
manipulate objects with their associated
methods. In an object-oriented model, each
group becomes an object and the objects
may further be grouped into classes. The
database designer can also define the
methods that process the data in each object.
Careful consideration of which objects inherit
which method will improve the efficiency of an
object-oriented database.
Databases are almost always shared
among many users and applications.
Database designers share data to make
effective use of available resources and to
become more productive. The set of data
shared by a group of related businesses, for
example, provides each business with a
consistent view of a customer, supplier, or
business
transaction.
These
shared
databases can also be distributed. A
distributed database is a database whose
data reside on more than one system in a
network. These data can be stored, retrieved,
or updated from any node in the network.
Distributing data provides the needed data
and information at a specific location, while
allowing those same data to be used at other
locations as well. People using distributed
databases need not be aware of the location
of the database. The application programs,
communications software, and database
management systems interact with one
another to identify, locate, and retrieve the
data and information needed by the database
user.
There are two common database
distribution strategies: geographic distribution
and functional distribution. In geographic
distribution strategy, a database, or database
partition is located in a region where the data
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(1)

strategies
are
effective
only
when
communication network interconnects each
database or partition.

and information will be used most frequently.
Each partition is accessible to database users
in all the regions. A functional distribution
strategy stresses processing functions over
physical location. Functional distribution

Geographic Distributed Database Communication Network
Object-Oriented Database Block #1
Customers (Data Fields & Method)

Products or
Services
Data Field
Method

Class:
Products or
Services

Income

Credit

Data Field
Method

Data Field
Method

Class: Customers

Object-Oriented Database
Block #2

Target Marketing
Project:
Distribute
personalized
letter, map of
nearest store, and
product fliers to
target customer a
week before
product ship to
store.

Object-Oriented Database
Block #3

Personalized Printing PrePress Production Process:
1. Data analysis
2. Target identification
3. Content information
analysis
4. Page layout and design
5. Preflighting and proofing

Digital
Printing
With High
Speed
Color
Printers
• Agfa
• Canon
• IBM
• Indigo
•

Scitex

•

Xeikon
Xerox

•

Inventory
Control
Database

Functional Distributed
Database Communication
Network

Distribution
& Results
Assessment

Manufacturing
Database

Shipping
Scheduling
Database

Figure 1: Distributed object-oriented database variable printing system model
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(1)

41

The following model (Figure 1) is a system
approach that is based on the relationship of
a variable printing production process and a
distributed object-oriented database. Each
distributed object-oriented database block
includes several objects and each object has
a method and has the ability to interact with
other objects. Objects that share common
characteristics are grouped into a class. For
example, the class customer includes the
objects customer, income, and credit. On the
other hand, the products/services object is a
separate class. The method generates a
potential customer list by calculating and
matching field information within objects. The
functional distributed database also provides
timing information for personalised printing
project schedule. The workflow of the variable
printing is identical to most digital printing.
The only difference is that the variable
printing pre-press operation is more focused
on data analysis and content information
analysis in order to provide appropriate
variable information for the right target.

6. CONCLUSION
One-to-one micro-communication is a
relationship
builder,
provides
effective
communication and high response rates, and
has created a new opportunity for the graphic
communications industry and will become a
new trend in the 21st century. Variable
printing
is
the
major
medium
for
micro-communication and also is a very
powerful value-added tool for marketing and
communication. The effectiveness of variable
printing depends on the completeness of
databases and database analysis. A
distributed object-oriented database system
allows database designers an effective use of
any available data within the network. The

Contributor:

42

distributed object-oriented database printing
system model displays the variable printing
workflow and database system network
structure. This system model provides the
graphic communications industry a clear
vision and the methods to adopt this
technology in the information age.

REFERENCES
1.

Alexander, C. Variable data in action.
Print On Demand Business, 1999, 5(2),
28-29.

2.

Crockett, J. A marketing lesson from
Fred. Print On Demand Business, 1999,
5(2), 26-27.

3.

Romano, F. Personalised and variable
data printing poised to grow. GATF
World, 1999, 11(1), 18-20.

4.

R omano, F.
personalisation.
10(5), 17-18.

5.

Ray, B. Preparing the database for
printing and mailing applications. GATF
World, 1998, 10(5), 19-20.

6.

Romano, F. 1998, p. 18.

7.

Mathison, M. The golden rules for
delivering personalised communications.
GATF World, 1998, 10(5), 21-22.

8.

Romano, 1998.

9.

Romano, 1999.

T he f i ve W s o f
GATF World, 1998,

10. Tilden, S. Revenue opportunities and
software choices for personalization.
GATF World, 1998, 10(5), 20-21.
11. Ray, 1998.
12. Romano, 1998.
13. Tilden, 1998.

Dr. Benjamin L. Lee is Professor and Coordinator of Graphic
Communications/Printing Management program at California State University,
Los Angeles.CSIT, California State University, CA 90032.
Phone: (323) 343-4572; e-mail: blee10@calstatela.edu

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(1)

