DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 23, No. 2, March 2003, pp. 43-47
© 2003, DESIDOC

Evaluation of Electronic Reference Sources
S P Singh
Abstract
Discusses the impact and acceptability of information technology (IT) in libraries
and information centres. Mentions how the role of reference librarian is changing
with the change in the mode of production and access to reference sources in
the libraries. It also adds what is expected of reference librarian to face the
challenges of today. Emphasizes the need of knowing how to evaluate
CD-ROMs and online reference sources, enumerates the important
characteristics of reference sources, finally describes in detail various criteria
which can be used for evaluation of e-sources.

1. INTRODUCTION
Today information technology (IT) has
been playing an important role for every
section of the society. Its impact is visible in
almost all walks of life and libraries are no
exception to it. Since the users today have
multi-dimensional requirements, IT is gaining
fast access in libraries, information centres
and documentation centres to meet their
changing
requirements
and
provide
value-added and need-based services to its
users. It has affected not only the way of
acquiring
and
processing
the
documents/information in the libraries but also
the way of providing the reference service to
the users of the library.
The field of reference service is very vast
and dynamic. The basic purpose of any
library however small or big it may be,
remains the same i.e., to collect, organise and
disseminate the information to meet the
information requirements of its users.
Technological development particularly with
the introduction of computer technology,
communication
technology,
printing
technology, reprography, etc., have added
new dimensions to the role of librarians in the
dissemination of information.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(2)

With the introduction of IT, advances have
been made not only in the format of reference
sources but also in the manner of providing
reference service. One can have direct
access to computerized databases via
terminals or the needed information can be
made available to the client through internet
in no time, irrespective of where the
information is available. Today the emphasis
in the libraries is shifting from ‘acquisition of
documents’ to ‘access to information’ thereby
increasing the scope of reference service to
‘no limit extent’. Libraries are passing through
a revolutionary phase which has changed the
way of working of professionals in the
libraries. Under the changing scenario, library
professionals are expected to be well
acquainted with all these developments which
would help to meet the challenges of today.
One should know how to use computer for
providing reference service, what the various
forms available of electronic reference
sources are, how to access them, and how to
select the best of these sources.
Today any reference librarian can provide
a wealth of information by acquiring non-print
form of documents such as CD-ROMs and
online databases. Unlike print documents, for
accessing the electronic documents one has
43

to rely upon the equipment required to access
such documents. Till recently paper form of
reference sources was the only form available
in the libraries for the users. The students in
library science schools in India were taught
how to evaluate the print form of reference
sources to enable them to acquire the best
reference sources in their library. But since
most of the libraries today are going for
computerisation and are acquiring reference
sources in CD-ROMs and online forms, it has
become necessary to have a knowledge
regarding how to evaluate CD-ROMs and
online reference sources for their acquisition
in the libraries.

library, based on users’ level of education.
For any library, the process of evaluation is
very important to develop the need-based
best collection. It helps to assess the value or
evaluate the quality of a particular source and
also it’s suitability for inclusion in the library
collection depending upon the readership of
the library. Various approaches have been
suggested by different authorities like Katz,
Smith, and Gates, etc. Although originally the
evaluation criteria were developed for printed
sources, but they can equally be used for
evaluation of electronic sources (e-sources).
However, in case of e-sources some
additional points are also needed.

2. CHARACTERISTICS OF
REFERENCE SOURCES

3.1 Criteria for Evaluation

q

q

These f o r m a s p e c i a l c a t e g o r y o f
documents meant for consultation or
reference and not for consecutive reading.
These are secondary or tertiary sources
based on primary or secondary sources of
information.

With the tremendous inflow of information
being generated from vast range of sources,
it has become essential to evaluate the
information for conducting quality research.
For this purpose, each source of information
must be reviewed with due care to ensure the
authority, accuracy, quality, reliability and
objectivity of the information one uses. This
section describes the general criteria which
may be used for evaluation of electronic
(internet) reference sources.

Usually these are compiled works for which
information is gathered from a large number
of sources. These sources do not contain
new knowledge, but contain the knowledge
which is already available somewhere.

(a) Purpose

q

In such sources information is organised
according to some definite artificial plan of
arrangement which can provide fast access
to information in the most convenient
manner.

The first thing is to find out the purpose of
publishing the source? Is it to inform, to sell or
to entertain? Websites can be misleading in
their stated or implied purpose. Therefore,
purpose of site should be carefully seen.

q

These sources have disjointed entries,
having no line by line or para by para
relationship as is there in other sources. So
they have no continuity of thought contents
as a result, these cannot be read para by
para or page by page.
Such sources are comprehensive in
coverage (scope) and condensed in
treatment.

(b) Authority

q

q

q

These are not 100% reliable for the data or
information provided therein.

3. EVALUATION
Evaluation of reference sources in a library
context means assessing the value of the
source according to the requirements of the
44

It is necessary to find who is the author, is
he/she a known expert/scholar? What is the
author’s occupation, position, title, education,
experience, etc.? Is the page signed? Is the
author qualified to write on the subject? What
were the sources (primary or secondary) of
author’s information/knowledge? Are these
sources cited as bibliography? Has he
explored new sources, and were they well
chosen and sufficient for the purpose? In
case of web sources, it may be difficult to
determine authors and their qualifications
(even if the page is signed) as any one can
publish anything on web, moreover, these are
not regulated for quality and accuracy as a
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23 (2)

result, user has to be more alert to know
whether the information can be verified? Is
the information filtered i.e. peer-reviewed?
Has it been refereed? One should check URL
domain for source of information and find who
the publisher of document is and what are its
credentials. Is the publisher well known with
good experience and reputation for issuing
reference sources. Is he a recognised
authority? Availability of email address, phone
number of authors/publishers can help in
authentication of information and sources.

(c) Accuracy
Accuracy is a very important characteristic
for any source so one should assess if the
information is accurate? Can it be checked for
its accuracy? Is there an editor or someone
who verifies/checks the information? How
does it compare with other sources of
information? Are the sources for factual
information clearly listed for verification of
information? Is it clear who has the ultimate
responsibility for accuracy of information?
Has the information been reviewed or
refereed? Is it free from grammatical,
spellings, or typographical errors?

(d) Objectivity
A standard source is the one which reflects
clear objectivity of information, therefore one
should check is the information biased? Does
it project all perspectives on an issue? Is the
author’s point of view objective and impartial?
Does it reflect the author’s (bias) affiliation
with an organisation? Whether the information
provided is a fact, opinion, or propaganda? Is
the information free of advertising? Does the
content of the page has an official approval of
the institution? One should also find when the
information was published and is the
information in its original form or has been
revised?

(e) Currency
Although the currency of information
usually depends upon the nature of the topic.
It is particularly important in science and
technology where information changes very
fast. However, a good reference source
should be updated regularly, therefore, one
should always try to find when the information
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(2)

was first published? When it was updated and
is it recent enough for the needed purpose?
Is the site updated regularly? Is there any
indication when the site was last updated?
Dates are sometimes absent or may have
different meanings like date of creation,
placing on web or last revised, so one should
check the dates carefully.

(f) Reliability
It is important to check the reliability and
credibility of sources. Is it authentic? One
should ascertain why to believe information
given on the site? Does the information
appear to be valid and well researched or it is
unsupported by evidence? Is the information
unique or has it been copied? Which
institution supports this information? Is the
supporting institution well known? Are there
some non-web equivalents of the material to
verify the information?

(g) Coverage
Is the source comprehensive enough in its
coverage for the indicated needs of the
audience? What items are included? What
subject area, time period, formats, or type of
materials are covered in the site? Does the
site contain original information or simply
links? If links are given, what kind of sources
are linked, are these related to the topic and
useful for the purpose of the site? Are these
links still current or they have become dead
ends? Have these been evaluated or
annotated in any way?

(h) Format and Presentation
Is the information easy to get? Does the
source contain a table of contents and/or an
index to facilitate the use or to find the
specific information one needs? How many
links does it take to provide the needed
information? Is the arrangement of links
uncluttered? Does the site has its own search
engine? Is the site easily browsable and
searchable?
If graphical images are included, what is
the quality of these graphical images? Do
these images enhance the understanding of
the resource or distract from the content?

(i)

Special Features
45

Does the source contain graphs, charts,
tables, maps, or any other special features
that adds to the usefulness of the source?
Does it use header and footer to indicate
information about the author and source?

4. EXAMPLES OF E-SOURCES
Now a good number of reference sources
are available on internet and CD-ROMs,
some important ones are given below:
On Internet
³ Encyclopaedia Britannica Online
http://www.eb.com
http://www.britannica

p

³ Rogets International Thesaurus Online
http://www.thesaurus.com
³ http://www.encyclopaedia.com
³ Webster’s Dictionary
http://www.dictionary.com
³ http://www.m-w.com
³ Encyclopaedias and Almanacs
http://www.virtualref.com/libdocs/
³ Newspapers Directory
http://www.newsrack.com
http://www.samachar.com
p

In CD-Rom Format

CD-ROM is another publishing me dium
falling under the economic cat egory of
electronic sources available in most of the
Indian libraries. It is capable of containing
enor mous quan tity of in for ma tion. Most of the
Indian li braries are using this medium these
days to fulfil their us ers’ re quirements in an
economic way. This form has been found to
be economic, particularly when one and the
same source is to be used by many users
again and again. There is a long list of
reference sources available on CD-ROMs,
some of the important examples are given
below:
³ Encyclopaedias
m Ac a demic Amer i can En cy clo pe dia
m Mc Graw-Hill En cy clo pe dia of Sci ence &

Te chnology
m New Encyclopaedia Bri tan nica
³ Bibliographies
m BIP Plus
46

m Books Out of Print Plus
m Ulrich’s In ter na tional P e ri od i cals

Directory
³ Indexing/Ab stracting Sources
m Cu mu la tive Book In dex
m Li brary Lit er a ture
m Li brary & In for ma tion Sci ence Ab stracts
³ Dictionaries
m Mc Graw-Hill Dictionay of Scientific &
Tech ni cal Terms

CONCLUSION
For evaluating web documents, author or
contact person with address (e-mail);
document URL, including an institution
identifier (e.g. edu); date of creation or
revision and link to sponsoring institution
website may be used. For evaluating esources one should be very critical of any
information found on web, and it should be
carefully examined. Information available on
the internet is not regulated for quality and
accuracy, therefore it is particularly important
to evaluate the internet resources or
information. Since anyone can publish
anything on web and it is often difficult to
determine authorship of web sources,
therefore, the responsibility of the librarian
increases manifolds to evaluate such
resources still more carefully. Web pages are
susceptible to both accidental and deliberate
alterations and may disappear without any
notice. Other sources like print may also be
used as they may be sometimes more
comprehensive in nature. As there are few
quality controls on the internet, one must use
the same guidelines as for printed sources
but apply these guidelines even more
rigorously. Most important thing about internet
sources is to know links given to other web
pages are current as well as the qualitative in
nature.

FURTHER READINGS
1.

Choudhary, G.G. & Choudhary, Sudatta.
Searching CD-Rom and online
information sources. Library Association,
London, 2001. pp. 40-45.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23 (2)

2.

Large, J.A. Evaluating online and CDRom reference sources. J Librarianship,
1989, 21(2), 87-107.

8.

http://www.sosig.ac.uk/desire/ecrit.html

9.

http://www.lib.nmsu.edu/instruction/evalcr
it.html

3.

http://www.library.georgetown.edu/interne
t/eval.html

10. http://www.lib.purdue.edu/ugrl/evalinfo.ht
ml

4.

http://www.merlin.alleg.edu/employee/h/h
mccull/eval.html

11. http://www.library.cornell.edu/okuref/rese
arch/webcrit.html

5.
6.

http://www.goshen.edu/library/eval.html
http://www.bailey.uvm.edu/ref/evalsource
s.html

12. http://www.lib.berkley.edu/teachinglib/gui
des/evaluation.html

7.

http://www.library.usm.maine.edu/guides/
webeval.html

Contributor:

13. http://www.seattlecentral.org/faculty/kann
a/lib/evaluation.html

Dr. (Mrs.) S P Singh, Reader, Dept of Library & Information Science,
University of Delhi, Delhi-110 007.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(2)

47

