DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 23, No.3, May 2003, pp. 11-19
© 2003, DESIDOC

Computer-aided Print Management Information
System for Printing Presses
Parveen Gupta & J V Ramakrishna
Abstract
To provide management control over the day-to-day operations of printing
business, the computer-aided print management information system plays a vital
role. It is extremely useful in streamlining the databases and comparing and
assessing the same for decision making as regards to business and technical
requirements. Various modern print management information systems are
available through different manufacturers that are made suitable for varing
number of operations, departments and units. This paper discusses management
information system (MIS), computer aided print MIS, benefits of computer aided
print MIS for printing presses, and so on. Brief details of printing press using print
MIS are also given.

1. INTRODUCTION
The development of computer-aided print
production control system is a natural
outgrowth of the entrance of computer and
information technology (IT) into almost every
phase of printing operations. Sunk in the sea
of untapped information flow, majority of the
printing presses in India are unscientifically
managed. In such printing presses, there is a
need of implementing fully integrated
computer-aided print production control
system for managing scientific press routine
through management information system
(MIS) that will not only increase their print
production capacity and efficiency but help
them to survive the current economic crisis
also. In India, this concept has still to catch
up, whereas most of the top printing presses
abroad
have
already
been
using
computer-aided print MIS software to
compare and assess business and technical
data for decision-making.
It is ironical that, considering the
international printing scenario, still the printing
presses, having in-house pre-press, press
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(3)

and post-press sections backed by four to five
4-colour printing machines, have been using
such print MIS in a haphazard manner and
that too to a limited extent only. Generally,
they develop such system in-house and
recommend them for selected departments
and operations only, and worth mentioning
avoiding database networking. Following the
same trend, the cost of implementing print
MIS largely varies from Rs. 25 lakh to Rs. 1
crore, depending upon the type and extent of
networking,
connectivity,
number
of
operations, departments and units-the system
is made suitable for, maintenance contract,
and workload of printing jobs, etc. The
increasing workload of particularly short-run
print jobs, time bound urgent jobs, emergence
of
digital
technology
and
current
developments in microcomputer based
systems now make it possible for all printers
to take advantage of computer-aided print
production control system.

2. WHAT IS MIS?
Management information system is
defined as the systematic and organised way
11

of providing informational support to the
managerial functions of an organisation. The
computer-aided MIS utilises computer
hardware, software, manual procedures,
models for analysis, planning, control and
decision-making, and a database. In other
words, the computer-aided MIS is an
automated system that presents information,
both internal and external to the business,
that aids in making specific set of decisions.
The computer-aided MIS provides information
that is more useful, accurate, timely, relevant,
effective and complete as compared to the
conventional MIS.
The scientific standard press management
routine, developed by computer-aided print
MIS system, is a methodology of working that
should be adopted by a printing press to
execute various print jobs received by the
press from time to time. It is extremely
essential in order to ensure error-free, quick,
and most economical execution of the print
jobs. But to work according to the standard
press management routine, every press must
lay down certain rigid and scientific press
procedures by utilizing modern IT and
computer-aided MIS components.

3. GENERAL MIS MANAGEMENT
AND CONTROL SYSTEM
The general MIS management and control
system provides desirable accuracy for not
only financial management and production
management
but
also
marketing
management, labour management, material
management, inventory/stock management,
quality
control,
cost
control,
and
miscellaneous management. Made up of
various IT and MIS components, the
management production control system
retains its integrity and the components
functions smoothly to ensure accomplishment
of the goal of maintaining scientific
management routine for an organisation like a
printing press. (Figure 1)
As far as printing presses are concerned,
various modern print MIS logic systems are
available through different manufacturers
having distinguishing feature (discussed
later) . Most of such print MIS systems are
made up of up to ‘11’ elements (as indicated
in figure 2) to perform all the standard routine
activities of printing presses shown in figure 3
that come under the standard press
management routine for developing a
computer-aided print MIS system.

F inancial a nd
Marketin g Man age ment
Market Forecasting
and Plann in g

In ve ntory
Op timiza tio n

Q ua li ty Co ntro l
an d Cost Co ntrol

Gene ral
Manag emen t
thr ough MIS

Product Mix

Distribu tio n and
Custome r Ser vice
Wa re hou sin g System
F acilities Utilisation
and Prod uction Scheduling
Figure1. General MIS Management and Control System
12

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23 (3)

ww w.inter fa ce

9.
5.

8.

Pre -pres s

7.

Shipp ing an d
Rece ivin g

Accou nt ing
4.

Inventor y
3.

Modern
Print
MIS
Server

Schedu ling

Post pres s 6.

11 .

2.

8.

Binding and
Finishin g

Pro duc tion
Mon ito ring
Estimating

Finished
Go ods

1.

8.

Pre ss
1 0.

Wid e Area Network
1) Esti mating and quoti ng
2) Production pl anning, ord er entry and job tra cking
3) Int egrated sched uli ng
4) Invent ory m anagement
5) Costing, inv oic ing, purc hasi ng an d fi nancial repo rti ng
6) Finishin g goods invent ory fu lfi l ment
7) J obd elivery and client interac tio n
8) Sh op floor data exc hang e us ing electro nic forms
9) W eb i nterface a nd e-services
10) Multi co mpany a nd multi divi si on n etworking
11) Central led databa se, hum an, machine , mate r ial and pr ocess ana ly si s, and management reporting
archiv es

Figure 2. Modern Print MIS Logic System for Printing Presses

4. BENEFITS OF COMPUTERAIDED PRINT MIS FOR
PRINTING PRESSES
In today’s technologically advancement
phase, the role of MIS cannot be ignored.
Without the scientific MIS, it would probably
be difficult to complete any project without
hurdle. Estimating, costing, order processing,
stock
control,
purchasing,
invoicing,
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(3)

forecasting, telesales, shop floor data
collection, production scheduling, accounting,
personnel
management
and
plant
management, etc., are the major focus areas
in which the computer-aided print MIS system
works and offers large number of advantages
not only to the printer but also to the customer
of the job. Some of the main benefits are:
t Full in te gra tion of op er a tions, a n d

im prove ment in al lo ca tion of phys i cal
13

Mark eting (generation of enquiri es/or der )
Quotation/pre parati on of job es timates
Negotiation, finali zati on, and registrati on of job
Receivi ng or der with original s l ik e manuscri pt, il lus trations, etc.
Making of work instruction ti ck et (WIT)/job doc ket and cost sheet
Proof- reading, editing, gr aphi c desi gning and proofing
Final print or der a pproval
Printi ng surfac e preparation
Inventory control, issue of material instr ucti ons and or gani si ng the printing c onsumables
Pr inti ng (with main tenance of job pr ogr ess card and dail y producti on re port)
Bi nding, finis hing and pac ki ng
T imel y disposal of WIT/daily job dock et
Intimati on of stores issued
Dispatch i ntimation
Follow-up and real iz ation of pay ments
Pre-s peci fie d reporting to managers thr ough pr oper channel
Maintenance of rec ord s and keeping s peci men copy of each j ob done by the press

Figure 3. Standard Press Management Routine Flow Chart

t

t

t
t

14

(materials and machinery), financial and
h u m a n re sources par tic u larly un d e r
con strained con di tions
Minimizes the possibility of any kind of
dispute between the printer and its client
regarding specifications of job, colour, print
quality and quantity of the job pro duced, etc.
In creases the ef fi ciency of out put in terms of
print quality and reliability, achieve maj o r
improvements in productivity
Pro vides high qual ity ser vice to cus tom ers.
Achieves targets and schedule, timely and
eas ily, in terms of over all profit and re duc tion
in time and cost

t Ensures the optimum utilization of various

forms and doc u ments usu ally main tained by
the print ing press with re gard to pro duc tion,
quality con trol and bill ing, etc.
t Pro vides full se cu rity to pil fer age of all kinds

in the press. No raw ma te rial, semi-finished
or fin ished job can leave the press with out
be ing prop erly re corded as per the laid down
procedure
t Helps to keep complete information with a
specimen copy of each job done by the
press
t Keeps a check on the in ven tory and en sures
timely availabil ity of the raw materials
re quired for var i ous jobs
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23 (3)

consumables
suppliers,
maintenance
engineers, etc. The processed standard press
management routine is also stored in memory
awaiting future use. The bar code system can
also be used for information entry as well as
for development of the computer-aided MIS
for printing presses. (Figure 4).

t Keeps the man age ment well in formed about

the in ter nal per for mance, work po si tion and
sta tus of each and ev e r y job be i n g
un der taken by the press.
In other words, we may accept that
printing can be a very efficient, economical,
expedient and interesting process if a good
interactive information system is followed
throughout. To improve the customer service
and to remove other possible inconveniences
to print buyers and printers, MIS can prove a
boon to any printing press.

The computer-aided MIS receives data,
process it and output the information based
on data according to the given instructions.
However, the input does not arise all of a
sudden but the data is collected automatically
through a network of computers, linked to an
organisation’s central database unit, as soon
as it is known rather than at the end of a
specific time frame. This ‘real time’ collection
of data (from computers being used at the
productive and non-productive departments)
greatly enhances the printing press’s ability to
assess the status of any particular operation
and correct problems as they occur. But the
data like the details of client, information of
inventory, job status, operating costs and
other expenses related to a specific job etc.,
can be gathered at the end of a shift or a work
day.

5. COMPUTER-AIDED PRINT MIS
The computer-aided print MIS system is
basically a computerised man-machine
system that produces information for use in
managerial
problem
solving
and
decision-making in day-to-day activities of
printing business. The accurate and timely
information,
that
is
the
heart
of
computer-aided
MIS,
after
specific
comparisons, is utilised to lay down valuable
standard press management routine having
certain functions that are of vital importance to
the printing press for improving their interface
with the outer environment viz print buyers,

Inpu t
Physi cal
Co mponents

Proced ures

Progr ams

I nstruc ti ons

Instructi on s

Pro cessin gF unction
In terface

Data

Peop le

Infor matio n
Comparator

I nfor m ation

Computer

Data Stora ge

Phy sicalC omponen ts

Com pu ter-aid ed P rint
MIS f or Printin g P resses
Stan dard Pr ess
Manage ment Ro utin e

Pr inting Pres s

Prepress
Press

Press

Post

Im proved Int erf acew i thoutere nvi ronment

Figure 4. Computer-aided Print MIS Components Model for Printing Presses
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(3)

15

For example, a printer can keep track of
the kind and quantity of paper, printing ink
and other consumables used for a particular
job, and the inventory conditions for the
same. The computer-aided print MIS system
will alert the press management when
inventory of particular paper, printing ink or
consumables runs low, so that the orders can
be placed accordingly.

changes in the organisation, its policies or in
its need for information. Such change is then
fed back to the system development process
and a new information system is developed.
Hence, systems are developed, used,
modified, and redeveloped as per the
requirements. No doubt, there cannot be a
single, universally best and applicable system
in the world (Figure 5).

The advantage of the computer-aided print
MIS system is that whatever information is
known about a particular job is available
immediately. Thus the customer service
representative of the printing press, in
response to print buyer’s queries, can look up
all aspects of customer related information
like quotations, invoices and the status of any
printing job instantly on the computer screen
and tell the print buyer about the job progress,
whether there have been any delays, and
when the job can be completed and delivered.
The computer-aided print MIS system also
greatly reduce the amount of paper work to
be done by functionaries at each individual
department/work-station, thus making data
entry faster and accurate.

The growth path of the system is exactly in
tune with the growth path you anticipate for
your business. This long-term expandability
and modification feature in development
process particularly appeals to the printing
presses, which already use computer-aided
print MIS system and mostly have recurring
and generalised print jobs. For example, the
job data entered about the job as it passes
through the press can be compared to the
original estimate and used to update the
estimating information so that estimates are
more accurate and can more closely reflect
the actual cost to the printing press of
producing the job. Thus the computer-aided
print MIS system can provide the type of
accurate information needed to continually
update and correct the standard press
management routine.

6. REDEVELOPABLE SYSTEM
DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
The development process produces an
information system that is useful for a period
of time. At some point, there may be certain

7. E-COMMERCE VS PRINTING
The possibility of applications of
e-commerce in printing business is wide

Busi nes s
N ee d

S yste m
De ve lopment
Process

I nform ation
Sys tem

P rinting
Press

Business
C hange

Improved
interface
with
outer
envir onment

Feedbac k

Figure 5. Redevelopable System Development Process for Continuously Changing
Printing Business
16

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23 (3)

depending upon the timeliness, urgency,
reach and economy, etc. Through internet,
printing jobs could be registered. Presses can
quote and negotiate the final price. Printing
business can be managed more effectively,
boosting communications with clients,
preventing hold-ups in printing and delivery
schedules, and keeping employees better
informed. Further, not only the print buyers
can provide the specifications of jobs to be
printed to the printer through e-commerce but
also they can transmit the manuscript over
e-mail or design sent as ZIP file. Proofs can
also be cleared and ‘OK’ on the computer
itself. Other attractions include monitoring
jobs in progress, viewing documentation of
past jobs for easy reference, the ability to
order or re-orders, making amendments and
specifying schedules. Possible role of
e-commerce in printing may be marketing and
trading with existing customers, giving
customers the facility to produce catalogue for
a client with product images, and capturing
new business, etc. Last but not the least, the
e-commerce
companies,
like
Xerox
Corporation’s
ePartners
programme,
printeurope.com,
print-packaging.com,
printchannel.com,
printingenquiry.com,
kagaz.com, internationalprinterpublisher.com,
print-times.com, agencyfaqs.com, etc., can
add advertising and promotional value to the
press, thereby securing them more and more
business, relieving printers as well as print
buyers from various chase-up actions.

8. COMPUTER-AIDED PRINT MIS
SYSTEMS SUPPLIERS
There are few companies offering MIS for
printing presses. Some of these organisations
are as under:
Atex Media Solutions offers Omnex, the
content and information management solution
for news. The other product from Atex is
Prestige, an editorial solution with integrated
and structured workflow for flexible,
customizable
and
open
solution
for
management. It also offers Classified
Pagination for producing complex, high
volume classified sections, which performs
advertisement
layout,
placement
and
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(3)

production of classified pages for newspapers
at an incredible speed. Optichrome provides
range of technology modules for estimating,
production scheduling and so on.
California-based Impresse Corporation,
co-founded by Siva Kumar and headed by
Nimish Mehta, offers impresse.com, an online
print procurement solution to streamline the
tasks like project specification, quoting,
proofing, and production management to
reporting and billing. Tharstern International’s
Online Estimate Enquiry enables the printer’s
customers to request a quotation directly via
the internet by inputting order information.
This system is dedicated to estimating,
costing, scheduling, shop floor data collection,
stock, and finished goods, etc. Shuttleworth
offers Shuttleworth Print Management
System. This 32 bit Windows package is a
fully integrated system built on a powerful
rational database called Progress. SolPrint
releases the SolPrintXN suite of modules,
which allow customers, suppliers or staff
direct access to SolPrint via the internet.
Features include quote requests, estimate
reviews, job raising, monitoring of stock levels
and call-off order entry.
Prism Business Solutions features Prism
Win System with production management and
QTMS modules, which provides immediate
feedback of data from pressroom equipment
to the system. Established 12 years ago,
Isys’s Keren system offers facilities for
quoting, estimating, order entry, purchase
order processing, and a range of production
tasks from proof tracking through to the
control of finished goods. Imprint Business
Systems unveils Print Master Management
Information System for the printing and
packaging industry. Data Design Services
Limited offers ACCURA, the 32 bit windows
print management system. DiMS! system
organises print development, selling, and
implementation,
the
true
end-to-end
management information solution.
LLS Technics’s Winprint estimating and
MIS system includes integrated modules
which print job tickets, deal with costing, print
invoices, send accounting details to
accounting packages, and control paper and
17

other raw materials. Vaccumatic unveils its
Provin live data collection system. Linked to
on-machine counting hardware, it provides
real time data direct from the press.
Window-base MIS from Cabbell Computers
covers everything from job scheduling to
estimating and carton designing.
Future
Solutions
of
Kingston-upon-Thames offers Solprint, a 32
bit Windows product, whereas Software
Technetics offers Milpara open system.
Optimus 2020, the latest version of
Optichrome Computers System Limited, that
exploits most up-to-date technologies and
computer architectures, to provide a print MIS
that can track the status of print jobs from
enquiry to invoice, provide market analysis,
and also allow even closer links with both
suppliers and clients, via the internet.
Optimus 2020’s high performance and
scalability is fully realized when used with Sun
Microsystems platform. Among other print
MIS include Sanderson, Focus Advantage,
Pecas Vision, Pics, Print Café, Printsmith, and
Printcost for windows, etc.
Another valuable and beneficial tool to the
printers is CIP3/CIP4 that is a Switzerland
based
international
body
known
as
International Cooperation for processes in
Pre-press, Press and Post-press. Recently
CIP4 replaced CIP3, by adding the fourth ‘P’
of ‘Processes’. Today the need of the hour in
the printing sector is integration between the
MIS and CIP3/CIP4. The Job Definition
Format (JDF) in the CIP4 is prepared to
include details of the pre-press, press,
post-press and delivery functions pertaining to
any print job and Job Management Format
(JMF). Among the emerging software
systems that taps the potential of CIP4’s JDF,
a job ticket specification that has information
in a standardized format, are Heidelberg’s
Prinect, KBA’s Opera, Komori’s K-Station, and
MAN Roland’s PECOM (Process Electronic
Control Organisation and Management).

9. BRIEF DETAIL OF PRINTING
PRESS USING PRINT MIS
Colin Clapp Limited, a Hertfordshire UK
based printing company, manages its entire
18

production process by Optichrome Computer
Systems Limited’s (OCSL) Optimus 2020
MIS. The company is an innovative printing
and direct mail specialist having high quality
4-, 5- and 6-colour Heidelberg printing
presses. The company has also developed a
complete direct mail facility, providing an
integrated ‘disk to door’ service, including
electronic repro, laser printing, litho printing,
inline ink-jetting, data processing, attaching,
finishing and fulfilment mailing.
Running on a powerful Sun Microsystems
Enterprise 250 server, the Optimus 2020
system integrates continually updated
information from production, sales and
accounts departments of the company,
yielding faster responses and accurate
scheduling. The Sun server provides a highly
reliable and stable environment for the
Optimus 2020 system. It enables rapid
generation of accurate estimates with storage
of historical data and comprehensive estimate
reporting function. This print MIS also have
the ability to link the company’s two sites - the
print shop and the mailing house, to share
data in order to compare print jobs, compare
prices, report on progress and so forth. Both
the printing site and the mailing house have
their own databases in Optimus 2020. Further
collecting the data remotely via the Remote
Data Collection Module, the company has
eliminated manual time sheets for 150
personnel
and
reduced
data
input
administration,
whilst
providing
up-to-the-minute information on the progress
of jobs in the company, together with accurate
information on costs incurred for each job.
Recently, Colin Clapp Limited has added a
link for its Sage accounting programme to the
Optimus 2020 system, to enable all of the
data required for the company’s invoices to
be generated in 2020 and transferred into
Sage. This has speeded up the invoicing
process, by feeding all of the necessary
information, including technical specifications,
prices and costs directly into Sage, and
enabling the invoices to be printed,
eliminating the need for each one to be typed
by hand.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23 (3)

Sun Enterprise 250 server, the main
hardware/software requirement for Optimus
2020 MIS, can be easily upgraded to
accommodate future growth, whilst still
providing the highest level of reliability and
availability.

CONCLUSION

1.
2.

3.

MIS technology is all about providing
management control over the day-to-day
operations of printing business. Absolute
control is rarely possible, but a good
computer-aided print MIS system removes
many of the variables, minimizing the risks of
sudden and unexpected problems and shocks
to the corporate system. The perfect system
does not exist, but any system claiming to
provide control over commercial functions
should at least be able to efficiently produce
and estimate jobs. It should also be able to
link estimating and accounting, produce
reports in any format you like, being readily
and inexpensively ungradable, and being
secure, particularly if the system is used
across multiple sites.
It is important to understand that
coordinating and controlling printing business
is more than just performing the production
tasks of running a printing press or operating
a printing machine. Planning of whole print
production requires not only a thorough
understanding of production but it also
demands functionaries having multiple skills
beyond the reproduction of text and images
on paper by ink.

Contributors:

REFERENCES

4.

Sarkar, N. N. Art and production. Sagar
Publications, New Delhi, 2002. 67-97.
Adams, Faux & Rieber. Printing
technology. Delmar Publishers Inc., U.S.,
2002. 559-77.
Hills, Philip J. Information management
systems. Ellis Horwood Ltd., U.K., 2002.
Basandra, S. K. Computers for managers
Global Business Press, New Delhi, 1998.
203-45.

5.

O’Brien, James A. Management
information systems. Ed. 4. Tata McGraw
Hill Publishing Company Limited, New
Delhi, 2000.

6.

Singh, H. K. Management of marketing
information system. 2000.

7.

Mohan, P. Management information
system and computer application. 2000.
Exhibitors’ guide of PIRA MIS show 2003
and MIS 2003 expo, UK.

8.
9.

The abc of MIS. Print & Publishing
Magazine, Oct./Nov. 2002, 26.
10. Print & Publishing Magazine, Feb./Mar.
2002, 27-28.
11. http://www.optimus2020.com
12. http://www.globalprint.com
13. http://www.uk.sun.com
14. http://www.printcafe.com
15. http://www.dotprint.com

Shri Parveen Gupta is Senior Technical Assistant ‘A’ at Defence Scientific
Information and Documentation Centre (DESIDOC), Metcalfe House, Delhi-54.
Shri J. V. Ramakrishna is Scientist ‘C’ at DESIDOC, Metcalfe House, Delhi-54.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(3)

19

