DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 23, No.4, July 2003, pp. 19-26
© 2003, DESIDOC

Multimedia and Data Transfer Technology: The
Challenges and Delivery
M Natarajan
Abstract
This article deals with multimedia data, which combines basic functions with high
quality graphics, sound, video and animation and definitions of multimedia. Also
deals with multimedia characteristics, network technology – Ethernet,
Provisioning and ATM, bandwidth needs and multimedia networking along with
data transfers protocols. Right issues for multimedia content like ownership,
general right issues, use of photographs, film clips, music works have been
discussed. Also multimedia delivery has been discussed with applications of
multimedia. Several implications of bandwidth for large transmission have been
explained. Multimedia applications are also highlighted in this article along with
the patent issues for multimedia products.

1. INTRODUCTION
In every area of information technology
computing, communications and content,
there has been tremendous development
over the last decade. In the area of content,
the society is witnessing the growth both in
size and in number of massive public and
private databases – bibliographic first, then
numeric and now multimedia. This boom is
principally technology driven, which arises
from the development of optical disc
technology, the availability of high quality
graphics and imaging, developments in
networking and the falling cost of computing
power and storage capacity. In the area of
communications, there has been enormous
development
in
electronic
digital
communications
via
which
multimedia
information can be transmitted worldwide at
an incredible speed. Also seen the
convergence
of
all
new
information
technologies with conventional media.
Information seekers are no longer satisfied
with only print based information. One desires
to have the information in any form viz. text,
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(4)

data, still image, motion picture and sound.
Multimedia systems are applied to a broad
range of applications from education to
entertainment and specialized systems for
military, research and other purposes. This
article deals with the data transfer technology
and the bandwidth requisites and the
challenges for LIS professionals.

2. DEFINITIONS
Multimedia systems combine the digital
form of images, graphics, audio, electronic
signals or video and hypertext with traditional
text data.
Multimedia is more than the text and
simple graphics of a regular computer. It
combines basic functions with high-quality
graphics, sound, video, and animation all in
one computer. Multimedia is ideal for things
like presentations. Instead of making
black-and-white printouts, for example, one
can present information on-screen using
colour video and graphics accompanied by
sound.

19

The working definition of multimedia is as
follows:
‘Hypermedia extends the hypertext
concept to non-linear and non-sequential links
of textual material to all forms of material that
may be digitally encoded for storage and
retrieval through computer-based systems,
including images, sound, graphics and
animation. Thus, multimedia refers to a
synthesis of text, data, graphics, animation,
optical storage, image processing and sound.
Clearly, multimedia technology is not a single
technology and there is no single product or
definable market. It emphasizes technology
integration. (Chen, June 1989a; Nov 1989a).

3. CHARACTERISTICS OF
MULTIMEDIA
Multimedia can be as simple as a few
images with some accompanying text to a
multimedia presentation using video clips,
sound,
images,
animation
and
text.
Multimedia files use a lot of data when in a
digital format. Video is the most demanding. A
PAL signal when digitised can require a data
rate of 170 Mbps. Audio is less demanding
but still requires 1.3 Mbytes for a 1 minute clip
using a Sound Blaster Pro system at 22 kHz
sampling rate. Still images require and use
more space proportional to their size.
Synchronisation of sound and video are
important. Sound is likely to brake up if parts
of it are lost or delayed in storage or
transmission.
To
accommodate
these
characteristics, techniques used by the
telecommunication
networks
include
compression of data and methods of timing
the transmission and replay of multimedia.
Data networks and computers have been built
in a different way (they are asynchronous) to
telephone and TV networks (which are
isochronous).

4. NETWORK TECHNOLOGY
Multimedia computers common features
include CD-ROM playback, audio processing,
front-panel access for most audio connections
and a set of loudspeakers. It should be
assumed that many peripherals are required
for multimedia data and its transfer. The first
20

step to optimized input/output performance is
choosing the right networking technology for
the application. Some applications need raw
available bandwidth, while others need
dedicated bandwidth. When the network
becomes congested, packets can be
dropped. Servers are forced to retransmit
data to clients, further congesting the network
and degrading performance. Having the right
amount of networking bandwidth and being
able to allocate it as needs dictate is crucial.
The appropriate configuration is critical to
meeting the needs of the application, whether
it is transmitting small or large packets.
Ethernet - With a wide range of capabilities,
such as ease of connectivity and a stable
installed base, ethernet is ubiquitous,
inexpensive and easy to deploy. Available in
10Mbps, 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) and 1Gbps
(Gigabit Ethernet), with future trends
promising 10Gbps, Ethernet provides a
scalable
platform
on
which
many
environments can succeed.
Provisioning - Sometimes a source of
strength can also be a failing. While
ethernet’s single fat pipe approach enables
high performance for single applications, it
prohibits multiple applications from sharing
bandwidth simultaneously. As a result,
applications may have to get in line to send
data. This dilemma can be solved by
provisioning - allocating bandwidth, setting
priorities and bounding delays. Ethernet
supports this capability only with additional
software, while ATM supports it natively.
Understand the alternatives and associated
overhead and make appropriate trade-offs.
ATM - A network technology based on cell
switching, ATM uses small, fixed-sized cells
and high-bandwidth, low-latency switches.
ATM can deliver approximately the same
performance as Gigabit Ethernet for many
data centre applications. This technology
offers a deterministic quality of service and
the mixture of multimedia data. ATM enables
the network to be tailored to the application.
ATM LAN interfaces are available at 155Mbps
and 622Mbps.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23 (4)

4.1

Bandwidth Needs

Simply selecting a networking technology
and topology is not enough. Maximizing the
effective bandwidth is essential to ensure that
servers
can
adequately
supply
the
organization with information and resources.
Most networks transfer information using
TCP/IP, a protocol that supplies a logical
client/server communications structure that
transparently
handles
inter-process
communication details. The protocol of choice
for the internet and intranet, TCP/IP consists
of a network layer (IP) and a transport layer
(TCP).
These
layers
have
unique
characteristics and limitations that need to be
considered when maximizing bandwidth. The
transport layer limits the TCP packet size to
the maximum network interface frame size to
avoid fragmentation.
There are many techniques that one can
use to reduce the problem, in case of limited
bandwidth, which are as follows:
Compression is one easy solution for the
limited bandwidth. One can apply even
data-specific compression eg. Still pictures
can be compressed with JPEG, Wavelet
compression or GIF. Moving pictures can be
compressed with MPEG, Motion JPEG,
Cinepak or one of the other QuickTime
codecs. Audio can be compressed with
dictionary-based compression algorithms.
Different
users
require
different
compression methods. Video conferencing
must be done in real time so fast encoding
and decoding is needed. Video film
distribution via cable networks, radio or CD is
essentially a playback process, so encoding
is not time critical and decoding should be
easy to implement to reduce consumer costs.
The MPEG standards address these
applications.
Another way to cope with limited
bandwidth is to write programs that take care
not to waste bandwidth. To reduce packet
size, wherever possible Bolo uses bytes
instead of 16-bit or 32-bit words.
A third way to cope with limited bandwidth
is simply to send less data. One can use
lower resolution also.
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(4)

Regardless of the network, higher data
speed may encourage greater take-up of
wireless application protocol (WAP) services
and other forms of mobile content delivery.
Version 2.0 of WAP will include push
capabilities, enabling organisations to use it to
send short message service - style alerts or
other time-sensitive data. It also provides
support for colour and greater use of
multimedia, as well as a wider range of user
interface elements. Use of the Extended
Hypertext Markup Language (XHTML) rather
than the Wireless Markup Language (WML)
for content brings WAP applications closer to
their conventional HTML-based equivalents.
The use of WAP may begin to deliver more
usable applications, both for business and
consumer use, helping some of the original
expectations of WAP.
Use of ISDN is another way of controlling
the limited bandwidth as
q ISDN is scalable, flexible; voice, data &
video traffic are easily accommodated.
q ISDN is not a point-to-point circuit but a
switchable, dial-up circuit via PBX or router.
q ISDN can be folded into current and future
LAN/ WAN technologies.
Also, there are economies of scale due to
the ability to combine voice, data, and video
traffic over the same facilities.

5. MULTIMEDIA NETWORKING
Computer networks were designed to
connect computers on different locations so
that they can share data and communicate.
Animation, voice and video clips become
more and more popular on the Internet.
Multimedia networking products like Internet
telephony, Internet TV, video conferencing
have appeared on the market. Now people
are using multimedia products in distance
learning, distributed simulation, distributed
work groups and other areas.
For multimedia networking one has to
build the hardware and software infrastructure
and application tools to support multimedia
transport on networks so that users can
communicate in multimedia. Multimedia
networking will greatly boost the use of
21

computer as a communication tool and
dramatically change our life in future.

another network hardware and building the
interface between two networks.

5.1

Presently, IP and Ethernet seem to be
more favoured in the desktops and LANs,
with ATM in wide area networks.

Real-Time Challenge

In multimedia networking, one can expect
at least three difficulties, which are as follows:
(a) Compared
with
traditional
textual
applications,
multimedia
applications
usually require much higher bandwidth. A
typical piece of 25-second 320x240
QuickTime movie could take 2.3MB, which
is equivalent to about 1000 screens of
textual data.
(b) Most multimedia applications require the
real-time traffic. Audio and video data must
be played back continuously at the rate
they are sampled. If the data does not arrive
in time, the playing back process will stop
and human ears and eyes can easily pick
up the artifact. In addition to the delay,
network congestion also has more serious
effects on real-time traffic.
(c) Multimedia data stream is usually bursty.
Just increasing the bandwidth will not solve
the burstiness problem. For most
multimedia applications, the receiver has a
limited buffer. If no measure is taken to
smooth the data stream, it may overflow or
underflow the application buffer. When data
arrives too fast, the buffer will overflow and
some data packets will be lost, resulting in
poor quality. When data arrives too slow,
the buffer will underflow and the application
will starve.

5.2

Multimedia over internet

There are other ways to transmit
multimedia data, like dedicated links, cables
and ATM. ATM was said to be the ultimate
solution for multimedia because it supports
very high bandwidth. It is connection-oriented
and can tailor different level of quality of
service to different type of applications.
The well-established LAN and WAN
technologies based on IP protocol suite
connect bigger and bigger networks all over
the world to the internet. Another benefit of
running multimedia over IP is that users can
have integrated data and multimedia service
over one single network, without investing on
22

Multimedia means extremely dense data
and heavy traffic. The hardware has to
provide enough bandwidth.
Multimedia applications are usually related
to multicast, i.e., the same data stream, not
multiple copies, is sent to a group of
receivers. For example, in video conference,
the video data need to be sent to all
participants at the same time. Live video can
be sent to thousands of recipients.
The price tag attached shared network
resources is unpredictable availability. But
real-time applications require guaranteed
bandwidth when the transmission takes place.
So there must be some mechanisms for
real-time applications to reserve resources
along the transmission path.
Internet is a packet-switching data network
where packets are routed independently
across shared networks. The current
technologies cannot guarantee that real-time
data will reach the destination without being
jumbled and jerky. Some new transport
protocols must be used to take care of the
timing issues so that audio and video data
can be played back continuously with correct
timing and synchronization.
There should be some standard
operations for applications to manage the
delivery and present the multimedia data.

6. RIGHTS ISSUES IN MULTIMEDIA
CONTENT
(a) ‘Ownership’ may not be enough
Even the outright purchase of a portfolio of
works, such as motion pictures, may not
provide the right of unrestricted use of the
contents of such works in multimedia
products. An assignment of all right, title and
interest in a copyrighted work, i.e., a transfer
of ownership, may leave residual rights to be
dealt with such as:

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23 (4)

q

Moral rights such as the right to prevent
changes to a work that could harm the
author’s reputation or honour

q

Payments may be required for reuse rights
under production agreements or group
contracts

q

Music sound track rights are a property
separate from a movie itself

(b) General rights issues
The general legal rule in copyright
licensing is to assume that the owner
reserves any right not expressly granted in
the license language. If the right is needed it
should be expressly included in the license
language. The commercial rights needed for
multimedia content may include copying, in
whole or part; performance rights; public
display rights; the preparation of derivative
works (modifications); and publication and
distribution by any variety of methods on all
media whether now known or invented
hereafter.
Content providers known as ‘stock houses’
and media libraries are an alternative to
obtaining the rights to specific works through
rights clearance agencies. The ‘stock houses’
maintain libraries of video clips, photographs,
illustrations, music and sound effects that can
be licensed for use in a multimedia product.

the photograph: minimum size, resolution,
number of copies, time period, etc. Thus, a
developer of a multimedia product may need
to negotiate with the photographer to obtain
rights to the photograph.
(e) Use of film clips
Films and related works are loosely
divided into motion pictures and other films.
Film libraries other than commercial motion
pictures often have fee schedules for
traditional uses of content. Thus, special
negotiations may be required to cover the
exact usage in the multimedia product.
(f) Use of music works
Music encompasses a number of different
licensing rights. The good news is that
procedures and policies for obtaining rights to
use a musical composition are well
established. It is also usually clear who owns
the rights being sought. The bad news is that
one normally has to negotiate with several
different parties to obtain all needed rights for
use as multimedia content.
q

q

(c) Use of literary and other written works
The Copyright Clearance Centre, Inc.
(’CCC’) was established primarily to protect
the rights of owners of printed materials
against unauthorized photocopying. The CCC
collects and distributes royalties to publishers.
The CCC has also begun to address the
electronic use of printed works protected by
copyright. Thus, the CCC could be a
candidate for the administrator of the
multimedia clearinghouse.
(d) Use of photographs
A book may also contain photographs of
interest to the developer of a multimedia
product. A publisher of a work that contains a
photograph may have only a one-time use
right rather than outright ownership of the
photograph. The publication agreement may
also impose additional restrictions on use of
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(4)

q

A mechanical license is needed for the right
to make and distribute material objects in
which a recording of a musical composition
is embodied such as a record, tape or CD.
A synchronization license is needed to
authorize the synchronization of a musical
composition with visual images of a
multimedia work. No compulsory license is
available for this right. Rights must be
obtained through a clearing agency.
Another exclusive right of the owner of a
musical composition is to control public
performances. A multimedia product may
need a public performance license.

7. MULTIMEDIA DELIVERY AND
APPLICATIONS
The main problem with multimedia data is
just delivering it where needed. Because of its
bulkiness, multimedia is often best archived at
a few sites and retrieved from there. That can
entail logistical problems in delivering all
those bits efficiently since networks are
generally optimized for text data. Multimedia
delivery systems are being explored for digital
23

multimedia libraries, video meetings, video
medicine, distance learning, multimedia mail
and interactive television.
Multimedia delivery is typically intensive in
input/output and communications resources
as opposed to processor resources. Network
architectures and software need to be
optimized for large transmission ‘bandwidth’
(bits per second). This has several
implications:
q

System architectures should be chosen for
fast input/output. Parallel ports are
desirable (although not currently common).

q

Star and fully connected topologies are
desirable. That may only be feasible with
local-area networks for many applications.

q

Switches should be preferred to routers on
network connections since the routers have
lower bandwidth and higher delays.

q

Experimentation with the packet size for
multimedia data may improve performance
since the best size is hard to predict.

q

Data-compression techniques should be
used where possible to minimize the
necessary bandwidth; typical compression
ratios range from 2:1 for audio to 20:1 for
images and 50:1 for video.

q

Caching of frequently used data can help
efficiency, but not all multimedia
applications so benefit. A simple and
popular alternative to caching is a CD-ROM
optical disk at the end-user site containing
commonly needed media data.

7.1

Real-time multimedia delivery

Many multimedia applications have
real-time constraints, such as those delivering
audio and video and those supporting
real-time simulations. But bandwidth over
networks is a problem. A single MPEG-1
compressed video of current television-picture
quality needs around 2 megabits per second
(though video conferencing and video
interviews can be adequate with less);
compact-disk music audio requires 1.4
megabits/second. Standard (ISDN) telephone
lines
provide
0.064
megabits/second,
nowhere near adequate for either (though
several lines can be used in parallel, what is
24

called ‘bonding’). Without careful design there
can be serious problems in quality of service
in real-time multimedia delivery, problems
suggesting negotiation both beforehand and
in real time.

7.2 Multimedia Applications
Networked multimedia applications will
give users the possibility to interact all kind of
media like text, graphics, images, audio,
video and animation. When adding network to
connect users it has the capabilities to new
merging applications. When added to the
networked multimedia environment where
telephone, computer, television, publishing,
education, movie and consumer electronics
industries are converging to the new digital
information industry and provide new ways to
use telephones, computers, televisions and
all kind of home electronics. It offers new
possibilities to interact and cooperate.
Using together the internet and the world
wide web, mobile phones, high resolution TV,
high quality VCR and DVD, one can draw a
light glimpse what the future can offer when
converging of different media will continue
and the network speed and bandwidth will
increase. Also when one interacts with the
large screen, it gives the natural
three-dimensional space, the virtual reality.
The multimedia applications provide to
interact the proper media and to be
connected to other people so that one can
share ideas, thoughts and create new ones.
Collaboration and sharing ideas is ideal for
developing new products and services and
rearranging processes to create better new
flexible and virtual environments. Interaction
will increase our pleasure. Different kinds of
entertainment, edutainment, infotainment and
sociotainment applications and products are
coming.
The interactive networked multimedia (e.g.
internet/intranets/extranets)
is
a
good
expedient to come closer to customers and to
penetrate deeply into customer’s processes,
so that people can make productive
co-operation. These products and services
bring added value to customers, which
creates totally new services to new media
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23 (4)

business.
The
deregulation
of
telecommunication and digitalisation will burst
new operators and end-user customers.
Networked multimedia offers us interaction by
sending and receiving multimedia e-mails.
Multimedia products demand is for
educating students and training employees in
classrooms those are remote from teachers.
There is also demand for accessing a wide
variety of movies, sports, news, and other
video programming at times that users select,
along with the demand for business video
conferences. Customers will use and pay for
multimedia only if it provides better solutions
at lower costs than available alternatives.
Relatively few multimedia solutions now have
higher quality and lower cost than alternative
solutions.
From a user’s point of view, an application
is everything that user sees of both the
software and the hardware, including the
delivery network and any other support
services. Programs should be build-in to help
a user navigate through the author’s media
(besides tables of contents and indexes that
merely assist page flipping).
A successful multimedia application must
be both economical and easy to use.

9. PATENT ISSUES
Patents are also important intellectual
property in multimedia products even when
the primary element is copyrighted content.
There are many patent issues and potential
disputes involving compression technology. In
addition, while MPEG is an open compression
standard, it is still proprietary and it remains to
be seen if there will be adequate cooperation
to achieve licensing at reasonable royalty
rates. There may also be patented processes
for presentation or retrieval that must be
embedded in the content itself. Even if
clearances are obtained for copyrighted
content, the process of presenting that
content as part of a multimedia product could
infringe a patent. Content developers will
have to deal with this issue.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23(4)

CONCLUSION
Digitized multimedia data such as images,
video, and audio is rapidly becoming
commonplace and will soon replace
conventional alphanumeric data as the
primary data format. New techniques are
needed to access, manage and search these
new multimedia data types. This article has
given an overall idea of the multimedia; data
types and data transfer methods available
with the rights for multimedia content. Library
and information professionals should take
these as a challenge and act upon to the
latest developments on multimedia data
transfer. The expectations of the current
technology
of
integrated
multimedia
information system inevitably greatly expand
the traditional system and functions and have
increased sharply information access for its
users.
A comprehensive information system of
tomorrow will be one of that is evolving far
beyond a text and/or data base system. It will
definitely be multimedia with capabilities for
non-sequential linking of not only related, but
also non-related information sources.

REFERENCES
1.

Chen, Ching-Chih. The challenge to
library and information professionals in
the visual information age. 45th FID
Conference, 18–21 September 1990,
Havana, Cuba.

2.

Flickner, F. Understanding networked
multimedia: Applications and technology.
Prentice-Hall International, UK, 1995.

3.

Multimedia i.t.magazine, July 1995, 27.

4.

Paul,
Andre.
The
future
of
communication formats. National Library
News, January 1997, 29(1).

5.

Rowe, Neil C. Multimedia systems.

6.

Special issue on Distributed Multimedia
Systems and Technology. IEEE Journal
on selected areas in communications,
September 1996, 14(7).

7.

What’s multimedia? Computers Today.
July 1995, 50–63.
25

8.

www.celeom.com.my/fixedservices

10. www.davidfincher.net/multimedia.htm

9.

www.cs.ucl.ac.uk/staff/jon/mmbook/book/
book.html

11. www.networkmagazineindia.com/200104/
access1.htm
12. www.oxsemi.com/articles/art001.html

Contributor:

Shri M Natarajan, Scientist, NISCAIR Regional Centre, Chennai – 600 113.
e-mail: m_natarajan@hotmail.com

Re a d e rs’ Fo ru m
Dear Readers
We welcome the readers of DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology (DBIT).
We intend to start a column entitled ‘Readers’ Forum’ in which the comments and
suggestions of the readers regarding the coverage, quality of papers and other
aspects of DBIT will be published.
This will help in further improving the bulletin and making it more educative and
interesting.
Readers of DBIT are invited to write to the Editor, DBIT on aspects mentioned
above. They can send their comments by e-mail also at dirdesidoc@vsnl.net

— Editor

26

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2003, 23 (4)

