DESIDOC  Bulletin of Information Technology , Vol. 23, No.5, September 2003, pp. 3-11 
© 2003, DESIDOC 
Networks, Digital Libraries and Knowledge 
Management: Trends & Developments 
Maitrayee Ghosh & Ashok Jambekar 
Abstract 
The work culture in libraries has changed due to the growth of computer networks and the World Wide Web. The growth of interest in knowledge management (KM) has essentially been contemporary with that of intranets/extranets. It is no longer sufficient for libraries to depend solely on having sufficient access to internal and external information resources but to efficiently exploit what the system actually knows—not only what it owns. The successful implementation of KM is that people will share what they know and reuse the know how of others; from this perspective, paper examines the changing role and core competencies required for information professionals specially as a chief knowledge officer (CKO). It also focuses on the vision, strategy and appropriate mind set required for successful implementation without  which knowledge management can become an empty slogan.  
1. INTRODUCTION  
Knowledge management (KM) has rapidly moved beyond the stage of a fad and has established itself as a key part of many library’s knowledge strategy. The concept of knowledge-based economy has generated tremendous interest now-a-days. A library’s status is no longer defined by the collection it housed, it is extended to include online and seamless access to information resources. The right amount of information at the right time has long since been an important factor for all kinds of libraries. But only to focus on storage and systematization is insufficient in today’s highly competitive age. Information must also be quality controlled according to the actual needs of the users and incorporated into the relevant databases. KM encompasses an overarching strategy aimed at exposing and taking advantage of an organization’s information, experience and expertise to serve patrons better and respond  quickly to their changing information needs. As more and more information becomes 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2003, 23(5) 
available because institutions are increasingly  competing to demonstrate who has made available the most comprehensive range of information in right time to right users. There is no doubt that KM has become increasingly important for the libraries to fulfill the users demand. 
There has been a spate of workshop sessions and even full-fledged workshops, magazine articles and journal papers on KM in the country over the past few years. Information retrieval and document management software have been retagged and promoted as KM tools. Conferences that previously went under the banner of information management have now become KM conferences.  
The  69th  IFLA general conference and council to be held in Berlin, Germany during August 2003 has included KM as a sub-theme. Today’s large and varied information repositories present challenges for both users and suppliers. The increasingly  
3 

========1========

widespread idea of ‘digital libraries’ implies that users can get all the information they need right at their desks, whether it’s from multimedia databases, distributed web resources, or traditional libraries. Librarians and libraries are now struggling to find a place  amidst tradition and change while dealing with  users’ growing and changing needs as well as  information access, storage and retrieval. 
Efficiency, accuracy and consistency can all be improved through effective KM because  it enables distributed teams to publish, search, apply and share information across organisational, geographic and political boundaries. 
2. CHARACTERISTICS & BASIC 
FRAMEWORK 
KM is defined by one consulting firm as a discipline that promotes an integrated approach to identifying, capturing, evaluating, retrieving and sharing all of an enterprise’s information assets. KM encompasses a very broad range of perspectives. In particular, it deals with the complexities and nuances of human intellectual process, including tacit knowledge, learning and innovating processes, communication cultures, values and intangible assets. It also recognizes the subjective, interpretive and dynamic nature of knowledge and the same time embraces the dramatic developments in information technology and seeks to bring their benefits effectively to the organization. 
Ioana Rus and Mikael Lindvall mentioned “KM is unique because it focuses on the individual as an expert and as the bearer of important knowledge that he or she can systematically share with an organisation. KM  supports not only the know-how of a company, but also the know where, know who, know what, know when and know why.”7 2.1 Knowledge Management 
System  
It is a value added intranet with facilities to search and identify captured knowledge or identify experts who have knowledge in the area users are looking for. The KM system also helps to establish contact with the expert 
4 
and to have a dialogue with them. It captures and makes available the transcripts of such discussion whether they have on chat or e-mail. The approach in building KM system would vary in different libraries. 
2.1.1 Knowledge Architecture 
In their book, Wayne Applehans & associates18  mentioned the term ‘Knowledge Architecture’. They said knowledge architecture represents organisation’s formal recognition that it has important experience and expertise which it must preserve and use to its advantage. It encompasses three components: 
³ People 
³ Content 
³ Technology 
Knowledge architecture brings these components together into a powerful working relationship. KM is making practical use of knowledge to accomplish any organizational objective through the structuring of people, technology and knowledge content. 
Managing knowledge means blending each of the components into a cohesive unit whose main purpose is to understand the important content necessary to meet objectives, the key people who are the supplier and user of the content and the technologies appropriate to meet the KM objective. (Figure 1) 
2.2  Knowledge Base 
Developing knowledge base for libraries requires encapsulation of knowledge into databases and effectively putting it into information format. There are several ways in which conventional databases of libraries can be made more useful through addition of more ‘knowledge base’ ingredients: q Adding contextual information to individual 
entries ( where was this information used?) q Validating the quality of the information 
(commentary should be added by users on 
its relevance, accuracy and helpfulness) q Providing clear navigation aids (users be 
able to navigate quickly to areas of interest) q Using a thesaurus of terms 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2003, 23(5) 

========2========

Attitudes, Sharing, Innovation, Skills, Team-work Motivation Vision/ Objectives, Organization 
70% 
Peop le 
Content 
20% 
Databases 
Expert 
Intelligence, 
KM Maps 
Technology 
10% 
Networks, Data Mining & Analysis Decisiontools Automation, Standards 
Figure 1. Components of a library KM system 
q User oriented information provision, for 
example, Siemens has an engineering 
problem database which the user accesses 
via a hierarchical problem tree 
q Giving details of originators. Users can 
contact contributors directly, e.g. via e-mail, 
hypertext links or ‘click for conversation’ 
icons that automatically dial the 
contributor’s telephone 
q Offering an expert database with pointers to 
people and information on the location of 
experts and expertise. 
Addition of  multimedia material, e.g.,  a visual demonstration of an entry, such as a team at work. Bharat Petroleum uses video clips to illustrate oil rig practice and for interviews with experts. 
3. TECHNOLOGIES FOR 
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
The concept of KM would be less powerful  for organisations without knowledge oriented technologies. Technology’s most valuable role  in KM is extending the reach and enhancing the speed of knowledge transfer. Knowledge engineering, digital networks, the internet and  intranets are not KM but only enabling technologies for managing knowledge. KM technology enables users to simultaneously access internet sites, databases, intranets 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2003, 23(5) 
and other internal/external resources as if the information existed in a single location. 
Improved collaborative technologies enhance person-to-person communication, thus helping in the development of knowledge  across organisational and geographical boundaries. Groupware such as Lotus Notes and the wide spread adoption of intranets and  extranets have helped this process. 
3.1 Intranet and Extranet 
Fundamentally intranets/extranets are phenomenally powerful tools to streamline library services. Information disseminated on an intranet enables a high degree of coherence for the entire library because communications are consistent. By giving information seekers and information providers  the ability to access time critical information, intranets improve the decision making process by empowering individuals with the knowledge necessary for faster and better informed decision making. Intranets allow the centralization of information which makes it easier to maintain and keeps data up-to-date. The extranet further extends the intranet by allowing other libraries on sister organisations  to gain access to selected internal data. Both intranet and extranet provide a facility where people can publish information electronically on library web pages. It is accessible by 
5 

========3========

anyone in the organisation who has access to  the net. It also contains information on the work being conducted within individual sections and often includes details of current projects, results of previous projects and some times ‘home pages of individuals involved in the project. Intranets and extranets fit into the bigger picture of KM. 
There is increased emphasis on the intranet as a collaboration tool that lets users exchange information through discussion groups and other features. (Figure 2) 
3.2  Groupware 
Groupware is essentially a software system that enables users to share information. It has been defined as a technology that communicates and organises unpredictable information. Groupware is not just an extension of traditional library automation system, but its applications are designed to support group-work which require  a different methodology to understand the tacit, invisible aspects of work practices. Some Groupware applications are described here. 
Communication—Groupware applications to  support synchronous communication includes  video conferencing, shared screens/ applications, media spaces and chat. Synchronous application links separate screen and people who interact with each other at the same time. Applications to support asynchronous communication include  e-mail perhaps the most widely used groupware application. 
Knowledge Management Technologies 
To ols 
WebPublishing Tools InternetInformation Server WebServers 
DatabaseConnectors Dynamic WebPage Generators 
Figure 2. Intranets and Extranets in KM 
6 
Meetings—Groupware applications to support meetings include software that captures and organises ideas for brainstorming, summarizing and reporting. Information sharing— this application include discussion databases, bulletin boards and electronic news groups where documents  and their responses are often grouped together under a single keyword making it easier to follow the discussion. Shared e-mail folder, like Microsoft Exchange or web pages built with Netscape, allow people to pull the information they want. Multiple users can thus  share a single piece of information. Online discussion make it easier to share information  with a number of colleagues simultaneously. The online conference is another type of knowledge sharing event. Applications for publishing documents have sometimes also been called groupware. 
Coordinating work processes—  commonly referred to as workflow systems. Workflow system may also include decision support component. 
An intranet provides an ideal platform on which to deploy groupware application. Most groupware applications are now provided as part of an intranet and web-based systems, it is principally designed to benefit and reward the group rather than the individual. 
4. KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
AND DIGITAL LIBRARIES 
Digital revolution has transformed the intellectual function of traditional libraries. 
Collaboration, Connectivity 
Information Distribution 
Intranets/ Extranets 
Publishing, PushServices 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2003, 23(5) 

========4========

Digital libraries are providing the base for a set of distributed activities. It is also providing a one stop solution for speedy delivery in a reliable fashion. 
Libraries are being digitised and patrons demand is growing the concept of content management has been adapted to the library world. More libraries are providing virtual references via the web. (Figure 3) 
5. CORE COMPETENCIES FOR 
KNOWLEDGE MANAGER 
The greatest challenge for the information manager today is to create an organisation that can share knowledge. Quality library services are imperative in knowledge society as it inspires the knowledge workers to be innovative, viz. think globally and design locally. Today information professionals have more opportunities to expand from their traditional role to organise the digital content, especially of getting and filtering available information which the Information professionals are expected to be elevated from managing the corporate information centre to managing corporate knowledge and become chief knowledge officers (CKO) and with greater responsibilities. These aspirations arising out of a belief that information professionals are best suited for 
Library Home Page 
Users 
Online Reference Service 
Profile 
Reports 
Engine 
KnowledgePortal 
Means of Delivery 
the CKO’s job since they already have the basic skills and attitude for such a job. 
The expertise of information professionals in searching for and providing access to explicit knowledge in the form of documents; their skills in understanding clients needs; their knowledge of information sources; and their skills in organising information and developing databases have been core competencies used by organisations. From a KM perspective, these skills are useful in helping professionals internalize explicit knowledge and also in facilitating the combination mode of knowledge conversion. New competencies are required to be developed to cope with the increasing emphasis on KM and several professional bodies such as ALA (American Library Association) and SLA (Special Library Association) have come up with recommendations for this purpose. 
“The core of the professional expertise of information professionals may be said to arise  from a unique confluence of expertise in three  areas, viz. knowledge of information sources, knowledge of users and knowledge of the application of information technologies for the  benefit of users and for the management of information resources”9 
Intranet Server 
Document Repository 
Content Management System 
Personal Knowledge 
Knowledge Source 
Figure 3. Architecture of a library KM system 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2003, 23(5) 
7 

========5========

5.1  Job Description of Chief 
Knowledge Officer (CKO)  t Create a successful KM infrastructure in the 
face of technical, cultural and logistical 
barriers 
t Distribute content, employing 
personalization techniques that meet the 
needs of user communities within and 
across organisational boundaries t Identify high priority content, capture and 
manipulate it 
t Put in place the organisation that will 
manage knowledge that satisfies 
customers, increases profits and decreases 
costs 
t Understand users of the KM system 
t Ensure that the knowledge architecture is 
funded, designed, built and administered 
properly. 
6. CURRENT PROBLEMS AND 
POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS 
A common problem in most KM programs is that individuals do not share their knowledge. Libraries need to apply levers of organisational change over a period of time. The real–world experience suggests that technology can offset or even overcome some cultural disinclination towards KM. 
Libby Ralph stated “Success has come not  through the implementation of ‘one stop’ tool solutions, but through creating an environment in which knowledge sharing and 
Table 1. Potential upsides and possible limitations of KM technology  
Management  functions Planning 
Potential upside 
Captures organizational knowledge and lessons that are often learned and make available for use in an organised and 
systematic manner 
Organising 
Determines patterns of organisation that work best based on domain knowledge. 
Staffing 
Make it easy to identify people with the skills knowledge required to fill open slots 
in the organisational structure 
Directing 
Possible limitations 
Hard to capture lessoned learned 
Users might require an organisation that doesn’t adhere to preferred patterns 
An individuals ability to fit into a team is something that only the people with whom he will work can  fully evaluate 
0 
Make it easy to deduce leadership & 
Leadership and teamwork are 0 
teamwork abilities 
qualities that need to be 
Identifies & streamlines optimal developed not inferred 
communication patterns in the 
organization 
0 
Exploits lessons learned relative to past 
experience 
Controlling 
Creates benchmarks to compare 
performance  
Facilitating 
Identifies linkages between work processes and highlights techniques that improve efficiency and effectiveness. 
Benchmarks might be misleading because they might be based on norms instead of specifics 
Good knowledge manager can facilitate problem solving because they anticipate problems and bring  in experts to work on them 
Source: Adapted from Donald J. Reifer. IEEE Software, 2002, May/June 2002, 15. 
8 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2003, 23(5) 

========6========

innovation thrives, and by tackling cultural or organizational and communication issues. These KM solutions are not packaged, but continually evolve.”11 
6.1 Developing Knowledge 
Sharing Culture 
Although new technology makes sharing easier than ever, organisational cultures might  not promote it. Some cultures even overly encourage individualism and ban cooperative work. Lack of a knowledge culture has been cited as one of the obstacle of successful KM.  If libraries do not foster a sharing culture, users including subject specialist feel possessive about their knowledge and won’t be forthcoming in sharing it. In scientific and technological libraries, the scientists and engineers might not be willing to share negative experiences and lessons learned based on failure because of their negative connotation; So although KM’s purpose is to avoid similar mistakes, users might fear that such information could be used against them. 
A very high proportion of knowledge will always remain tacit. Library system managers  can encourage the full exploitation of tacit knowledge by paying attention to the environment they are creating, by encouraging respect for different thinking styles by understanding the distinction between intelligent failures and stupid mistakes. 
The KM solution therefore majors not on the building and access of knowledge repositories, but on creating the cultural environment and the communication channels  (both facilitated and informal) that will encourage knowledge sharing between individuals. To change an organization’s culture leaders need to undertake two studies: a cultural assessment and a knowledge audit. 
6.1.1 Reward Systems/Incentives for 
Knowledge Sharing 
There must be incentives and demonstration of faith which will encourage knowledge-sharing orientation across the organisation. 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2003, 23(5) 
In Infosys “when a person submits a document to the knowledge shop (K-Shop), it is reviewed by experts selected from people knowledge map. If it is acceptable, K-Shop publishes it; the reviewer and author are rewarded with knowledge currency unit (KCU)”1. The user of the document is encouraged to contribute cash or other gifts to  KCU for the benefits gained. 
Sharing of best practices—many companies save millions of dollars by taking existing knowledge and applying it to similar situation elsewhere. 
6.2  Organisational Infrastructure 
A knowledge sharing culture needs following information technology infrastructure: 
t A distinct virtual space for knowledge 
exchange 
t Content publishing tools that can be 
managed locally 
t Group communications tools appropriate to 
the culture 
t Technical support and tools for local 
reconfiguration of the interface 
t Application integration for ease of use. 6.3 Training  
Training and education programs emphasizing KM and explaining the proper implementation tools are of obvious importance. It is realized that most educational programs are pitched too high or too low and are delivered in class-rooms which may not be the way many people learn. 
7. CONCLUDING REMARKS 
There are a few basic changes that pose challenges to modern libraries towards acquiring and managing larger and larger bodies of knowledge are: globalization, decentralization, customization and acceleration. Modern libraries are dependent on technology, which is highly diversified in their product and services they offer. These factors make decision making extremely difficult. These problems can be overcome with the effective utilisation of traditional resources (manpower, materials and money) 
9 

========7========

as well as information and knowledge resources. That’s where the role of Knowledge managers comes into play. KM is a buzzword turned business phenomenon, may be just the push our profession needs to grab a piece of the spotlight for all our hard work. 
Tony Hooper mentioned in his article “In the context of the New Economy, libraries are businesses, and need to harness their assets-  stakeholders, information and technology to compete and survive… If librarians do not do this, others will and will put libraries out of Business”. 
10 
REFERENCES 
1. Subramanian, Shivam Rama & 
Gokulakrishnan Jagadeesan. Knowledge  
management at Infosys. IEEE Software, 
May-June 2002, 53-55. 
2. Ghosh, Maitrayee. Knowledge 
management in the digital age: 
challenges and opportunities in India. In 
International Conference (Asia-Pacific): 
Challenges and Opportunities for 
Libraries and Information Professionals in  
Knowledge Management, organized by 
Dept of Library Sciences, Faculty of 
Humanities, Chaing Mai University, 
Thailand, 20-22 March 2003, pp. 79-89. 3  Blackmore, Paul. Intranets: 
Considerations for the information 
services.  Information Services and Use , 
17(2), 23. 
4. Haridasan, Sudharma. Knowledge 
management: A new challenge for library 
professionals. Iaslic Bulletin,  1998,  43(4),  
145-47. 
5. Teng, Sharon & Hawamdeh, Suliman. 
Knowledge management in public 
libraries. Aslib Proceedings,  2002,  54(3), 
188-97. 
6. Bansal, Alka. Knowledge management: A  
Review. DESIDOC Bulletin of Information  
Technology, 2000,20(4), 3-9. 
7. Rus, Ioana & Lindvall, Mikael. Knowledge  
management in software engineering. 
IEEE Software, May/June 2002, 26-38. 
10 
8. Streatfield, David & Wilson, Tom. 
Deconstructing knowledge management. 
Aslib Proceedings,  1999,  51(3), 67-71. 9. Wilson, T.D. The nonsense of knowledge 
management.  Information Research, 
2002, 8(1), 1-26. 
10. Hooper, Tony. Management issues for 
the virtual library. The Electronic Library, 
2001, 19 (2), 71-77. 
11. Ralph, Libby. Is knowledge management 
past its sell-by date? Managing 
Information,  2002, 41-42. 
12. Rao, Jayashree N. Knowledge 
management by library and information 
centres.  University News,  2002, 40(44), 
5-11. 
13. Reifer, Donald J. A little bit of knowledge 
is a dangerous thing. IEEE Software, 
May/June 2002, 14-15. 
14. Figallo, Cliff & Rhine, Nancy. Building the  
knowledge management network: Best 
practices, tools and techniques for 
putting conversation to work. 
Wiley–Dreamtech India Pvt. Ltd, 
New-Delhi. 2002 
15. Haravu, L.J. Lectures on knowledge 
management: Paradigms, challenges 
and opportunities. Sarada Ranganathan 
Endowment for library Science, 
Bangalore. 2002.  
16.  Skyrme, David J. Knowledge networking:  
Creating the collaborative enterprise. 
Butterworth-Heinemann. Oxford, 1999. 17.  Callaghan, James. Inside intranets and 
extranets: Knowledge management and 
the struggle for power. Palgrave 
Hampshire. 2002. 
18. Applehans, Wayne; Globe, Alden  & 
Laugero, Greg. Managing knowledge: A 
practical web based approach. Addison 
Wesley, Massachusetts.1999. 
19. Ehrlich, Kate. Designing groupware 
applications: A work-centered design 
approach. In  Knowledge, Groupware and  
the Internet, edited by  David E. Smith. 
Butterworth-Heinemann, USA. 2000. 
137-70. 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2003, 23(5) 

========8========

20.  Hawkins, Brian. Libraries, knowledge 
management and higher education in an 
electronic environment.  
http://www.alia.org.au/conferences/alia20 
00/pr…/brian.hawkins.htm (7/12/2002) 21. Honeycutt, Jerry. Knowledge 
management strategies. Prentice Hall of 
India, New Delhi. 2001. 239. 
 Contributors: 
22.  The knowledge management homepage 
http://www.bus.utexas.edu/kman  23.  Knowledge Management Magazine 
http://kmmag.com 
24. WWW Virtual library on knowledge 
management  
http://www.brient.com/km/ 
Ms.Maitrayee Ghosh, Librarian, Sardar Patel college of Engineering, Mumbai  e-mail: mrghose@vsnl.com; Fax: 022-26237819 
Sh. Ashok Jambekar, Librarian & Head (NICMAN), Indian Institute of 
Management, Ahmedabad. 
DESIDOC  Bulletin of Inf Technol , 2003, 23(5) 
11 

========9========

