DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 36, No. 5, September 2016, pp. 269-277   DOI: 10.14429/djlit.36.5.10174 
 2016, DESIDOC 
Social Networking Tools in Library Service Delivery: The Case of  
Academic Libraries in South-East Zone of Nigeria 
Saturday U. Omeluzor,* Gloria O. Oyovwe-Tinuoye** and Imam Abayomi*** Department of Library, Federal University of Petroleum Resources Effurun, Delta State, Nigeria  
E-mail:*someluzor@yahoo.com, ** gloriatinuoye@yahoo.com 
Dept. of library, Michael Otedola College of Primary Education 
Noforija Ekpe, Lagos State 
E-mail:***abayomimam16@yahoo.com 
ABSTRACT 
A lot of literature exists concerning acceptance and utilisation of ‘social networking’ (SN) tools in academic  libraries from different parts of the world. However, only a handful of work has been done on librarians’ use of  SN in academic libraries in South-East, Nigeria. Therefore, this study tends to investigate librarians’ use of SN  in academic libraries in South-East, Nigeria. This study adopted a survey design using 173 librarians from the  zone. Finding showed that some librarians used SN in libraries for delivery of library services. It also revealed  that SN will be benefcial and cost effective for academic libraries to adopt. Some challenges identifed in this  study inhibiting use of SN in academic libraries are erratic power supply, inadequate skill to manipulate SN and  other ICT tools, technophobia, lack of awareness, insuffcient bandwidth, apathy in using modern technologies and  lack of internet connection. The study suggested that SN can be adopted in academic libraries for library service  delivery. It recommended that academic libraries should prioritise training and retraining of librarians in the use  of emerging and current internet resources, provision of power supply, ICT facilities and internet connection to  
enhance delivery of library services. 
Keywords: Social networking, academic libraries, librarian, South-East, Nigeria, service delivery 
1.  INTRODUCTION  
Libraries are meant to provide information materials  and  disseminate  to  its  patrons. A  critical  task  that  faces  libraries  across  the  world  is  to  be  able  to  support  its  users through various media. Before the advent and use  of  information  and  communication  technology  (ICT)  in  library  services,  the  traditional  methods  were  the  only  means  of  disseminating  information  to  library  users.  However,  the  traditional  means  of  communication  are  no  longer  effective,  prompt  and  far  reaching,  especially  in  the  21st century.  This  situation  made  it  unavoidable  to  utilise  other  means  of  communication  such  as  social  networking  tools.  Kaplan  &  Haenlein  cited  in  Onuoha1  asserted that social networking is a group of interrelated  technological applications that is rooted on ‘the ideological  and  technological  foundation  of  Web  2.0.’  Similarly,  Seufert1,  et al.,  opined that social networking also known  as social media is ‘knowledge networking’ that indicates  a number of connections, resources and associations that  enable  them  to  interact  and  share  knowledge  for  the  purpose  of  creating  value  among  themselves. 
Suraweera2   asserted  that  the  use  of  online  social  networks  by  libraries  and  information  centers  have  increased  and  is  common  among  new  and  old  library  users. Social networking in libraries will promote adequate  information  access,  sharing,  dissemination  which  are  
Received 8 October 2016, online published    September 2016   
core functions of academic libraries. Chu & Meulemans3,  Burkhardt4, Robinson, Aggarwal & Buggarapu5  see online  social networking as an effective tool for organisational  productivity and service delivery. In china, social media  is increasingly an important force for defining taste and  driving  purchases.  Larson  further  stated  that  a  survey  by  PricewaterhouseCoopers  indicated  that  80  %  of  the  respondents attested they used social media platforms to  collect  information  about  brands  or  to  make  purchases  directly6. 
Although,  Kelleher7   argued  that  organisations  lose  lots  of  hours  and  resources  through  use  of  social  sites  such  as  Facebook  and  LinkedIn.  Despite  Kelleher’s  claim, research shows that online social networking tool  enhances business, and therefore, has the capability and  features  to  improve  library  processes  and  services4-7.  Based  on  this  assertion,  it  is  convincing  that  the  use  of  online  social  networking  in  academic  libraries  will  boost  libraries’  services.  Furthermore,  as  observed  by  Robinson5  online social media is an interesting, prevailing  and  all-encompassing  means  of  communication  that  is  drastically  affecting  people’s  interaction  and  behaviour.  He  noted  that  most  pioneers  and  successful  businesses  around the world are working towards integrating social  media  in  their  key  management  processes.  It  is  in  view  of  the  foregoing  that  this  study  seeks  to  assess  the  use  

========1========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  5, SEPTEMBER   2016 
of  online  social  networking  tools  in  academic  libraries  are commonly adopted in university libraries for service  in  South-East,  Nigeria. delivery.’ In line with this, Burkhardt4  opined that librarians  2. OBJECTIVES  
should leverage on SN tools for notifying patrons of new  
arrivals and recent trends in the library. Also, researchers  
The  main  objective  of  this  research  was  to  assess  
such as Elmore13, Aggarwal and Buggarapu14   confirmed  the  use  of  online  social  networking  tools  in  academic  
that  social  media  are  effective  tools  to  disseminate  libraries in South-East zone of Nigeria. Specific objectives  
information  to  young  and  older  people.  They  further  are  to: 
asserted  that  about  1.5  billion  people  in  the  world  use  • Ascertain if librarians in South-East zone of Nigeria  
OSN  tools. 
uses  online  social  networking  tools; 
Similarly,  Brooks  &  Richter15   studied  workplace  • Find  out  the  benefits  of  online  social  networking  
tools;  and 
• Identify the factors inhibiting the use of online social  
networking  tools  in  academic  libraries. 
3. LITERATURE  REVIEW 
Prior to the use of modern technology tools in academic  libraries  for  managing,  processing  and  dissemination  of  information,  traditional  methods  hold  sway.  Traditional  library processes and structuring however, could no longer  satisfy  and  respond  fast  enough  to  an  environment  that  is  already  saturated  by  technology,  hence  it  becomes  imperative  to  adopt  online  social  networking  tools  to  deliver library services. According to Ayiah & Kumah8,  most  university  libraries  in  the  world  have  adopted  online social networking tools; examples are Yale Science  Libraries, Adelphi University Libraries, Carnegie Mellon  University  Libraries,  Cambridge  University  Library  and  Norwegian  University  of  Science  and  Technology  Library8.  In  Nigeria,  some  university  libraries  that  have  adopted online social networking are Babcock University,  Covenant University, Nnamdi Azikiwe Library University  of Nigeria Nsukka, University of Ibadan and University  of  Ilorin  among  others.  These  libraries  use  the  online  social  networking  walls  to  announce  programmes  of  the  library,  inform  their  new  and  current  users  of  new  acquisition  and  recent  additions  to  their  collection. 
The use of OSN in academic libraries is fast gaining  prominence. Ayiah & Kumah8  confirmed that 75.8 % of  the  respondents  in  their  study  interacted  with  reference  librarian  concerning  library  services  on  social  network.  Corroborating,  Chitumbo  &  Chewe9   in  their  study  established  that  113  out  of  124  respondents  indicated  that they will support the idea of using social networking  tools  in  library’s  service  delivery.  According  to  Toit10,  Facebook  and  Twitter  were  adopted  and  used  at  the  South African  Broadcasting  Corporation  (SABC)  Media  Libraries  to  render  library  service  to  users.  Using  OSN  in  academic  libraries  will  help  in  meeting  some  of  the  needs  of  potential  library  users. 
In  the  same  vein,  Ivala  &  Gachago11   asserted  that  social media such as Facebook and Blogs have the potential  to enhance students’ engagement in learning both on and  off  campus.  Ivala  &  Gachago’s  study  further  indicated  that social media is capable of aiding students’ learning.  Similarly, Chu12  et al , noted that ‘Facebook and Twitter  
Figure 1. Facebook monthly membership growth. 
Table 1. Twitter Company’s membership growth 
Twitter  Company’  membership  growth    Data and  revenue  generation 
Total  number  of  registered  Twitter  users  645,750,000 Total  number  of  active  Twitter  users  289,000,000 Number  of  new  Twitter  users  signing  up  135,000 everyday  
Number  of  unique  Twitter  site  visitors  190  million  every  month  
Average  number  of  tweets  per  day  58  million Number  of Twitter  search  engine  queries  2.1  billion  every  day  
Percent  of Twitter  users  who  use  their  phone 43  % to  tweet  
Percent  of  tweets  that  come  from  third  party  60  % applicants  
Number  of  people  that  are  employed  by  2,500 Twitter  
Number  of  active Twitter  users  every  month  115  million  Percent  of Twitters  who  don’t  tweet  but  40  % watch  other  people  tweet  
Number  of  days  it  takes  for  1  billion  tweets  5  days  Number  of  tweets  that  happen  every  second  9,100 Twitter Annual Advertising  Revenue Revenue 
2014 2013 2012 2011 2010+ 
$479,078,000 $405,500,000 $259,000,000 $139,000,000 $45,000,000 
270 

========2========

SATURDAY, GlORIA & IMAM: SOCIAL  N ETWORKING  T OOLS IN  L IBRARY  S ERVICE  D ELIVERY 
challenges associated with employee’s social media use.  They  found  out  that  Facebook’s  statistics  displayed  a  significant  number  of  active  users  who  uses  ‘Facebook  mobile  products.’  With  the  growing  number  of  online  social networking users, librarians can meet their potential  library  users  through  the  network  on  time.  Burkhardt5 asserted  that  social  media  is  a  prevailing  media  of  communication  in  which  the  number  of  users  is  rapidly  increasing as presented in Fig 1. and Table 1. Aggarwal  and  Buggarapu14   stated  that  over  1.5  billion  users  on  social  networking  sites,  it  cannot  be  ignored. 
4.  METHODOLOGY 
This study assessed the use of social networking tools  in academic libraries in South-East zone of Nigeria. It was  carried out within a period of four months (September to  December, 2015) when the universities were in session.  Survey research design was used for the study. A ‘purposive  sampling technique’ was used to select the zone from the  six geopolitical zones of Nigeria. This research therefore  covers  only  one  zone  in  the  Southern  part  of  Nigeria.  The  choice  of  one  zone  was  because  of  accessibility  to  the respondents and the high concentration of librarians  in  the  zone.  The  population  of  this  study  was  made  up  of  173  academic  librarians  in  the  zone.  The  sampling  method  used  was  total  enumeration.  
This  was  because  the  entire  population  of  one  hundred  and  seventy  three  librarians  from  the  eighteen  university  libraries  in  the  South-East  zone  of  Nigeria  was considered appropriate to achieve the purpose of the  study.  A  questionnaire  was  designed  in  simple  English  and  format  for  easy  understanding  by  the  respondents.  Before  the  administration  of  the  questionnaire  to  the  respondents,  face  validity  was  done  to  test  the  validity  of the questions by presenting the instruments to experts  in  the  ‘Department  of  Library  and  Information  Science,  Delta  State  University, Abraka’  who  validated,  resolved  defects  and  modified  the  questions.  The  questionnaire  was  also  subjected  to  a  reliability  test  using  Cronbach  Alpha  Reliability  Coefficient  which  gives  0.76.  
This means that the instrument was good and reliable  since  the  test  result  was  above  the  acceptance  point  of  0.50.  A  total  of  173  questionnaires  were  administered  directly  on  the  respondents  by  the  researchers  and  all  were  answered  and  retrieved.  A  total  of  167  copies  of  the  questionnaires  were  correctly  answered  and  found  usable  given  a  return  rate  of  97  %  while  7  copies  of  the  questionnaires  were  wrongly  answered  and  were  not  included  in  the  analysis.  The  questionnaires  were  analysed  and  results  were  presented. 
5.  ONLINE   S OCIAL   N ETWORKING 
5.1 Use  of  Online  Social  Networking  Tools  in  
Academic  Libraries 
Social  media  is  a  two-way  communication  media  for exchange of ideas, information and learning. Use of  
online  social  networking  (OSN)  tools  in  the  library  is  essential as it will help to provide feedback for librarians  and update  to  library  users.  Graham,  Faiz  &  Hartman16  opine  that  use  of  Facebook  at  Kimbel  Library  of  the  Coastal Carolina University provides reference assistance,  library  tours  and  promotes  services.  Toit10   also  noted  that  South  African  Broadcasting  Corporation  (SABC)  Media Libraries uses social media such as Facebook and  Twitter to communicate and send out information to the  library  users.  In  2012,  Collins  &  Quan-Haase17 carried  out  a  longitudinal  study  and  found  out  that Twitter  was  the  most  popular  SN.  It  was  obvious  in  that  study  that  Ontario’s university libraries used ‘Facebook to distribute  news and photographs about their libraries.’ Interestingly,  some libraries such as (Brock, Wilfrid Laurier, McMaster  and  Trent)  use  Facebook  to  interact  with  users  about  their  library  holdings. 
A  study  by  Onuoha18   revealed  that  librarians  in  Nigeria  used  social  media  such  as  Facebook,  Blogs,  Wikis  and YouTube  for  their  professional  development.  The  study  revealed  high  use  of  Facebook,  Blogs  and  Nigeria Library Association (NLA) online forum. SN can  serve as a platform for engaging professional colleagues,  sharing  of  ideas  and  information  on  current  trends  in  librarianship.  It  is  perhaps  the  reason  why  Elseviez’s  Library  Connect  Newsletter  and  Murphy  cited  in Toit10  stressed  that  librarian’s  ability  to  use  social  media  for  effective  service  delivery  is  an  added  advantage. 
Chu & Du19  investigated OSN used in some academic  libraries  across  ‘Asia,  North  America  and  Europe.’  It  was found out in that study that ‘Facebook and Twitter’  were frequently accessed in academic libraries. Further,  Ezeani & Igwesi20 examined  the  experience  of  Nigerian  librarians on the use of social media for dynamic library  service  delivery.  The  study  revealed  that  Facebook  had  become  most  popular  in  academic  libraries  in  Nigeria  because  it  is  librarian-friendly. They  noted  that  with  its  compatibility with many applications like JSTOR search,  WorldCat  among  others,  librarians  can  interact  with  library  users  to  know  their  information  needs.  Chu  and  Meulemans4   had  suggested  that  Facebook  can  enhance  ‘libraries’  social  visibility’  on  the  internet.  In  the  same  vein, Charnigo & Barnett21  noted that sizable number of  librarians  use  Facebook  to  interact  with  library  users. 
Ayia  &  Kumah8   study  of  social  networking  tools  indicated  that  majority  or  73  %  and  77.6  %  of  the  respondents  accepted  accessing  library  and  new  books  respectively on social networks. Furthermore, the study by  Connell22  shows that librarians need to add as many users  as  their  friends  on  their  Facebook  account  for  effective  usage to enhance easy communication and participation.  In  a  related  development,  Bosch23   explored  students’  ‘use  of  Facebook  at  the  University  of  Cape  Town’  and  identified  certain  challenges,  including  ‘ICT  literacy’  and  irregular  access  as  prevalent  challenges. 
However, Ezeani & Igwesi20 and Chitumbo & Chewe9  confirmed  that  among  the  SN  that  were  used  in  the  
271 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  5, SEPTEMBER   2016 
library, YouTube was by far the most effective means of  reaching library patrons as well as important for library  users’  orientation  and  highlighting  of  important  events  in academic libraries like inaugural lectures, conferences  and workshops. Similarly, Ezeani & Igwesi20   noted  that  Twitter  was  useful  for  questions  on  issues  pertaining  to  the library with an instant reply. They further stated that  Library Thing was also a social media tool that enriches  the  library  online  public  access  catalogue  (OPAC)  and  could  help  to  send  lists  of  current  publications  to  users  without  visiting  the  library  physical  facilities. 
5.2 SN  in  Marketing  Library Activities 
The  SN  tool  is  an  incredible  marketing  tool  to  market  the  library  services  to  the  21st   century  library  users.  It  is  becoming  a  media  for  social  and  business  transaction  hence  users  of  SN  cuts  across  different  ages  and  social  strata. According  to  Suraweera2 et  al.,  marketing  involves  pushing  out  services  to  the  users  and  “convincing  them  by  demonstrating  their  benefits.”  This  can  be  done  through  online  social  networking.  Burkhardt4   affirmed  that  online  social  networking  tools  create  an  avenue  which  academic  libraries  can  explore  to market its products and services. Burkhardt also noted  that the versatility of online social networking, made in  evitable  for  libraries  to  utilise  and  communication  with  faculty, staff, and students in new ways. Suraweera2, et  al.   investigated  the  ‘value  that  social  networking  will  create in libraries and information organisations in Asia  and  Oceania.’ Their  findings  revealed  that  SN  will  help  to  attract  more  users  to  the  library.  Academic  libraries  are  involved  in  information  provision  and  services;  therefore,  marketing  is  a  way  of  promoting  the  library  activities  to  the  public24. 
According  to  Gnad25,  online  social  media  such  as  Library  Thing,  YouTube,  Twitter,  Facebook,  Flicker,  LinkedIn, Wikis, Blogs and Ning are marketing tool for  any  business  to  utilise.  A  statistical  report  of  LinkedIn  users  released  in  May  2014  showed  a  total  number  of  300  million  potential  users26.  Similarly,  a  review  of  Facebook  usage  posted  on  The  Guardian  Datablog27   in  December 31, 2013, as shown in Figure 1 indicated that  within  a  period  of  ten  years  of  Facebook’s  existence,  it  had recorded 1.23bn monthly users worldwide. Currently,  FB  statistics  as  at  December  2015  showed  1.04  billion  daily active users, 934 million mobile daily active users  and  with  a  continuous  growth  in  the  number  of  users.  It  also  revealed  that  83.6  %  of  daily  active  users  are  outside  the  US  and  Canada. 
Another interesting feature of SN tools is the ability  to  support  text  and  uploading  of  high  density  coloured  picture  and  video  such YouTube.  Chitumbo  &  Chewe11 noted  that  YouTube  is  the  most  effective  means  of  reaching  library  patrons.  The  library  documentaries,  current  awareness,  SDI  and  notices  that  are  beneficial  to  library  users  can  be  posted  on  the  library’s  online  social  networking  page  on  the  Internet. 
272 
An analysis of Twitter Company’s membership growth  and  its  annual  revenue  generation  available  at  http:// www.statisticbrain.com/twitter-statistics and as shown in  Table  1  shows  an  improved  revenue  generation.  This  is  also applicable to other SN tools like Facebook, LinkedIn,  Blog, Google+ and WhatsApp etc. This implies that since  there is significant revenue generated, the developers will  continue to maintain, sustain and support the subscribers;  hence  the  library  cannot  hesitate  to  meet  its  potential  users  through  this  laudable  media. 
5.3 Benefits  of  Online  Social  Networking 
It  is  important  to  explore  as  many  social  media  as  possible  to  ascertain  their  benefits.  There  are  many  benefits that libraries in Africa can derive from utilising  online social networking (OSN) tools. Ayiah & Kumah8  opined  that  libraries  can  benefit  in  using  SN  through  collaborations,  promotion  and  meaningful  engagement  with their patrons. It can also help as avenue in receiving  and  responding  to  users’  queries. 
Some specialised social websites like Researchgate,  Academia.edu and LinkedIn among others are also available  for  librarians  to  use  in  rendering  library  services  to  professionals in all fields of human endeavour. According  to Ayiah & Kumah8,  the use of SN tools is easier and does  not require hi-tech equipments except computer, Internet  connectivity  and  a  trained  professional.  It  is  sometimes  expensive  to  utilise  other  means  of  communication  like  phone  call,  SMS,  radio,  newspapers  and  television  to  inform  library  users  about  services  that  the  library  render.  But  with  the  availability  of  ICT  tools,  the  use  of  online  social  networking  in  library  services  will  be  advantageous  and  cost  effective. 
Flickr is another SN tool that is beneficial for sharing  and  distribution  of  new  images  of  library  collections.  The  cover  pages  of  newly  acquired  library  resources  can be snapshot and sent online to users through Flickr.  It  can  also  facilitate  notification  of  users’  on  current  issues  as  they  emerge,  especially  in  Nigeria, Africa  and  the  entire  world.  Other  online  social  networking  tools  that are relevant for library service delivery are Omeka,  Scribus,  Slideshare,  Whatsapp,  Wikispace  and  Zinepal.  These  tools  are  freely  available  on  the  Internet  and  mobile  technologies  which  can  be  used  by  librarians  to  offer  prompt  services  to  library  users.  However,  most  librarians  in  South-South  and  South  West  Nigeria  are  yet  to  effectively  utilise  SN  in  library  service  delivery.  Bosch23   and  Ezeani  &  Igwesi 
20  
had  stated  that  certain  challenges hinder librarians from effective utilisation of  SN  in  academic  libraries. 
5.4 Factors  Inhibiting  Online  Social  Networking  in  
Academic  Libraries  
Utilisation  of  SN  in  Nigeria  academic  libraries  is  faced  with  several  challenges.  According  to  Ezeani  &  Igwesi20  in their study on the Nigeria experience in using  social media for dynamic library service delivery found  

========4========

SATURDAY, GlORIA & IMAM: SOCIAL  N ETWORKING  T OOLS IN  L IBRARY  S ERVICE  D ELIVERY 
out  that  apathy,  lack  of  awareness  and  phobia  militate  against  use  of  social  media  in  most  libraries  especially  in  developing  countries. 
Moreso,  Ezeani  &  Igwesi20   also  found  out  that  insufficient  bandwidth  and  obsolete  Internet  facilities  which they described as ‘moribund’ are inhibiting factors  to  using  SN  in  academic  libraries.  They  lamented  that  it  was  frustrating,  and  that  most  university  libraries  in  Nigeria  only  subscribed  to  higher  bandwidth  during  accreditation time. Chitumbo & Chewe9  also affirmed that  although some library staff had positive views about the  effectiveness  of  SN  tools,  but  it  is  negatively  affected  by  indecision  to  implement  it  and  poor  acceptance  by  the  user  community. 
In addition, erratic power supply hampers utilisation  of technological tools in most developing nations of the  world. Although, Nigeria is witnessing a radical change  in  the  power  sector;  however,  power  supply  in  Nigeria  is  still  unstable.  Akinwale28   and  Iwayemi 
29  
lamented  that  irregular  supply  of  electricity  is  common  in  the  Nigeria system. In the same vein, Haliso & Ogungbemi30 bemoaned  that  erratic  nature  of  electric  power  supply  in  Nigeria  is  another  problem  that  confronts  academic  libraries.  This  situation  adversely  affects  use  of  SN,  electronic information resources and other Internet-based  resources31. Opeke & Onuoha32  in their study corroborated  that  non-use  of  SN  is  associated  with  discouragement  to  erratic  power  supply. 
Lack  of  training  of  staff  in  the  use  of  computer  is  also a challenge that hinders effective service delivery in  libraries33. Most library staff lack skills that are necessary  for the adoption and use of SN tools in library services.  Ogunsola,33 et al.,  study on information literacy in Nigerian  higher  institutions  and  role  for  librarians  revealed  that  lack  of  qualified  ICT  librarians,  poor  communication  systems  and  poor  funding  are  factors  militating  against  ICT  utilisation  in  academic  libraries  in  Kenya.  They  noted that the case is not different in Uganda and other  African countries like Nigeria where inadequate ICT skills  of  librarians,  inadequate  computerisation,  infrastructure  and  human  capacity  are  major  challenges. 
  Inadequate  ICT  skill  of  librarians  can  hinder  use  of  SN  and  other  ICT  resources  in  academic  libraries.  Technophobia  is  another  challenge  affecting  use  of  online  social  networking  tools  in  academic  libraries.  Most  library  staff  and  users  are  not  willing  to  embrace  this  new  technology  because  of  fear  and  are  therefore  comfortable  with  the  traditional  library  services20. 
6.  RESULTS  AND  DISCUSSIO NS 
All  categories  of  librarians  are  represented  in  this  study.  On  their  designation,  result  indicates  that  from  a  total  of  167  who  responded,  25  (14  %)  respondents  are Librarian 1 followed by Librarian 2 with 38 (23 %)  and  Principal/Senior  Librarians  with  56  (34  %).  Result  further  reveal  that  16  (10  %)  of  the  respondents  are  university librarians who are heads of academic libraries  
while lower number of 32 (19 %) of the respondents are  Assistant  Librarian.  On  their  qualification,  result  shows  that  64  (38  %)  have  doctorate  degrees  in  librarianship,  74  (44  %)  have  Masters  Degree  while  29  (17  %)  have  Bachelor  degree. 
6.1  Use  of  Social  Networking  Tools    
Table 2 reveals that majority (87 %) of respondents  use Facebook and 79 % of the respondents use Twitter. It  further shows that 57 % of the respondents use Blog while  58 % of the respondents use Google+. 67 % respondents  use  LinkedIn  and  82  %  use  YouTube.  However,  result  indicated  that  lesser  percentage  28  %  and  26  %  of  the  respondents  use Wikis  and  MySpace,  respectively. 
Table 2.  Social media tools used in academic libraries 
Social  media  Frequency  and  tools percentage  of  
user  (%) Facebook 145  (87) Twitter 132  (79)  Blog 96  (57) YouTube 137  (82) Google+ 97  (58) LinkedIn 112  (67) Wiki 46  (28) MySpace 44  (26) 
Frequency  and  percentage  of  nonuser  (%) 
22  (13) 
53  (21) 
71  (43) 
30  (18) 
70  (42) 
55  (33) 
121  (72) 
123  (74) 
6.2  Benefits  of  Online  Social  Networking Tools 
The  respondents  were  asked  to  either  agree  or  disagree regarding the benefits of SN in library services.  Table  3  shows  that  majority  (86  %)  respondents  agreed  that  SN  provides  reference  assistance,  library  tours  and  promotes  services  while  14  %  respondents  disagreed.  Also,  76  %  of  the  respondents  agreed  that  SN  has  the  potential  to  communicate  and  send  out  information  to  the  library  users  while  24  %  of  the  respondents  are  of  a  contrary  view.  Another  73%  of  the  respondents  agreed  that  SN  tools  can  helps  in  teaching  basic  search  tools  while  27  %  were  of  contrary  opinion.  The  result  also  showed  that  89  %  of  the  respondents  agreed  that  SN  can  help  in  announcing  library  programmes  to  the  users while 11 % of the respondents disagreed. It further  Table  3.    Benefits  of  using  SN  tools  in  delivery  of  library  
services 
Benefts  of  SN Agree  (%)     Disagree  (%) Providing  reference  assistance,  143  (86) 24  (14) library  tours  and  promotes  services 
Communicating  and  sending  out  127  (76) 40  (24) information  to  the  library  users 
Help  in  teaching  basic  search  tools 122  (73) 45  (27) Help  in  announcing  programmes  of  148  (89) 19  (11) the  library 
Enable  block  posting  of  special  selections  to  selected  library  users 
14  (9) 
153  (91) 
273 

========5========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  5, SEPTEMBER   2016 
demonstrates  that  91  %  of  the  respondents  disagreed  that  SN  can  enable  block  posting  of  special  selections  to  selected  library  users  while  9  %  of  the  respondents  are  in  agreement  to  the  fact.  
6.3  Factors  Inhibiting  Use  of  SN  Tools  in Academic  
Libraries 
The  result  showed  that  majority  or  77  %  of  the  respondents indicated that apathy inhibits OSN usage in  academic libraries. Result also shows that 74 % and 150  89  %  of  the  respondents  indicated  that  lack  of  internet  connection and insufficient bandwidth are challenges of  using  OSN  in.  Another  majority  or  88  %  respondents  stated that technophobia is an inhibiting factor while 83 %  indicated that lack of skill and knowledge is a challenge.  Result further shows that 97 % of the respondents agreed  that  erratic  power  supply  inhibits  use  of  SN.  However,  few  of  the  respondents  or  38  %  stated  that  lack  of  incentive  inhibits  use  of  SN  while  87  respondents  also  agreed  that  lack  of  awareness  is  a  problem. 
7. DISCUSSIONS 
Finding  shows  that  14  %  respondents  are  Librarian  I,  23  %  of  the  respondents  are  Librarian  II,  34  %  of  the  respondents  are  Principal/Senior  Librarian,  10  %  are  University  Librarian  while  19  %  of  the  respondents  are Assistant  Librarian.  It  also  reveals  that  38  %  of  the  respondents have Doctorate Degrees, 44 % of the respondents  have  Masters  Degree  while  17  %  are  Bachelor  Degree  holders.  This  means  that  the  respondents  in  this  study  are  practicing  librarians  in  their  respective  libraries.  
On  the  use  of  SN  in  academic  libraries,  finding  in  Table  2  reveal  that  87  %  and  79  %  respondents  uses  Facebook and Twitter respectively. Facebook and Twitter  are  popular  among  librarians  since  the  tools  provides  platform for information sharing. Using Facebook, libraries  can  create  a  page  and  upload  pictures  of  its  current  activities, while Twitter allows sharing of topical issues  and  short  messages  with  library  users.  This  finding  confirms the findings of Toit10  who affirmed that SABC  Media Libraries used online social networking tools such  as  Facebook  and  Twitter  to  communicate  and  send  out  information  to  the  library  users.  
About  57  %  of  the  respondents  use  Blog.  This  finding is in tandem with Ivala & Gachago11 who asserted  that  social  media  such  as  Facebook  and  Blog  have  the  potential  to  enhance  students’  engagement  in  learning  both  on  and  off  campus.  Blogging  has  become  a  means  of information sharing with feedback mechanism used by  many people. YouTube also shows significant number of  users with 82 % of the respondents attesting to that. This  is in line with Chitumbo & Chewe9   who  found  out  that  YouTube has the ability of communicating with users of  academic libraries. YouTube has the potential to display  recorded  video  about  the  library  and  tutorials.  Finding  also shows that 58 % and 67 % respondents use Google+  and LinkedIn. The use of SN tools in academic libraries  
274 
may not be unconnected with the fact that they have the  capacity  to  reach  out  to  the  technologically  driven  age  who utilises ICT tools. Findings shows a low patronage  of Wiki and MySpace with 21 % and 16 % who indicated  they used it. The low patronage of some of the resources  may  be  due  to  lack  of  awareness  by  the  users. 
Attitude  of  some  librarians  in  using  ICT  tools  sometimes  hinder  its  adoption  in  academic  libraries34.  However, the reverse is the case in this study as majority  of them are interested in using SN in academic libraries.  This  confirm  the  finding  of  Chitumbo  &  Chewe9   who  found out that 113 out of 124 respondents in their study  indicated  that  they  will  accept  the  use  of  SN  tools  in  delivering  services  in  academic  libraries.  In  a  related  study,  Graham16,  et  al.   established  that  Facebook  was  used  at  Kimbel  Library  of  Coastal  Carolina  University;  while Toit10   also  acknowledged  the  adoption  and  use  of  Facebook  and  Twitter  in  SABC  Media  Libraries.  Using  OSN  in  academic  libraries  will  help  in  meeting  some  of  the  needs  of  potential  library  users.  
Finding  in  Table  3  reveals  that    98  %  respondents  agreed  that  SN  provided  reference  assistance,  library  tours  and  promotes  services.  This  finding  substantiates  the  findings  of  Graham16,   et  al .  who  established  that  OSN used at the Kimbel Library of the Coastal Carolina  University  provides  reference  assistance,  library  tours  and  promotes  services.  Reference  services  in  academic  libraries  are  an  important  service  for  both  internal  and  distant  library  users.  
Also,  83  %  respondents  agreed  that  OSN  has  the  potential  to  communicate  and  send  out  information  to  the  library  users  while  17  %  disagreed.  This  finding  corroborates the finding of Suraweera2, et al. who stated  that  SN  being  used  by  libraries  will  enable  interaction  with  new  and  existing  library  users  with  the  aim  of  providing adequate and quality services to them. Another  81 % of the respondents agreed that OSN tools helps in  teaching basic search tools. This finding supports Ayiah  & Kumah8  finding that online social networking tool can  be used in teaching basic search tools. This could be by  real-time  interaction  between  a  reference  librarian  and  a  potential  library. 
The finding also shows that 75 % respondents agreed  that OSN can help the library in announcing its programmes  to  the  users. This  finding  supports  the  finding  of Ayiah  &  Kumah8   who  stated  that  OSN  can  help  libraries  in  announcing  programmes  to  its  users.  This  implies  that  using  OSN  can  help  the  library  to  send  out  information  about new arrivals to the library users. Finding, however,  shows that 61 % respondents disagreed that OSN enable  block  posting  of  special  selections  to  selected  library  users  while  39  %  respondents  agreed  to  that  fact.  This  may possibly mean that most of the respondents have not  experienced  block  posting  of  information  to  specialised  or  selected  group  of  library  users. 
Table  4  shows  that  majority  (78  %)  of  respondents  indicated  that  apathy  inhibited  use  of  OSN  in  academic  

========6========

SATURDAY, GlORIA & IMAM: SOCIAL  N ETWORKING  T OOLS IN  L IBRARY  S ERVICE  D ELIVERY 
libraries. This result confirmed the assertion of Ugboma who stated that apathy is a major challenge in using ICT  tools  in  academic  libraries  in  Delta  State.  The  findings  is  also  in  tandem  with  Ezeani  &  Igwesi20   who  asserted  that  apathy  among  librarians  inhibited  use  of  ICT  tools  in academic libraries. Apathy on the part of librarians in  using  available  ICT  tools  and  electronic  resources  can  inhibit  service  delivery  to  library  patrons. 
Findings  also  showed  that  77  %  and  84  %  of  the  respondents indicated that lack of internet connection and  insufficient  bandwidth  are  challenges  in  using  OSN  in  academic  libraries.  This  finding  is  supported  by  Ezeani  and Igwesi20   who  found  out  that  insufficient  bandwidth  and obsolete Internet facilities in academic libraries are  moribund and cannot support remote access to information.  Lack  of  internet  connection  and  insufficient  bandwidth  are factors inhibiting the use of OSN and other electronic  resources in academic libraries. Table 4 also shows 88 %  indicated that technophobia inhibits use of OSN. Another  83  %  also  agreed  that  lack  of  knowledge  and  skill  are  inhibiting  factors. This  finding  confirms  the  findings  of  Ezeani & Igwesi20 who found out that lack of awareness  and  phobia  inhibits  utilisation  of  social  media  in  most  libraries  especially  in  developing  countries.  Fear  of  using new technology and lack of awareness of available  online  resources  can  render  a  librarian  unconfident  in  attending  to  library  users  which  will  negatively  affect  library  service  delivery. 
Table 4.  
Factors inhibiting use of social networking in academic  libraries 
Factors  inhibiting  SN  in  academic  libraries Apathy  in  the  use  of  modern  technology 
Unstable  internet  connection Insufficient  bandwidth Technophobia 
Lack  of  skill  and  knowledge Erratic  power  supply Lack  of  incentive 
Lack  of  awareness 
Yes  (%)    
No  (%) 
130  (77) 
37  (23) 
125  (74)  150  (89) 149  (88) 158  (94) 162  (97) 64  (38) 146  (87) 
42  (26) 17  (11) 18  (12) 9  (6) 5  (3) 103  (62) 21  (13) 
Table  4  shows  that  92  %  respondents  attested  that  erratic power supply is an inhibiting factor. Akinwale28  in  his  study  on  the  menace  of  inadequate  infrastructure  in  Nigeria lamented irregular supply of electricity as a major  challenge.  Similarly,  Haliso  &  Ogungbemi30   bemoaned  that erratic nature of electric power supply in Nigeria is  another problem that confronts academic libraries. Erratic  power supply in most academic libraries in Nigeria is a  hindrance  to  accessing  online  social  networking.  Since  OSN, electronic information resources and other ICT tools  depend  on  electricity;  it  will  be  difficult  to  effectively  use  them  in  delivery  of  library  services. 
Finding also shows that 38 % respondents indicated  that  lack  of  incentive  for  librarians’  hinder  use  of  OSN  in academic libraries. This few respondents indicates that  lack  of  incentive  for  librarians  does  not  significantly  affect  use  of  OSN  in  academic  libraries.  It  also  implies  that  whether  librarians  are  given  incentive  or  not  they  are  willing  to  use  OSN  in  library  service  delivery.  
8. CONCLUSIONS  
This  study  has  established  that  new  trends  are  evolving  in  library  service  delivery  especially  in  using  social  networking  tools.  It  is  also  obvious  in  this  study  that  librarians  are  utilising  SNTs  in  library  service  delivery  across  the  South-East  of  Nigeria.  The  findings  in  this  study  showed  that  utilising  SNTs  will  help  the  librarians to support their library users who may not be  physically  present  in  the  library. 
The  academic  libraries  are  situated  in  dynamic  environments that require continuous change. Adoption of  modern technologies such as SNTs in meeting the needs of  the 21st  century library patrons should be prioritised. The  study revealed that enhancing teamwork and promotion of  effective interaction between librarians and library users  is  possible  with  SN.  In  addition,  utilisation  of  SNTs  in  the  library  will  assist  to  attract  patrons  to  the  library  environment  and  enhance  marketing  of  the  library  and  its  unique  services  to  the  users.  
The  challenges  that  be  clouded  utilisation  of  SNTs  in  Nigeria  must  be  tackled  with  vigour  to  reshape  academic  libraries  mission.  This  will  engender  quality  service  delivery  to  the  library  clientele. 
9. RECOMMENDATIONS 
The  following  recommendations  are  made  in  line  with  the  findings  of  this  study: 
(a) Academic  libraries  should  harp  on  research  and  
development  of  their  parent  institution  and  devise  
means  of  generating  power  to  ensure  delivery  of  
library  services. 
(b) Academic libraries must improve its infrastructure, i.e.,  
power supply, ICT facilities and Internet connection  
to  meet  international  standard  to  enable  effective  
utilisation  of  OSN  for  service  delivery. 
(c) Adoption  and  use  of  OSN  in  academic  libraries  
should  be  encouraged. 
(d) Systems  Librarians  should  create  awareness  about  
the potentials of OSN in academic libraries’ service  
delivery. 
(e) Librarian  needs  to  explore  more  features  in  OSN,  
especially  block  posting  of  information  to  multiple  
library  users. 
(f) There  should  be  regular  training  and  retraining  of  
librarians  to  acquire  relevant  skill  and  knowledge  
in  utilising  OSN  for  delivery  of  library  services. 
275 

========7========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  5, SEPTEMBER   2016 
(g) A  phased  approach  of  integrating  OSN  as  a  media  
of information dissemination and delivery of services  
to  users  in  academic  libraries  should  be  adopted. 
REFERENCES 
1.    Seufert,  A;  Von-Krogh,  G.  &  Bach,  A.  Towards  
knowledge networking. J. of Knowl. Manag.,  1999,  
3(3),  180-90. 
2. Suraweera, Namali, et al., Value of social networking  
in  libraries  and  information  organizations  in  Asia  
and  Oceania.  Being  a  paper  presented  at  the World  
Library and Information Congress: 76th  IFLA General  
Conference  and  Assembly,  Gothemburge,  Sweden.  
http://www.ifla.org/en/ifla76  (accessed  23  February  
2016). 
3. Chu,  M.  &  Nalani-Meulemans,  Y.  The  problems  
and  potential  of  MySpace  and  Facebook  usage  in  
Academic  libraries.  Inter.  Ref.  Serv.  Quar.,  2008,  
13(1),  69-85. 
4. Burkhardt,  A.  Social  media:  A  guide  for  College  
and University libraries. Coll. and Res. Lib. ,  2010,  
71(1),  10-24. 
5. Robinson,  A.H.  The  impact  of  social  media  in  
the workplace–7 key trends. http://interchange-dev. 
squarespace.com/storage/documents/The%20Impact%20 
of%20Social%20Media%20in%20the%20Workplace. 
pdf  (accessed  on  15  December  2015). 
6. Larson,  C.  Smartphones  and  social  media  power  
China's  e-shopping  revolution.  www.businessweek. 
com/articles/2014-04-15/smartphones-and-social- 
media-power-chinas-e-shopping-revolution (accessed  
on  12  January  2016). 
7.  Kelleher,  D.  5  problems  with  networking  in  the  
workplace.www.information-management.com/ 
specialreports/2009_165/social_networking_media- 
10016208-1.html  (accessed  on  12  February  2016). 8.     Ayiah,  E.M.  &  Kumah,  C.H.  Social  networking: A  
tool  to  use  for  effective  service  delivery  to  clients  
by African  Libraries.  Paper  presented  at  the  World  
Library and Information Congress: 77th  IFLA General  
Conference  and  Assembly.  San  Juan,  Puerto  Rico,  
Brazil,  2011. 
9.  Chitumbo, E.M.M. & Chewe, P. Social media tools for  
library service delivery in higher learning institutions:  
Case of University of Zambia and National Institute  
of  Public  Administration  libraries.  Res.  J.  of  Lib.  
Sci.,  2015, 3(5),  1-7. 
10.  Toit, K.D. Social media for libraries. www.slideshare. 
net/karendtoit/social-media-for-libraries-power-point  
(accessed  14  January  2016). 
11.  Ivala, E. & Gachago, D. Social media for enhancing  
student engagement: The use of Facebook and blogs  
at  a  University  of  Technology.  South  Africa  J.  of  
High.  Educ.  (SAJHE),   2012,  26(1),  52-67. 
276 
12.  Chu,  S.K.W.;  Cheung,  H.S.C.;  Hui,  J.S.C.;  Chan,  
R.L.S.  &  Man,  K.S.Y.  Social  networking  tools  for  
academic libraries. Paper presented at the International  
Federation  of  Library  Association  and  Institution  
(IFLA),  Gothenburg,  Sweden,  2010. 
13.  Elmore,  N.  Social  media  connecting  the  world  with  
business: Statistics that will make you rethink your  
marketing strategy. www.slideshare.net/NiciElmore/social- 
media-connecting-the-world-with-businesses?ref=http:// 
nicoleelmore.com/interesting-social-media-statistics- 
for-businesses. 
14. Aggarwal, N. & Buggarapu, G. Using social media to  
improve efficiency and productivity in IT organizations.  
www.ca.com/us/~/media/Files/About%20Us/CATX/using- 
social-media-to-improve-efficiency-and-productivity-in- 
it-organizations.pdf  (accessed  on  13  March  2016). 15.  Brooks,  J.L.  &  Richter,  C.P.  Workplace  challenges  
associated with employee’s social media use. www. 
acc.com/legalresources/quickcounsel/wcawesmu.cfm  
(accessed  on  14  January  2016). 
16.  Graham,  J.M.;  Faiz,  A.  &  Hartman,  L.  Crashing  
the  Facebook  party:  One  library  experience  in  the  
student’s domain. Library Review,  2009,  58(3), 228- 
36. 
17.  Collins,  G.  &  Quan-Haase,  A.  Social  media  and  
academic libraries, current trends and future challenges.  
http://asis.org/asist2012/proceedings/Submissions/272. 
pdf  (accessed  on  23  May  2016). 
18.  Onuoha,  Uloma.D.  Librarians’  use  of  social  
media for professional development in Nigeria. Inf.  
Manag.  and  Busi.  Rev.,  2013, 5(3),  136-43. 19.  Chu S.K.W. & Du H.S. Social networking tools for  
academic  libraries.  J.  of  Lib.  and  Inf.  Sci.,  2013,  
45(1),  64-75. 
20.  Ezeani,  C.N.  &  Igwesi,  U.  Using  social  media  
for  dynamic  library  service  delivery:  The  Nigeria  
experience. http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/libphilprac/814/  
(accessed  on  11 April  2016). 
21.  Charnigo, L. & Barnett, E. Checking out Facebook. 
com:  The  impact  of  a  digital  trend  on  academic  
libraries. Inf.  Tech.  &  Lib.,   2007,  26(1),  23-4. 22.  Connell,  R.S.  Academic  libraries,  facebook  and  
mySpace, and student Outreach: A survey of student  
opinion.  portal:  Libraries  &  the  Academy,   2009,  
9(1),  25-36. 
23.    Bosch  T.E.  Using  online  social  networking  for  
teaching and learning: Facebook use at the University  
of Cape Town, Communication. S. African J. Commu.  
Theo.  and  Rese., 2009,   35 (2),  185-200. 
24.  Malik,  F.A.  Push  to  Pull.  IFLA  ALP  course  on  
Information Literacy wellington, New Zealand. IFLA  
Asia  and  Oceania  Sect.  Newsl., 2009, 21(1),  21. 25.  Gnad,  C.  Social  media:  Your  best  cause-marketing  
tool. www.socialfocusbycg.com/social-media-marketing- 
tool  (accessed  on  11 April  2016). 

========8========

SATURDAY, GlORIA & IMAM: SOCIAL  N ETWORKING  T OOLS IN  L IBRARY  S ERVICE  D ELIVERY 
26.  Smith,  C.  By  the  numbers:  88  amazing  LinkedIn  
statistics.  http://expandedramblings.com/index.php/ 
by-the-numbers-a-few-important-linkedin-stats/#. 
U39UIHZh1mg  (accessed  on  11 April  2016). 27. The Guardian Datablog. Facebook: 10 years of social  
networking, in numbers. www.theguardian.com/news/ 
datablog/2014/feb/04/facebook-in-numbers-statistics  
(accessed  on  11 April  2016). 
28.  Akinwale, A. A. The menace of inadequate infrastructure  
in Nigeria. African J. of Sci., Tech., Inno. and Dev. ,  
2010,  (3),  207-28. 
29.  Iwayemi,  A.  Investment  in  electricity  generation  
and  transmission  in  Nigeria:  Issues  and  options.  
International  Association  for  Energy  Economics,  
2008,  pp.  37-42.  
30.  Haliso,  Y.  &  Ogungbemi,  J.I.  Internet  vs  Library:  
Coping  strategies  for  academic  librarians  in  Lagos  
State, Nigeria. Infor. and Know. Manag.,  2014, 4(1)  
58-64. 
31.  Omeluzor,  S.U.;  Madukoma,  E.;  Bamidele,  I.  &  
Ogbuiyi, S.U. Use of electronic information resources  
and  research  output  by  academic  staff  in  private  
universities  in  Ogun  State,  Nigeria. Canadian  Soc.  
Sci.,  2012, 8(3),  8-15. 
32.  Opeke,  R.O.  &  Onuoha,  U.D.  Librarians’  use  of  
social  networks  for  professional  development  in  
Nigeria. PNLA  Quarterly,   2013,  77(2). 
33.  Ogunsola, L.A.; Akindojutimi, B.F. & Omoike, A.D.  
Information  literacy  in  Nigerian  higher  institutions  
and role for librarians? Ozean J. of Soc. Sci., 2011, 
4(2),  85-92. 
34. Adekunle,  P.A.;  Omoba,  R.O.  & Tella, A. Attitudes  
of librarians in selected Nigerian universities towards  
the  use  of  ICT.  Lib.  Phil.  and  Prac.,  2007  http:// 
digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?articl 
e=1160&context=libphilprac  (accessed  on  22  July  
2016). 
Contirbutors 
Mr Saturday Unwelegbemenwe Omeluzor  is the Automation  Librarian at Federal University of Petroleum Resources Effurun,  Delta State, Nigeria. He holds a Masters Degree in Information  Resources  Management.  He  is  a  registered  member  of  the  Nigerian Library Association. He has published several articles  in  learned  journals  and  book  chapters.  His  research  interests  include: Library automation, electronic information resources,  digitisation  and  librarianship.  
Mrs Gloria Ogheneghatowho Oyovwe Tinuoye   is  a  Readers  Services Librarian at Federal University of Petroleum Resources  Effurun,  Delta  State.  She  has  Masters  Degree  in  Library  and  Information  Science  from  Delta  State  University,  Abraka,  Nigeria.  She  has  published  articles  in  learned  journals  and  book chapters. Her research interests include: Users’ orientation,  referral  service  and  information  retrieval.  
Dr  Imam  Abayomi   works  with  Michael  Otedola  College  of  Primary  Education  Noforija-Epe,  Lagos  State  as  the  Deputy  College Librarian. He has over 40 academic publications both  national  and  international  to  his  credit. 
277 

========9========

