DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 36, No. 6, November 2016, pp. 424-430 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.36.6.10221 
 2016, DESIDOC 
Impact of WhatsApp on LIS Professionals 
Maneesh Kumar Bajpai 
Ram Manohar Lohiya National Law University, Lucknow -226 012 
E-mail: maneeshbajpai@rmlnlu.ac.in  
ABSTRACT 
Socially aware computing is breaking the bricks of information communication. The emergence of mobile  phone/smartphone is helping to do so. Mobile phone/smartphone is like a magical tool which allows one to do  anything like surfng to chatting to messaging to entertainment. The mobile phones are the genuine gift of the  technological transformation and development to the present generation. WhatsApp messenger is one of the popular  social networking tool among the students, professionals, and households. Almost everyone is using to promote their  business, products and services and even using it to manage their team. Library and information professionals are  not much for away with its acceptance. To know LIS professional’s viewpoint, online survey method is adopted.  This paper, analysis at what extent LIS professionals are using WhatsApp messenger, and  activities in which they  have involved. An effort is made to understand the impact of the WhatsApp messenger on LIS professionals.     
Keywords: Whatsapp messenger, social networking tools, chatting, mobile applications, LIS groups  
1.  INTRODUCTION 
Technology  and  its  continuous  advancements  are   making life better. The communication is now too easly  to  manage  and  exchange  ideas  in  quick  successions.  Seamless  internet  speed  is  wonderfully  shifty  entirely  paradigm of access to technology. Now people are talking  about the speed of bandwidth rather internet access which  is  commendable.  By  the  end  of  2015,  there  were  3.17  billion internet users worldwide1. In India, the expected  mobile internet users will be 371 million by June 20162.  The  reason  that  acceptance  of  mobile  is  reaching  to  the  rural  areas  which  shows  the  adaptability  of  the  internet  technology  and  communication  among  Indians.  Cheaper  cost  and  easy  access  to  technology  are  helping  in  its  acceptance.  Everyone  wants  to  communicate  and  respond  in  the  compatible  much  faster  way  but  at  the  same  time,  the  cost  is  needed  in  segments.  SNS  made  life  easy  in  communication.  Sometimes,  it  is  said  that  social  networking  tools  are  the  revolution  in  human  communication.  They  smashed  almost  every  barrier  of  communication. They are available free on Internet only  one  needs  to  have  the  internet  connection.  
Personalise  messaging  is  again  the  need  of  the  society.  Various  messengers  have  been  launched  with  attractive  features  but  the  most  user-friendly  messenger  is  WhatsApp.  Whatsapp  is  widely  accepted  by  almost  every  sections  of  the  society  worldwide,  especially,  in  India. Library and information science (LIS) professionals  are  also  enjoying  these  services.  The  impact  of  the  Whatsapp messenger on LIS professions is needed to be  investigated because LIS professionals are in the business  of  information  communication  and  dissemination. 
1.1  Social  Networking Tools 
The social networking sites (SNS) are very popular  among  Indians,  especially  among  young  generation.  Facebook,  Flicker,  Twitter,  YouTube,  MySpace  etc  are  some  very  common  and  trendy  SNS  to  use  as  the  tool  for communication. Share, Tag, Comment, Like, Smiley,  etc.,  are  such  a  wonderful  and  attractive  features  of  the  SNS which make it acceptable to almost all age groups.  The SNS are the web-based services which enable users  to maintain their professional and public profile within a  network. In such a network, they can share their views and  resources among the members of the network. The SNS  give  freedom  to  inter-connect  with  all  members  within  the  network  too. The  classification  and  character  of  the  SNS  may  be  differing  from  one  site  to  another3. 
There  is  various  mobile  messenger  application  are  available  in  the  market  viz.  AIM  (AOL  Instant  Messenger),  aMSN,  BuzzIM,  Cubie  Messenger,  eBuddy  XMS  Messenger,  Facebook  Messenger,  Go  SMS  Pro,  Handcent  SMS,  Hangouts,  Hike,  iCall,  Invi  Messenger,  Kakao  Talk,  Line,  ManyCam,  Miranda  IM,  Nimbuzz  Messenger,  OrSiSo,  Palringo,  Skype,  SnapChat,  Social  Lite, Talk.to, Tango, Trillian, Twitter, Vbuzzer Messenger,  Viber, WeChat, Wempey,  and Yahoo  Messenger  etc.  but  Whatsapp  is  the  most  popular  among  all  these. 
2.  LITERATURE  REVIEW 
Social media is one of the very useful platforms where  people  may  discuss  issues  of  their  interest  or  general  issues sitting in the virtual environment. In fact, it gives  an  opportunity  to  restore  their  relationships  remotely  too.  Englander4   observed  in  his  study  that  students  are  
Received 18 June 2016, revised 14 October 2016, online published 30 November 2016 

========1========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  6, NOVEMBER   2016 
sparing their time on SNSs for other purposes apart from  their  academic  activities  which  affect  their  study  too.  According to Mazer5, SNS have shown the positive impact  on students as for as easy learning climate among them.  Instant  Messaging  tool  helps  to  communicate  instantly  between  a  teacher  and  students  which  enables  to  help  an  individual  student  for  a  particular  problem6.  
Team man is the demand of the 21st century, which  skills is not possible to be developed in the conventional  classroom but such skills are developed in students while  working  in  Whatsapp  due  to  sharing  and  co-operation  among each other. The Discussions made by students on  the  particular  problem,  issues  and  challenges  under  the  direct or indirect supervision of teachers inculcate harmony  and  teamwork  among  them7.  In  last  10  years,  various  channels  of  digital  communication  have  been  accepted  by the groups of teachers and students in communicating  each  other.  Facebook  groups,  Orkut,  Google+,  Twitter,  Short  Messaging  Service  (SMS)  and  E-mails  etc.  are  some  of  the  tools  which  are  very  popular  and  the  latest  one is Whatsapp messenger of this family. Students and  teachers  find  them  appropriate  for  study  and  learning  purpose  due  to  their  uniqueness  and  diverse  features8. 
From  these  it  is  observed  that  the  use  of  SNS  is  assessed  in  schools  and  academic  environment.  It  has  the positive and negative effect on teachers and students  too.  But  at  the  same  time,  none  of  the  studies  has  been  done  so  far  to  analyse  the  impact  of  the  use  of  WhatsApp  messenger  on  LIS  professionals.  This  study  will give new ideas and experience in understanding the  approach  of  LIS  professionals  towards  SNS,  especially  of WhatsApp  Messenger. 
3.  SCOPE AND   OBJECTIVES 
The study is confined to only library and information  science professionals, particularly of Indian region. The  LIS  professionals  who  are  using  WhatsApp  messenger  tool  on  their  mobile  phones  are  only  included  in  this  study. It is also taken care of that such LIS professionals  shall  be  deemed  to  be  participants  in  this  research  who  are  the  member  of  any  group  addressing  to  the  library  and  information  science  area. 
The  study  was  undertaken  to  analyse  the  impact  of  WhatsApp  messenger  on  library  and  information  science  professionals  of  India.  The  main  objectives  of  the  study  were  to: 
(a) Study  the  time  consumed  by  the  LIS  professionals  
on WhatsApp  messenger. 
(b) Purpose  of  using  WhatsApp  Messenger  by  the  LIS  
professionals  
(c) Views of LIS professionals towards the information  
shared  on  WhatApp  Messenger  such  as  personal  
information, duplication of information and authenticity  
of  information. 
(d) Expectation  of  LIS  professionals  from  WhatsApp  
Messenger. 
425 
4.  METHODOLOGY 
The primary and secondary data have been collected  from diverse sources including journals, internet sources,  books,  etc.  The  data  has  been  collected  to  achieve  the  goals of the research through survey method. Receiving  answers  to  the  questions  on  particular  problems  from  the  group  of  people  on  the  basis  of  their  opinion  and  experience by is the course of a survey9.  The  collected  data  and  its  interpretation  shall  be  used  to  get  findings  of the research. A well designed pre-tested questionnaire  comprising  of  11  questions  have  been  developed.  SNS  are  very  much  popular  among  the  LIS  professionals  and  assuming  that  they  are  quite  familiar  with  the  use  of  computer  devices.  Therefore,  online  survey  method  is  being  adopted.  The  online  survey  method  helps  to  reduce  the  paper  use  and  time  saving  too.  
The  questionnaire  has  been  developed  on  Google  Forms and link of the same has been shared with various  LIS  groups  available  on  WhatsApp  and  also  displayed  on  the  Facebook  wall  of  the  researcher  for  15  days.  The  actual  responses  have  been  recorded  without  any  human  intervention. 
5.  DATA ANALYSIS 
The online survey was made during 10-25 May 2016.  Total 203 WhatsApp members participated in this survey.  75.4 % LIS professionals have participated followed by  14.30  %  faculty  members.  Only  10.30  %  LIS  students  have  participated  in  the  event.  LIS  professionals  from  technical,  academic,  higher  and  school  library  system  have  participated  in  this  survey.  Their  representation  is  also  almost  all  cadre  of  library  system  from  top  to  lower  level. 
5.1 WhatsApp  Messenger’s  Membership 
It  was  observed  from  the  study  (Fig.  1)  that  30  %  LIS professionals are the member of WhatsApp Messenger  since  more  than  three  years  whereas  51.70  %  members  are  in  the  last  one  to  two  years.  Only  18.20  %  LIS  professionals joined WhatsApp Messenger from less than  one  year.  This  shows  that  LIS  professionals  are  quite  active  on  such  social  networking  platforms.    5.2 Involvement  in WhatsApp  Messenger  Groups 
Figure  2  reveals  that  44.30  %  LIS  professionals  are active in >3 LIS groups which are quite impressive.  26.10  %  LIS  professionals  have  joined  only  one  group  followed  by  16.30  %  where  members  have  joined  3  groups  whereas  only  13.30  %  are  the  member  of  only  two LIS groups. Library professionals, LIS Professionals,  Library  Dot  Com,  LIS  Forum  and  LIS  Link  groups  are  most popular among the LIS professionals. LIS Question  Bank  2016,  LIS  Rockstars  Linux  for  librarians  and  UGC  Net  2016  Lib.Sc.  groups  are  been  prepared  with  attractive  titles.  Some  LIS  groups  are  dedicated  to  a  very  specialised  activity.  The  data  is  quite  impressive  in  the    context  of  the  participation  of  LIS  professionals  in  such  SNS. 

========2========

BAJPAI: IMPACT OF  W HATSAPP ON  LIS P ROFESSIONALS 
Figure 1. Social networking platforms on whatsapp. 
5.3 Frequency  of  Use  of  Group  to  Discuss  LIS- 
related  Issues 
WhatsApp  Messenger  is  a  very  good  tool  used  often  for  discussions.  Figure  3  shows  that  73.40  %  LIS  professionals  are  using  five  times  a  day  for  discussions  followed by ten times (13.30 %) in a day whereas 9.90 %  professionals  used  it  for  the  same  purpose  20  times  a  day. Only 3 % professionals are using it 15 times a day.  The  study  reflects  that  LIS  professionals  are  using  this  platform  for  discussions  regularly  in  a  day. 
5.4 Time  Spent  in WhatsApp  Messenger  Every  Day 
In response to the question how much time you spent  on WhatsApp messenger, 40.90 % said that they spent less  that  30  minutes  per  day  on  it  followed  by  35  %  (31-60  min.  per  day).  Surprisingly  16.70  %  LIS  professionals  are dedicating > 90 min per day on Whatsapp messenger.  
Figure 2. Involvement in whatsapp messenger groups. 
The study reveals that Whatsapp messenger has succeeded  to  attract  to  the  LIS  professionals  immensely.  
5.5 Use  of WhatsApp  for  Casual  Communication 
Figure 5 shows that only 20.20 %  LIS professionals  are  using  WhatsApp  messenger  for  discussion  on  LIS- related issues. But a large number of LIS professioanals  (47.30  %)  are  using  it  for  casual  communication,  like,  wishing, etc. followed by 15.80 % to share images whereas  only  5  %  are  using  it  for  sharing  voice  chatting  and   only  11.80  %  are  using  it  to  share  videos. Therefore,  it  can  be  seen  from  the  study  that Whatsapp  messenger  is  mostly  used  for  causual  communication. 
Figure 3. Frequency of use of group to discuss LIS related  
issues. 
Figure 4. Time spent in WhatsApp messenger every day. 
5.6 Duplication  of  Information  Shared  on  LIS  
Group  in  a  Day 
When the issue related to sharing duplicate information  on LIS group was discussed,  a large number of respondents   agreed  that  duplicate  information  is  shared  2-5  times  per  day  whereas  7%  agree  that  11-15  times  duplicate  information is shared. 11% were of view that more that  20  times  per  day  same  information  is  being  shared.  It  shows  that  LIS  professionals  are  very  casual  in  sharing  information  on  LIS  groups.  
5.7 Reading  of  Each  Post  on  LIS  Group 
A large number of LIS professionals (45.80 %) read  each  and  every  post  on  LIS  group  followed  by  24.6  %  who read often the same. 3.6 % never read each and every  post on LIS group whereas 26.10 % do it sometime. The  study  depicts  that  LIS  professionals  are  very  particular  in  reading  information  shared  on  LIS  groups. 
5.8 Sharing  Information  on    LIS  Group After  
Checking Authenticity 
In  the  issue  of    checking  the  authenticity  of  the  information  while  sharing,  40.90  %  said  that  they  first  check  the  authenticity  of  the  posts  and  then  share  the  information,  followed  by  26.10  %  (often).  29.10  %  responded that they  casually and check sometimes whereas  3.90  %  responded  that  they  never  check  authenticity  of  the  information  while  sharing  it.  The  study  reveals  that  most  of  the  users  are  quite  aware  of  the  fact  that  authentic  information  should  be  shared. 
426 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  6, NOVEMBER   2016 
Figure 5. Use of whatsapp for casual communication 
Figure 5. Use of whatsapp for casual communication. 
Figure  6.  Duplicate  information  is  shared  on  LIS  group  in  a  
day. 
Figure 7. Read each post on the LIS group. 
5.9 Features  of WhatsApp  Used 
Figure 9 shows that 32.5 % used all the features of  WhatsApp Messenger  whereas 45.5 % used some features  of  it.  14.3  %  used  some  features  of  WhatsApp  whereas  only  7.9  %  are  not  aware  of  it.  From  the  study,  it  can  be  understood  that  LIS  professionals  are  using  features  of  WhatsApp  messenger  comprehensively.  
427 
Figure 8.  Sharing information after checking of     
authenticity. 
5.10   Sharing  Personal  Information  Shared  on  
  LIS  Group 
In  response  to  the  question  on  ‘whether  personal  information  should  be  shared  on  LIS  group’,  64  %  respondents  answered  ‘no’  whereas  22.7  %  are  in  favor  of it. 13.3 % are not sure about it. The study shows that  LIS  professionals  understand  the  integrity  of  the  LIS  
Figure 9. Features of Whatsapp used. 

========4========

BAJPAI: IMPACT OF  W HATSAPP ON  LIS P ROFESSIONALS 
group  on  WhatsApp  messenger.  Therefore,  they  do  not  want to share personal information on such professional  groups  other  than  professional  information. 
5.11 Action  for  Posting  Other Than  LIS      
  Information 
From  Fig.  11    it  can  be  seen  that  the  huge  number  (64.5  %)  of  support    has  been  shown  in  favour  that  admin  should  take  strict  action  against  the  LIS  group  members  who  are  sharing  information  other  than  LIS  whereas  18.70  %  said  no  action  should  be  taken.  As  usual,  16.7  %  are  not  sure  about  the  idea.  The  study  reveals that LIS members are very focused and realising  
Figure 10. Personal information shared on LIS group. 
the  importance  of  the  LIS  group. 
5.12  LIS  Groups  on WhatsApp  as  Opinion About    
Vital  Sources  of  Communication  
Figure 12. Vital sources of communication. 
5.13  Boostinge    LIS  Profession  by  LIS  Groups  
  on WhatsApp 
It was observed that majority of the respondents (78.3 %)  agreed that such LIS groups on WhatsApp will boost the  LIS profession but at the same time, 8.9 % disagree with  the statement. 12.80 % have responded ‘Can’t say’ which  gives an impression that such members of the LIS group  are  not  sure  that  it  will  help  to  boost  LIS  profession.  The study reflects the positive impact of SNS especially  WhatsApp  essenger  on  LIS  professionals. 
5.14  Features  Required  on WhatsApp 
In  response  to  the  question  ‘Any  feature  do  you  want  to  suggest  that  WhatsApp  must  have’,  the  LIS  professionals have given followings suggestions to improve  WhatsApp  Messenger:  
(a) There should be request sending system to add any  
member  in  any  group  like  on  Facebook. 
irrelevant  post  from  the  group  shared  by  others.  
It  was  asked  whether  LIS  groups  on WhatsApp  are  
one  of  the  vital  sources  of  communication  to  the  same  
(b) Admin should have the authority of deletion of any  fraternity. A large number of LIS professionals (82.8 %)  
were of the opinion that LIS groups are the vital source  
(c) The  calling  facility  should  be  improved  and  video  of communication for the professionals of the same group  
whereas  very  few  think  that  it  is  not  so.  However  9.9  
(d) All  comments  on  the  particular  topic  should  be  
%  answered  as  ‘Can’t  say’.Fig.  12  the  study  prompts  
Figure 11. Action taken against members of LIS group. 
that accessibility and adaptability of SNS are increasing  among  LIS  professionals. 
calling  like  SYPE  should  be  added.  
listed  at  one  place. 
(e) Current  news  and  feed  services  should  be  
incorporated. 
(f) Discussion  forums  and  chat  room  should  be  
developed. 
(g) Video  conferencing  among  group  members  should  
be  integrated. 
(h) Facility  to  search  other  members  other  than  the  
group  should  be  incorporated  
(i) A feature that could stop duplication in post sharing  
should  be  introduced. 
(j) Sharing of large files in various file formats should  
be  included.  
(k) Information is shared must be reviewed by WhatsApp  
community  before  making  it  public. 
(l) Offline  feature  should  be  developed.    
428 

========5========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  6, NOVEMBER   2016 
(m) WhatsApp should have the feature to rate the posts  
shared  on  it.  
(n) Auto-clearance  of  catch  memory,  data  reduction,  
inbuilt  explorer  and  standard  news  feed  should  be  
extended.    
(o) WhatsApp messenger should be available in multi- 
languages  especially  in  regional  languages.  (p) Restrictions on use of WhatsApp messenger per day  
feature  should  be  used  (N  hour/minute  per  day).  (q) Privacy  and  security  features  should  be  improved  
which  can  be  configured  offline. 
(r) There  should  be  a  feature  to  mute  voice  chats  on  
the  group.  
13. MAJOR   F INDINGS 
The  findings  based  on  the  study  are: 
(a) The  popularity  of  WhatsApp  Messenger  among  
LIS  professionals  of  almost  all  cadres  are  quite  
audacious.  
(b) LIS  professionals  are  using  social  media  such  as  
WhatsApp  Messenger  since  last  2-3  years  which  
reflects LIS professionals’ awareness and enthusiasm  
to  use  new  tools.      
(c) LIS professionals are seriously involved in WhatsApp  
LIS group activities because the majority of participants  
are  the  member  of  more  than  3  LIS  groups. (d) LIS professionals are using LIS groups on WhatsApp  
messenger to discuss LIS related issues which give an  
edge to improve skills and to establish cohesiveness  
among  LIS  professionals. 
(e) LIS  professionals  are  sparing  quite  good  time  on  
WhatsApp  LIS  groups  which  is  again  a  striking  
phenomenon as for as the acceptability of WhatsApp  
messenger. 
(f) The  majority  of  LIS  professionals  have  chosen  
WhatsApp  for  casual  communication  rather  for  
discussion of LIS-related issues, which is not a fair  
aspect  of  it. 
(g) Most of the LIS professionals agreed that sharing of  
duplication  of  information  is  done  in  great  extent. (h) Most  of  the  LIS  professionals  are  sensibly  using  
WhatsApp Messenger. They read every post and share  
such  information  after  checking  its  authenticity. (i) One-third  of  the  LIS  professional’s  generation  is  
using  all  features  of  the  WhatsApp  messenger  and  
at  the  same  time  majority  of  the  LIS  professionals  
are  in  favour  of  not  to  share  personal  information  
on  LIS  groups. 
(j) They prefer also think that if other than LIS information  
is shared on LIS groups by the members, the admin  
may  take  strict  action  against  such  members. 
429 
(k) LIS professionals are using WhastApp messenger as  
the  vital  tool  of  communication  among  them.  They  
are  also  quite  optimistic  that  WhatsApp  messenger  
may  help  them  to  boost  their  professional  skills  by  
using  it  as  a  discussion  platform  on  LIS. 
14. CONCLUSIONS 
The  study  has  shown  some  positive  impact  on  LIS  professionals  who  are  using  WhatsApp  messenger.  Social  networking  sites  are  the  revolution  in  public  communication.  They  are  adopted  by  almost  every  age  group due to its availability at the rate of internet access  cost  and  user-friendly  platforms.  The  LIS  professionals  are  spending  quality  time  in  various  LIS  groups  on  WhatsApp  Messenger  to  discuss  LIS-related  issues.  Surprisingly  teachers,  students,  and  professionals  of  LIS  are  available  in  the  same  LIS  group  which  is  very  promising  to  enhance  skills  and  knowledge  too.  The  LIS  WhatsApp  Messenger  users  are  anticipating  more  features  in  the  same  like  review  the  authenticity  of  the  information shared on it, privacy and security of higher  standard,  discussion  chat  rooms  and  they  also  need  the  option  to  rate  the  posts  shared  by  the  members.  There  are  very  positive  notes  shown  by  LIS  professionals.  WhatsApp  Messenger  is  proving  its  worth  among  LIS  professionals  for  their  professional  growth  and  speedy  way  of  communication  tool.  
REFERENCES 
1.    http://www.statista.com/statistics/273018/number- 
of-internet-users-worldwide/  (accessed  on  12  May  
2016) 
2.      Mobile  internet  users  in  India  to  reach  371  mn  by  
June 2016. http://indianexpress.com/article/technology/ 
tech-news-technology/mobile-internet-users-in-india- 
to-reach-371-mn-by-june-2016/ (accessed on 11 May  
2016) 
3.    Boyd  &  Ellison.  Social  network  sites:  Definition,  
History & Scholarship. Journal of Computer- Mediated  
Communication., 2008,  13,  210-30. 
4.    Englander F.; Terregrossa RA, & Wang, Z. Educational  
Review.,   2010,  62(1),  85-96. 
5.      Mazer,  J.;  Murphy  R.  &  Simonds  C.  I’ll  see  you  
on  "Facebook":  The  effects  of  computer-mediated  
teacher self-disclosure on student motivation, affective  
learning,  and  classroom  climate.  Communication  
Education.,  2007, 56,  1-17. 
6.   Hrastinski, S.; Edman, A.; Andersson, F.; Kawnine,  
T. & Soames, C.A. Informal math coaching by instant  
messaging:  Two  case  studies  of  how  university  
students coach K-12 students. Interactive  Learning  
Environments.,  2014, 22(1),  84-96. 
7.  Bouhnik, D. & Deshen, M. WhatsApp goes to school:  
Mobile instant messaging between teachers and students.  
J.  of  Inf.  Tech.  Edu.  Res.,   2014,  13,  229. 

========6========

BAJPAI: IMPACT OF  W HATSAPP ON  LIS P ROFESSIONALS 
8.    Calvo,  R.;  Arbiol,  A.  &  Iglesias,  A.  Are  all  chats  
suitable  for  learning  purposes?    A  study  of  the  
required characteristics. Procedia Computer Science .,  
2014, 27,  251-60. 
9.    Leedy,  P.D.  &  Omrod  ,  J.E.  Practical  research:  
Planning  and  design  (Ed.  8),  Prentice  Hall,  NJ,  
2014,  183. 
Contributor 
Dr  Maneesh  Kumar  Bajpai  is  University  Deputy  Librarian  and In-charge University Librarian at Dr. Ram Manohar Lohiya  
National  Law  University,  Lucknow.  His  research  papers  have  been published in various National/International journals. He is  the executive editor (Technical) of ‘Legal Analyst Journal’  and  Managing Editor of RMLNLU Journal.  He is been nominated as  the subject expert by the prestigious universities of India. He is  also Assistant Program In-charge at IGNOU RMLNLU Center.  Recently, he has been nominated as University Coordinator for  Shodhgangotri/Shodhganga ETD programme. He has experience  in  LIS  field  more  than  15  years.  He  has  specialisation  in  Web  2.0,  digital  library,  innovative  library  services  and  law  librarianship.  
430 

========7========

