DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 36, No. 5, September 2016, pp. 284-290  DOI: 10.14429/djlit.36.5.10283 
 2016, DESIDOC 
  Use of Social Networking Sites Tools and Services by LIS Professionals for  
Libraries: A Survey 
Anna Kaushik 
Central Library, University of Kota (Rajasthan) 
E-mail: drkaushikanna@gmail.com 
    Ab STrAcT 
Social networking sites (SNS) are widely used by the library information science professionals for libraries  for various purposes due to their characteristics, facilities and connectivity. This study provides views of library and  information science professionals regarding usages of SNS tools and services for their libraries. It was discovered  from the study that maximum number of library and information science professionals who responded in this survey  were associated with academic libraries have known about SNS tools and services since more than four years from  internet/search engines, use SNS several times in daily, for interacting with the users and getting feedback from  the users , used SNS namely ‘Facebook’, for marketing of library services and products but did not have policy  for using SNS into their libraries and lack of credibility of SNS tools and services emerged as  major barrier to  use SNS for libraries. Apart from this, maximum number of respondents said that SNS tools and services will be  
used for libraries in full extend in future.  
Keywords: Library and information science professionals, social networking sites (SNS), libraries   
1. INTrodUcTIoN 
Advent of Internet technologies especially world wide  web  (WWW)  facilitates  to  the  people  to  use  different  social  networking  sites  (SNS)  for  different  purposes.  These  SNS  tools  and  services  enable  users  to  connect,  contribute, share and get feedbacks of their posts. Though,  different  SNS  tools  and  services  differ  each  other  but  most  common  thing  in  these  SNS  tools  and  services  is  to  provide  platforms  to  connect,  contribute,  collaborate  post and get reflections for their inputs free of cost. The  most  important  feature  of  social  networking  sites  is  to  facilitate user’s to make their social networks and build  connections worldwide with ease, Huan & Eric1   added.  Being  above  said  facilities,  SNS  have  presented  great  impact  on  every  kind  of  users  and  society.  However,  people  who  resided  in  any  corner  of  the  world  have  access and use these SNS tools and services as per their  interest and purposes. Boyd & Ellison2  defined that SNS  are  web-based  services  which  permitted  individual  to  develop a public profile, express/share to a list of users  who are connected with him/her. But there is vagueness  in  the  term  SNS,  sometime  this  term  is  used  as  social  media  or  Web  2.0  owing  to  containing  some  social  networking tools and services. Due to deeper impact and  wide useb of SNS by the users, the libraries are thinking  seriously  towards  shifting  their  traditional  services  on  SNS  platform.  Worldwide  the  library  and  information  science (LIS) professionals who are working in different  libraries  are  connecting  themselves  and  their  libraries  with  the  SNS  sphere  and  delivering  different  types  of  library  services  to  the  target  users  worldwide.  The  LIS  
professionals  who  are  working  in  diverse  libraries  are  exploring  potentials  of  different  SNS  tools  and  services  regarding  how  these  tools  and  services  can  be  used  for  libraries  effectively  to  disseminate  library  services  to  the  users  in  social  networking  environment.  Therefore,  an  attempt  is  made  to  know  different  views  regarding  using  SNS  tools  and  services  for  their  libraries  for  diverse  purposes. 
2.   LIT erATUre revIew 
Diverse  issues  related  to  social  networking  sites,  social media were covered by different studies conducted  by various authors in which Shiri & Rathi3  study mainly  covered  one  of  the  SNS  tools  and  service  component,  namely ‘Twitter’ in particularly public library perspective  and  discovered  that  Twitter  may  be  used  for  diverse  information services and knowledge management practices  in public libraries. Further, this study was also categorised  Twitter contents through scheme specially for information  services  offered  by  public  libraries.  Jeyshankar4,et  al.,  conducted a survey for access and use social networking  sites  among  the  post  graduate  students  of  rural  based  college  of  Tamil  Nadu,  India  and  revealed  that  most  of  respondents  contain  skills  of  SNS  for  resources  sharing  and  communication.  Ayiah  &  Kumah’s5 study  focussed  on  link  to  SNS  on  library’s  webpage  particularly  for  African  libraries  and  revealed  that  presence  of  social  networking  sites  on  library  webpage  can  be  helpful  in  building  collaboration  between  academic  community  and  libraries.  Vitaki6,   et  al. , made  the  balance  between  audience  and  privacy  of  data  as  well  as  affects  of  
Received 30 June 2016, revised 12 August 2016, online published 30 September 2016 

========1========

KAUSHIK: USE OF SOCIAL NETWORKING SITES TOOLS AND SERVICES BY LIS PROFESSIONALS FOR LIBRARIES: A SURVEY 
privacy  on  audience  while  using  SNS  for  different  purposes.  Young  &  Rossmann7 demonstrated  the  ways  about how social networking sites may be helpful building  library community. Mannheimer8, et al.,proposed library  specific privacy ethical framework for conducting social  networking sites research. Chen9, et al., study focused on  how  libraries  can  make  interaction  with  users  by  using  social  networking  sites.  This  study  further  stressed  on  necessities  for  libraries  to  coordinate  diverse  types  of  SNSs with regard to improve the efficiency of interacting  with users on social networking sites. Zohoorian-Fooladi  & Abrizah10   argued  about  the  social  media  presence  in  Malasiyan academic libraries setting and also discovered  that  the  librarians  are  using  social  media  for  promoting  library  services,  organising  knowledge  and  for  getting  feedback from users against their inputs. Phillips11  discussed  perceptions  and  attitudes  of  librarians  towards  using  social  networking  sites  tools  and  services  effectively  not  only  for  libraries  but  also  for  other  young  users  for  various  purposes.  
Jacobson12 measured the use of Facebook as a library  tools  whether  it  meets  intended  goals  of  a  library  in  terms  of  perceived  and  actual  use  of  Facebook.  Gaha  & Hal13  investigated the sustainable use of social media  particularly in the context of marketing libraries. Gupta14,  et  al.,  examined  the  awareness  and  use  of  selected  social networking sites by library staff of thirteen power  sector  organisations  through  a  survey  and  found  that  library staff who did not aware about social networking  applications  was  not  have  understanding  to  use  social  media  applications  in  the  libraries  and  library  staff  was  also  suffering  from  lack  of  adequate  training  on  social  media applications. Aras15  stressed on to build an effective  policy  for  use  social  networking  sites  for  a  university  library in order to meet expectations and requirements of  both libraries and users. Dahibhat & Patil16  highlighted  the impact of social media on library services in present  and future perspectives and also discussed the challenges  and  skill  required  for  library  and  information  science  professionals for using social media for enhancing library  services.  Johnson  &  Kaye17 examined  the  credibility  of  social networking sites through an online survey. Choi’s study18   urged  to  the  libraries  to  be  prepared  for  social  media  librarian. 
Islam & Habiba19  examined the use of social media in  forty six libraries through an online survey and discovered  that  majority  of  libraries  are  using  social  networking  sites  for  marketing  library  services  and  products. 
3.   o bjecTIveS 
The  objectives  of  the  study  are  to: 
•	 Investigate  the  awareness,  sources,  frequencies  and  
reasons to know and use SNS tools and services by  
LIS  professionals  for  their  libraries  
•	 Assess  the  types  of  SNS  tools  and  services  and  
library  services  are  using  by  LIS  professionals 
•	 Identify  barriers  and  policies  to  use  SNS  tools  and  
services  for  libraries 
•	 Get  opinions  of  LIS  professionals  about  the  future  
use  of  SNS  tools  and  services  in  libraries  4. MeThodoLogy  
For  doing  this  study,  a  survey  was  conducted  using  an  online  questionnaire  which  consisting  of  total  11  questions  in  which  five  multiple  choice  and  six  single  choice  questions  were  incorporated  on  various  issues  connected  to  use  of  SNS  tools  and  services  by  library  and  information  science  professionals  for  their  respective libraries. To know views of LIS professionals  towards  use  SNS  tools  and  services  for  libraries,  the  online  questionnaire  was  circulated  to  100  library  and  information  science  professionals  who  are  working  in  different libraries on their personal e-mail ID(s) through  electronic mail e-mail. In response to questionnaire sent  to  100  LIS  professionals,  80  completed  questionnaires  were  received.  The  responses  received  were  recorded  and  tabulated  in  MicroSoft  Excel-2007  and  analysed.  This  survey  was  conducted  from  1  June  2016  to  28  June  2016. 
5. ANALySIS 
It  was  found  that  highest  number  of  respondents  (92  %)  who  participated  in  this  survey  is  working  in  academic  libraries  in  contrast  to  public  libraries  and  special libraries. But lowest number of LIS  professionals  who  participated  in  this  survey  are  working  in  equal  number (4 % each) in public libraries and special libraries  respectively.  
5.1 Awareness  about  SNS Tools  and  Services 
Majority of LIS professionals (97.5 %) know about  SNS tools and services which may be due to popularity  of  SNS  tools  and  service  around  the  world  and  these  tools and services provide facilities to connect, post and  get  reflections  against  their  posts  in  online  mode.  On  contrary,  only  (2.5  %)  LIS  said  that  they  do  not  know  about  SNS  tools  and  services.  
5.2  Means  to  Know  about  SNS Tools  and  Services 
Figure  1  shows  the  means  to  know  about  SNS  tools  and  services.  It  can  be  seen  from  Fig.  1  that  in  comparison to other seven means, maximum numbers of  LIS  professionals  (60  %)  opined  that  they  knew  about  SNS tools and services by internet/search engines which  are  the  reservoirs  and  popular  media  to  find  any  type  of  desired  information.  Kaushik20   in  his  study  found  that  library  and  information  science  professionals  used  e-resources and search engine to know about massive open  online course (MOOC). Besides this, from professionals  colleagues,  from  e-resources  and  from  friends  also  discovered  as  useful  medium  in  contrast  to  other  four  means in which among rest of four means, ‘from readers’  used  by  minimum  (5  %)  LIS  professionals  only. 
285 

========2========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  5, SEPTEMBER   2016 
Figure 1. Means to know about SNS tools and services.  5.3  Use  of  SNS Tools  and  Services 
Figure 2 shows that majority of library and information  science professionals are using SNS tools and services from  more than four years for libraries in comparison to other  time  slabs  as  mentioned  in  the  Fig.  2,  may  be  reasons  for  getting  popularity  of  some  SNS  tools  and  services  in  academic  arena.  On  contrary,  equally  only  (2.5  %  )  LIS  professionals  are  using  SNS  tools  and  services  for  library  for  one  year  and  two  years,  respectively. 
Figure 2. Use of SNS tools and services. 5.4  Frequencies  to  Use  SNS Tools  and  Services 
While  question  asked  from  respondents  regarding  frequency of use SNS tools and services for libraries, the  responses  received  from  respondents  presented  through  Fig. 3 in which maximum (60 %) LIS professionals said  that  they  use  SNS  tools  and  services  several  times  in  daily  in  contrast  to  other  four  frequencies. This  may  be  happened  because  LIS  professionals  would  like  to  keep  updates  and  get  reflections  for  their  inputs  many  times  in a day through SNS tools and services as well. Further,  
 Figure 3. Frequencies to use SNS tools and services. 
286 
two  frequency,  viz.,  several  times  in  a  week  and  once  daily  are  being  used  by  twenty  percent  to  ten  percent  LIS  professionals  respectively.  Whilst,  equal  number  of  LIS  professionals  (5  %)  are  using  SNS  tools  and  services  on  basis  of  once  in  a  week  and  several  times  in  a  month,  respectively. 
5.5  Status  of  Social  Networking  Policy 
Most  LIS  professionals  (65  %)  who  are  using  SNS  tools  and  services  don’t  have  any  social  networking  policy in their respective libraries which is a mandatory  mechanism  for  using  for  SNS  tools  and  services  into  libraries  without  any  doubt  and  hesitation.  Chitumbo21 study  focused  on  make  policy  for  social  media  tools  to  provide  guidance  on  access  and  use  of  social  media  tools  on  the  institutional  network.  But,  on  contrary,  it  is  found  that  only  few  number  of  libraries  (35  %)  have  social  networking  policies. 
5.6 reasons  to  Use  SNS Tools  and  Services 
It can be noted from Fig. 4 that in contrast to other  three  reasons,  two  reasons  namely  ‘for  interacting  with  the  users’  and  ‘for  getting  feedback  from  the  users’  in  majority  opined  by  equal  number  of  LIS  professionals  (83.7 %) as these are main motives of LIS professionals  to use SNS tools and services for libraries, followed by  reason  ‘for  communicating  information’  with  (75  %)  LIS  professionals. 
Figure 4. reasons to use SNS tools and services. 
Sahoo & Sharma22  presented different views regarding  use  of  social  networking  sites  tools  and  services  and  identified areas in which SNS tools and services may be  incorporated  in  libraries  by  using  examples  of  various  SNS  tools  and  services.  While,  very  slight  difference  was observed in between two reasons ‘For adding extra  value in library services’ and ‘Showcase for the library’  in  terms  of  number  of  LIS  professionals.  
5.7  Types  of  Library  Services clubbed  with  SNS  
Tools  and  Services 
It is necessary to know about which library services  are  providing  to  targeted  users  through  SNS  tools  and  

========3========

KAUSHIK: USE OF SOCIAL NETWORKING SITES TOOLS AND SERVICES BY LIS PROFESSIONALS FOR LIBRARIES: A SURVEY 
service. Figure 5 presents responses got from the respondents  in  which  majority  of  library  and  information  science  professionals  are  using  SNS  tools  and  services  for  ‘marketing of library services and products’, followed by  ‘for library news and updates’ with (82.5 %) respondents  as these are important services which not only attracting  the  users  but  also  keep  inform  them  in  advance  about  happening  of  the  libraries. 
Figure 5. Library services clubbed with SNS tools and  
services. 
Sriram23   investigated  how  different  social  media  tools  and  services  may  be  used  effectively  in  terms  of  marketing the library services and products by experience  of  KN  Raj  Library  Centre  for  Development  Studies,  Thiruvananthapuram. Apart from this, two services namely  ‘reference  service’  and  ‘resources  sharing’  respectively  were opined by equal percentage of library and information  science professionals with (55 %). On the contrary, among  six services, ‘circulation services’ was responded by only  (15  %)  LIS  professionals  at  minority  level.  
5.8 barriers  to  Use  SNS Tools  and  Services. 
In  contrast  to  five  barriers  mentioned  in  Fig.  6,  three  barriers  namely  lack  of  credibility  of  SNS  tools/  services, lack of security and privacy and lack of policy  to  use  SNS  tools/services  were  responded  by  highest  number of library and information science professionals  
Figure 6. barriers to use SNS tools and services. 
and slight difference was noted among above said three  barriers  because  security  and  privacy  of  data  as  well  as  credibility are the major issues as far as use of SNS tools  and  services  in  any  domain,  are  concerned.  Ezeani  &  Igwesi24  pointed out challenges faced by Nigerian libraries  to  use  social  networking  sites  into  their  libraries  and  also provide some readies for these challenges. Further,  barriers,  viz.,  lack  of  high  Internet  speed  and  dramatic  growth  of  SNS  tools/services  respectively  pointed  out  as  another  important  barriers  by  equal  number  of  LIS  professionals.  On  contrary,  among  three  barriers,  one  barrier  such  as  ‘lack  of  technical  skills’  suggested  by  lowest  number  of  LIS  professionals  (35  %)  only. 
5.9 Types  of  SNS Tools  and  Services  use 
While  asking  question  about  to  use  types  of  SNS  services  and  tools  for  libraries,  it  is  found  from  Fig.  7  that  majority  of  LIS  professionals  (92.5  %)  are  using  
Figure 7. Types of SNS tools and services use. Facebook,  followed  by  Twitter  with  (85  %),  and  You  Tube and online discussion groups/forums both are with  equal  76.2  %  LIS  professionals  respectively  because  above  said  SNS  tools  and  services  are  the  established  SNS  tools  and  services  in  open  sphere  and  widely  used  by  almost  every  user  in  every  domain.  Chu  &  Du25 examined  the  usefulness  and  challenges,  and  factors  influencing  decisions  to  use  or  not  to  use  of  social  networking  tools  in  academic  library  context  through  an  online  survey  and  Facebook  and  Twitter  were  found  as  most  used  SNS  tools  in  university  libraries.  Besides  this,  among  eleven  SNS  tools  and  services,  LinkedIn,  Blog,  Slideshare, Wiki,  RSS,  Flickr  are  also  discovered  as another important SNS tools and services for libraries.  Rest  of  five  SNS  tools  and  services  using  by  less  than  50  %  LIS professionals wherein Skype using in minority  level  only  by  (33.7  %)  LIS  professionals. 
5.10  Future  Perception  about  SNS  Tools  and  
  Services  
In  response  to  question  regarding  use  of  SNS  tools  and services in future for libraries, the responses received  from respondents were depicted in Fig. 8 in which majority  
287 

========4========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  5, SEPTEMBER   2016 
    Figure 8. Future perception about SNS tools and services. 
of  LIS  professionals  (55  %)  said  that  SNS  tools  and  services  will  be  fully  used  for  the  libraries  in  future  in  comparison to other indicators, such as ‘partially’, ‘rarely’,  and  ‘not  sure’.  Collins  and  Quans-Haase26   investigated  the adoption rates of social networking sites in academic  libraries and suggested that more social networking sites  should  be  used  by  the  librarian  in  future  in  connection  to create more contents as per user’s interest. But, exact  five  percent  difference  was  observed  among  indicators,  viz.,  ‘partially’,  ‘not  sure’  and  ‘rarely’  respectively. 
6.  FINdINgS 
The  following  findings  were  found  from  the  study:  Large number of LIS professionals who responded in this  survey  belonged  to  academic  libraries  in  comparison  of  other  type  of  libraries. 
•	 Most  of  LIS  professionals  know  about  SNS  tools  
and  services. 
•	 Majority  of  LIS  professionals  use  internet/search  
engine  for  knowing  about  SNS  tools  and  services. •	 Large number of LIS professionals use SNS tools and  
services  from  more  than  four  years  for  libraries. •	 Massive number of LIS professionals use SNS tools  
and  services  LIS  several  times  daily. 
•	 Large  number  of  library  and  information  science  
professionals use SNS tools and services for libraries  
without  having  policies  for  the  same. 
•	 To  use  SNS  tools  and  services  for  libraries,  two  
reasons—‘for  interacting  with  the  users’  and  ‘for  
getting  feedback  of  users’  were  given  by  most  of  
LIS  professionals. 
•	 Most of LIS professionals use SNS tools and services  
for  marketing  of  library  services  and  products. •	 Lack  of  credibility  of  SNS  tools/services,  lack  of  
security  and  privacy  and  lack  of  policy  to  use  SNS  
tools/ services were discovered as appropriate barriers  
for  using  SNS  tools  and  services  for  libraries. •	 Among  15  SNS  tools  and  services,  Facebook  used  
most  of  LIS  professionals. 
•	 SNS  tools  and  services  will  be  used  in  libraries  in  
future. 
288 
7.  SUggeSTIoNS 
The  following  are  some  of  the  suggestions  on  the  basis  of  findings  of  this  study: 
•	 LIS professional should participate in every type of  
surveys  conducted  time  to  time  on  different  topics  
to  provide  their  insights  and  experiences. •	 LIS  professional  must  know  about  SNS  tools  and  
services  which  may  be  connected  to  libraries  for  
different  purposes. 
•	 Most  appropriate  mean  should  be  discovered  and  
used  by  LIS  professionals  for  knowing  about  new  
SNS  tools  and  services.  
•	 LIS  professionals  should  use  trusted  SNS  tools  and  
services  to  establish  them  as  reliable  media  for  
libraries. 
•	 LIS professionals should use SNS tools and services  
as  per  need. 
•	 Every  LIS  professionals  should  make  proper  policy  
prior to use SNS tools and services for their libraries  
for  different  purposes.  
•	 LIS professionals should discover appropriate reasons for  
using SNS tools and services and also incorporate these  
reasons in their SNS policies with proper justifications  
in  connection  to  convince  authorities  explicitly  to  
use  SNS  tools  and  services  for  libraries.  •	 LIS  professionals  should  explore  possibilities  to  
provide  other  library  services  to  the  users  through  
SNS  tools  and  services. 
•	 LIS professionals should make remedies to overcome  
all barriers in use SNS tools and services for libraries  
in  connection  to  use  full  version  and  facilities  of  
SNS  tools  and  services  in  libraries  and  for  their  
professional  growth.  
•	 LIS  professionals  should  explore  possibilities  in  
which other SNS tools and services can be used for  
libraries  in  most  efficient  manner.  
•	 LIS  professionals  must  think  on  how  to  make  most  
effective use of SNS tools and services for libraries  
to  enhance  their  services  in  demanded  formats,  
achieving  goals  and  building  library  image  among  
academic  community. 
8. coNcLUSIoNS 
This study provides the different views of library and  information  science  professionals  regarding  use  of  SNS  tools and services for libraries. It is discovered from the  results of the study that majority library and information  science  professionals  are  aware  about  the  SNS  tools  through  Internet/  search  engines  and  using  SNS  tools  and services for interacting with users and for marketing  of library services but do not have policy regarding use  of  SNS  tools  and  services  for  their  respective  libraries  which  may  create  question  and  confusion  to  use  SNS  tools and services effectively for libraries. On the other  

========5========

KAUSHIK: USE OF SOCIAL NETWORKING SITES TOOLS AND SERVICES BY LIS PROFESSIONALS FOR LIBRARIES: A SURVEY 
hand, results of this study also revealed that credibility,  privacy and security of data on SNS tools and services are  big question marks for using these tools and services for  libraries for different purposes. Therefore, it is suggested  that diligent and explicit policies should be made for using  SNS  tools  and  services  for  the  libraries  on  the  basis  of  their  requirements,  users  and  goals  of  the  library  where  privacy  and  security  of  data  as  well  as  trust  on  use  of  SNS tools and services must be considered and included  after  thoroughly  examining  the  characteristics,  nature,  platforms  and  impact  of  SNS  services  and  tools.  Apart  from  this,  libraries  which  are  providing  library  services  through  the  SNS  tools  and  services  should  also  provide  proactive services and regular feedback should be taken  from  targeted  users  and  necessary  improvement  should  be  done  accordingly.  Moreover,  it  is  prime  duty  of  LIS  professionals  to  think  seriously  to  make  SNS  tools  and  services  as  a  reliable  medium  for  libraries. 
The further study may be carried out on the following  issues: 
•	 Growth  and  patterns  of  SNS  tools  and  services  in  
LIS  sphere. 
•	 Impact  of  SNS  tools  and  services  on  libraries  in  
future  perspectives. 
•	 Evaluation  of  SNS  tools  and  services  by  using  
different  parameters. 
•	 Trust  and  security  of  SNS  tools  and  services  in  
LIS  domain. 
reFereNceS 
1. Huan, C. & Eric, H. The lived meanings of Chinese  
social network sites (SNSs) among urban white-collar  
professionals: A  story  of  the  happy  network.  J.  of  
Inter. Advert.,  2010, 11(1),  11-26. 
2. Ellison,  N.  B.    Social  network  sites:  Definition,  
history, and scholarship. J. of Com. Media. Commu., 
2007,  13(1), 210-230. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/ 
doi/10.1111/j.1083-6101.2007.00393.x/epdf 3. Shiri, A. & Rathi, D. Twitter content categorisation:  
A  public  library  perspective.  J.  of  Inf.  &  Know.  
Manag.,  2013, 12(4),  13-8. 
4. Jeyshankar, R.; Nachiappan, N. & Suresh, M. Access  
and  use  of  social  networking  sites  (SNSs)  among  
the post graduate students of rural based college of  
Tamil Nadu, India-A Study. SRELS J. of Inf. Manag., 
2016, 53(3),  237-41. 
5. Ayiah, E.M. & Kumah, C.H. Social Networking: A  
tool to use for effective service delivery to clients by  
African libraries.  In  World Library and Information  
Congress: 77th  IFLA General Conference and Assembly  
2011,  pp.  1-14. 
6. Vitak, J.; Blasiola, S.; Patil, S. & Litt, E. Balancing  
audience  and  privacy  tensions  on  social  network  
sites:  Strategies  of  highly  engaged  users.   Inter.  J.  
of  Commu.,  2015, 9(20),  1485-1504. 
7. Young,  S.W.  &  Rossmann,  D.  Building  library  
community through social media. Inf. Tech.and Lib.  
(Online),  2015, 34(1),  20-37. 
8. Mannheimer,  S.;  Young,  S.W.  &  Rossmann,  D.  On  
the ethics of social network research in libraries. J.  
of  Inf.,  Commun.  and  Ethics  in  Soc.,   2016,  14(2),  
1-16. 
9. Chen,  D.Y.T.;  Chu,  S.K.W.  &  Xu,  S.Q.  How  do  
libraries use social networking sites to interact with  
users. Proceedings of the American Society for Inf.  
Sci.  and Tech,  2012, 49(1),  1-10. 
10. Zohoorian-Fooladi,  N.;  &  Abrizah,  A.  Academic  
librarians and their social media presence a story of  
motivations and deterrents. Information Development,  
2014, 30(2),  159-71. 
11. Phillips,  A.L.  Facebooking  it:  Promoting  library  
services to young adults through social media. Public  
Lib.  Quart.,  2015, 34(2),  178-97. 
12. Jacobson, T.B. Facebook as a library tool: Perceived  
vs.  actual  use. Coll.  &  Res.  Lib.,  2011 72(1),  79- 
90. 
13. Gaha, U. & Hall, S. Sustainable use of social media  
in libraries. Codex: The J. of the Louisiana Chapter  
of ACRL,  2015, 3(2),  47-67. 
14. Gupta, R.K.; Gautam, J.N. & Khare, V.P. Awareness  
and  use  of  social  media  applications  among  library  
staff  of  power  sector  organizations. Annals  of  Lib.  
and  Inf.  Stud.,  2015, 61(4),  320-31. 
15. Aras, B.B. University libraries and social media policies.  
J.  of  Balkan  Lib.  Union,   2014  2(1),  21-7. 16. Dahibhate, N.B. & Patil, S.K. Library and information  
services using social media tools: Need of the future.  
Asia  Pacific  J.  of  Lib.  and  Inf.  Sci.,  2015  3(2),  
1-8. 
17. Johnson,  T.J.  &  Kaye,  B.K.  Credibility  of  social  
network sites for political information among politically  
interested Internet users. J. of Com. Mediated Commu.,  
2014, 19(4),  957-74. 
18. Choi,  C.  Is  your  library  ready  for  a  social  media  
librarian.  In   ALIA  Biennial  Conference,  Sydney,  
Australia.  http://conferences.alia.  org.  au/alia2012/ 
Papers/18_Crystall.  Choi.  pdf. 
19. Islam,  M.M.  &  Habiba,  U.  Use  of  social  media  in  
marketing  of  library  and  information  services  in  
Bangladesh. DESIDOC J. of Lib. & Inf. Tech., 2015,  
35(4),  299-303. 
20. Kaushik, A.  Perceptions  of  library  and  information  
science  professionals  towards  massive  open  online  
course. World  Digital  Lib.,  2015, 8(2),  113-26. 21. Chitumbo, E.M.M. Social media tools for academic  
library  services.  Inte.  J.  of  Human.  and  Soc.  Sci.  
Inven.,  2015, 4(9),  33-40. 
289 

========6========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  5, SEPTEMBER   2016 
22. Sahoo,  D.R.  &  Sharma,  D.  Social  networking  tools  
for library services. Inte. J. of Inno. Sci., Engi. and  
Tech.,  2015, 2(3),  69-71. 
23. Sriram,  V.  Social  media  and  library  marketing:  
Experiences  of  KN  Raj  Library.  DESIDOC  J.  of  
Lib.  &  Inf.  Tec.,  2016, 36(3),  153-57. 
24. Ezeani,  Chinwe  Nwogo  and  Igwesi,  Uzoamaka:  
The  Nigeria  Experience.  Lib.  Philo.and  Prac.  
(e-journal).  Paper  814.0  http://digitalcommons.unl. 
edu/libphilprac/814 
25. Chu, S.K.W. & Du, H.S. Social networking tools for  
academic  libraries.  J.  of  Lib.  and  Inf.  Sci.,   2013,  
45(1),  64-75. 
26. Collins,  G.  &  QuanHaase,  A.  Social  media  and  
academic libraries: Current trends and future challenges.  
290 
Proc. Amer. Soc. for Inf. Sci. and Tech.,  2012,  49(1),  1-4. 
contributor 
dr  Anna  Kaushik  is  working  as  Deputy  Librarian  and  In- charge,  Central  Library,  University  of  Kota,  Rajasthan.  He  holds PhD degree and has 14 years work experience in library  administration and management. He has been published several  articles in national and international LIS journals, conferences,  edited  LIS  books  and  contributed  book  chapters  in  national  repute  LIS  books.  His  areas  of  research  interest  are:  Open  source  software  and  resources,  internet  resources,  marketing  of  library  services,  Web  2.0,  and  application  of  emerging  technologies  in  LIS.  

========7========

