DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 36, No. 5, September 2016, pp. 320-324 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.36.5.10323 
 2016, DESIDOC 
Access versus Ownership of Information and DESIDOC’s Balancing Act 
Gopal Bhushan* and Margam Madhusudan** *Director, DESIDOC, Metcalfe House, Delhi–110 054 
**Department of Library and Information Sciences,University of Delhi-110 007 
E-mail:mmadhusudhan@libinfosci.du.ac.in 
ABStrACt 
Under Open Data policy of the Government of India, the Indian research organisations playing a vital role in making  unrestricted data sharable in the open domain. Organisations are facilitating the access to data by civil sectors for  its potential reuse, repurposing and empowerment of the society. In this endeavour, the Defence Research and  Development Organisation (DRDO) of the Ministry of Defence of India, is contributing immensely by making research  data available for the economic and social value to the society. The paper is an attempt to discuss opportunities and  challenges of the data revolution, from ownership to access and the role of DRDO’s scientifc community in making  unrestricted data available for sharing, reuse and re-purposing by the civil sector; and, how data revolution can be  exploited to improve own knowledge and beneft to society through data-driven research and innovation. 
Keywords:  Information access, ownership of information, DRDO, DESIDOC, India 
1 
  IN trODUCtION 
As  rightly  said  by  Shri  Narendra  Modi,  Prime  Minister  of  India  that,  ‘Every  institution  has  to  evolve  in  tune  with  the  times,  no  institution  can  remain  static.  Changes are inevitable in tune with the times. There is a  need to change the way we think’1. In the modern world,  libraries  and  ICT  services  play  a  key  role  and  as  such,  the  system  of  governance  required  to  be  modified  in  order to address the fundamental issues that have emerged  as  a  result.  Due  to  technology  adoption,  the  world  has  become  interlinked  and  innovation  happening  globally,  the  only  way  to  stay  on  top  of  trends  is  to  constantly  research  the  best  practices  and  global  requirements.  A  library reflects its role in social, cultural, economic and  scientific  development  of  a  nation.  It  builds  resources,  develops  services,  preserves  and  provides  access  to  the  information,  which  is  growing  exponentially.  The  technology  for  use  by  libraries  is  also  advancing  in  great  deal  day-by-day.  These  advances  have  brought  out  lot  of  changes  in  the  role  of  librarians  in  terms  of  collection development, acquisition, preservation, access  and  delivery.  ICT  has  also  played  a  major  role  in  this  development and access scenario. Hence, there is a debate  among  those  who  advocate  importance  of  ownership  to  those  believing  and  giving  more  importance  to  access  to  information.  
Access  versus  ownership  is  an  issue,  which  has  come  to  the  fore  in  the  library  world  over  the  past  few  decades.  The  access  versus  ownership  debate  is  
all  about  change.  Over  the  time  libraries  evolve  from  warehouses  of  information/collection  to  providers  of  access  to  information/collection  and  similarly  views  librarians  has  changed  from  information  collectors  to  information  managers.  But  still  librarian’s  problem  is  plenty  in  dealing  with  universe  of  knowledge2. • Availability  of  too  many  information  sources  • Limited access available information due to lack of  
human  assistance  and  funds  
• Ownership of scholarly literature is getting expensive  
and  the  same  time  free  access  of  quality  literature  
is  limited.  
• Libraries  need  to  provide  access  to  more  resources  
than  ever  before  
• Libraries  are  spending  more  on  content,  but  at  the  
same  time  acquiring  less  
• Libraries want more full-text resources- but security  
of  print  
• Users  want  24/7  access  to  resources-preferably  
remote.  
1.1      Ownership  Scenario 
Ownership  as  defined  by  Oxford  Dictionary,  ‘legal  right of possession; property, proprietorship, dominion’.  Ownership involves three legal rights: the right to exclude;  the  right  to  do  whatever  you  want  or  to  prevent  others  from  doing  certain  things  with  the  items  owned;  and  
Received 7 August 2016, revised 16 August 2016, online published 30 September 2016 

========1========

1.2     Access  Scenario 
• Monopoly  of  some  publishers  and  escalating  the  
• Publisher mergers lead to higher prices as competition  
• 
the  right  to  preserve.  Ownership  in  the  library  context  pertains to the physical item, not the rights to its content.  However, for R&D libraries, the right to select items for  their  collections,  the  right  to  use  them,  and  the  right  to  preserve  them  so  that  they  are  available  over  the  long  term, are essential to support research and scholarship3.  The reality that ownership was the only practical means  to  provide  access  to  most  material  meant  that  in  the  process  of  serving  current  needs.4   If  one  looks  at  the  scenario of ownership but without access to information,  then  the  library  can’t  serve  the  information  needs  of  its  readers. If a library wants to depend only on ownership  then  it  has  to: 
(a)   purchase all collection which include books, journals,  
databases  in  all  available  formats,  (b)  involve  in  
massive digitisation process, (c) develop databases,  
technology, and supporting infrastructure development,  
and so on which can potentially lead to many major  
constraints;  some  broad  ones  are  as  follows: • Library can’t afford to subscribe all needed journals,  
books,  reports,  proceedings,  etc. 
• Rise  of  number  of  journals/books  and  other  
material5 
• Limited  library  budget  and  space5 
• 
cost  every  year  
• 
decreases  
• 
resources 
• Specific  as  well  as  general  information  needs  of  
users  
• Availability  of  information  in  various  formats • Requirement  of  users  for  different  formats  as  well  
as  different  platform  (compatibility  issues) • Difficulty  in  maintenance  and  complaints  from  
patrons5 
• Pressure from scientists/users to access to critically  
important  journal  literature 
• Too  much  development  cost  for  in-house  
databases. 
As the results indicate, non–ownership is the current  state of affairs for an ever-growing percentage of licensed  digital resources and collections acquired by R&D libraries;  perpetual  access  of  digital  content  and  at  the  same  time  digital  rights  on  access  of  contents  is  hampering  persistent access to and use of the content. As Adrienne  Muir  notes,  ‘[i]f  libraries  do  not  physically  own  digital  material,  they  cannot  preserve  it  because  this  requires  physical  intervention’  and  the  new  ‘access  rather  than  ownership  model  [raises]  the  question  of  responsibility  for  preservation’6. 
Limited  manpower  to  handle  all  the  subscribed  
• 
In  context  of  libraries,  access  broadly  means:  Bibliographic  access  where  user  get  knowledge  of  information’s existence; Physical access - actual possession  of  that  information  thru  ownership;  and  Access  thru  shared  ownership  by  combining  access  and  ownership.   In  a  total  access  scenario  where  there  will  be  no  books  and  no  print  formats,  and  libraries  will  solely  depend  on  other  sources  for  their  survival  there  going  to  be  problems  as  well.  Due  to  following  reasons5: • Too much dependence of one library on other libraries/ 
publishers  capabilities  and  also  many  libraries  on  
one  library 
• Possible  delays  in  delivery  of  sources  and  services  
and  waiting  on  part  of  users 
• Speed  of  access  and  elimination  of  browsing • No  browsing  of  book  stacks 
• One  library  catering  too  many  libraries  (documents  
might  be  already  issued) 
• Double payment by the patrons for all information— 
membership  fee  and  printing  fee/searching  fee • Photocopying  charges  vs  article  purchase  charges  
Pay  for  multiple  copies  of  same  articles 
No  backup  of  already  paid  sources/services 
Publishers/libraries  may  increase  the  charges  
anytime  
Non  availability  of  specific  resources  catering  to  
specific  needs 
There  is  a  perception  that  information  will  be  electronically  accessible  from  home  computers,  and  librarians  will  no  longer  be  needed.  But,  the  librarians  play  a  role  in  information  collection,  evaluation  of  resources, access to information and the medium through  which the information can be disseminated. It is also not  possible  for  the  libraries  to  own  everything.  They  have  to  seek  access  and  network  with  other  resources  and  if  access  to  information  is  not  provided  then  a  library  is  not  serving  its  purpose.  Some  of  the  ways  to  deal  with  such  situations  are:  
(i) Document  delivery  service,  
(ii) Inter-library  Loan,  
(iii)  Subscription  of  databases,  
(iv) Rely  on  ‘big  deals’  and  consortia  discount,  and  (v) Open  access  to  books  and  journals. 
Kane has advocated the idea of access and ownership  of  information  instead  of  access  versus  ownership  to  serve the patrons that will save the libraries from certain  extinction.3  Further, Levine-Clark has rightly pointed out  that in near future ‘libraries will have banded together to  develop more efficient collaborative collection development  decisions,  making  it  more  likely  that  a  broad  range  of  
321 

========2========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  5, SEPTEMBER   2016 
titles is intentionally secured for the future. At the same  time,  libraries  will  work  together  to  develop  strategies  and  tools  that  enable  the  collective  preservation  of  the  cultural  record’’5.    
2. ABOUt   DESIDOC 
Defence  Scientific  Information  and  Documentation  Centre  (DESIDOC)  which  is  among  52  research  labs/ establishments  of  Defence  Research  &  Development  Organisation  (DRDO)  is  the  sole  agency  engaged  in  the  dissemination  of  information  and  knowledge  to  the  DRDO’s  scientific  community  and  civil  society.  In  DRDO, DESIDOC acts as a science and society interface  and  plays  a  very  important  role  in  promoting  S&T,  and  bringing  public  awareness  and  understanding  of  science  in  the  scientific  and  civil  society. The  vision  of  DESIDOC  is  to  provide  essential  science  and  technical  research,  development  information  rapidly,  accurately  and  reliably  to  support  DRDO's  scientists’  needs  and  in  this  effort  DESIDOC  is  evolving  continuously  to  keep  pace  with  the  ever  changing  technology  landscape  and  the  revolutionary  needs  of  the  DRDO7. 
The mission of DESIDOC is to establish an integrated  resource centre and state-of-the-art information management  system  encompassing  knowledge  centre,  publications,  e-services, print and multi-media services and to collaborate  with  national  and  international  institutions/academia/  organizations  for  cooperative  partnerships  to  improve  upon quality of sources and services. DRDO’s scientists  in excess to 5000 are working on various defence-related  projects. With such specialised needs, specialist librarians  in  DESIDOC  who  understand,  analyse  and  search,  are  delivering  the  required  information  to  them  in  the  most  timely and precise manner. They have scholarly aptitude  and ICT know-how as they have to increasingly deal with  the digital information; search and delivery mechanisms  and customisation of databases for faster and easy retrieval  of  information.  DESIDOC  is  working  on  all  sorts  of  modern  information  technologies  to  facilitate  increased  information delivery to its user. Also make e-information  more  generally,  readily,  and  flexibly  accessible  to  their  users  for  cost  effectiveness  and  time  saving. Achieve  a  delicate  balance  between  access  and  ownership.  
2.2  Knowledge Access Activities  of  DESIDOC  for      
DrDO 
DESIDOC has embraced advanced technologies, and  contributing in building knowledge capacity, knowledge  capital  and  knowledge  economy  of  DRDO  and  country  at  large.  It  plays  the  role  of  knowledge  manager  who  captures,  develops,  shares  the  organisational  knowledge  to  achieve  organisational  objectives.  It  thinks  like  a  customer,  and  embed  his  feelings  into  its  product/and  services;  and,  in  line  with  its  vision,  information  is  rapidly, accurately and reliably delivered. DESIDOC has  taken  many  initiatives  to  provide  access  to  information  
322 
to  its  users.  Fig.  1  depicts  the  Ownership  and  access  scenario  by  DESIDOC.  
Figure 1. Ownership and access scenario--DrDO/DESIDOC 
2.3  Information  Collection  and  Services 
DESIDOC is under few institutions in India, which is  having policies or even codified practices for preserving  ‘born–digital’  and  ‘converted–to–digital  materials’.    A  library based solely on access has many obstacles and is  also  vulnerable  to  failures  if  based  solely  on  ownership  only.  To  avoid  this  downside  consequence,  DESIDOC  which has a very large collection of its own books it also  in collaboration with external sources access information  and deliver. Some of the knowledge sources and services  of  DESIDOC7   are: 
• Library  Collection-   More  than  70,000  books  and  
1,00,000  bound  volumes  of  journals,  and  access  of  
3000+  periodicals 
• Knowledge  repository-  consisting  of  28,000+  
technical  reports  published  by  DRDO  scientists  • Institutional  repository-  consisting  of  7,000+  
research  papers,  orations  and  articles  published  by  
DRDO  scientists.  
• DrDO e-consortium- DESIDOC established DRDO  
E-Journals service under a consortium for providing  
online access to about 550 e-journals to all the DRDO  
labs/establishments covering 10 publishers : American  
Chemical Society; American Institute of Aeronautics  
and Astronautics; Association of Computing Machinery;  
American Society of Mechanical Engineers; Elsevier;  
IEL Digital Library; Jane’s; Nature Publishing; Science  
Magazine; Taylor and Francis. One service provider  
to  access  all  theses  journals,  JCCC  service  is  also  
available  to  all  the  DRDO  labs.  Remote  Access  
extended  is  extended  apart  from  IP-based  access. • Databases  Services-  Access  to  large  number  of  
databases: IEEE, SPIE, NTIS (NASA, NACA, RAND,  
etc)  bibliographic  databases, ASTM,  etc. 
• 
Union Catalogue of Books/Journals- DESIDOC has  

========3========

• 
• 
developed a union catalogues of books and journals  to  let  the  scientists  know  about  the  holdings  of  all  the  DRDO  labs 
Library  and  Information  Services -  DESIDOC  is  providing a large number of services to its scientists.  Some  of  them  are:  Infowatch  Service  (fortnightly),  Newspaper Clipping Service (daily service covering  Defence,  DRDO,  S&T  related  news),  Translation  Service (on demand), Drop Box Initiative, Reference  Services, Electronic Books, Video Magazine (monthly),  and  Photo  Bank  etc.  International  Conferences  in  Military Science & Technology - provide information  on  National  and  International  events  in  defence  science  and  related  areas  to  DRDO  scientists.  It  is  available  at  DRDO  website  and  Inranet.  Access from other resource- DESIDOC is dedicated  to  meet  the  varied  needs  of  user  communities  in  DRDO  and  civil  society.  Membership  of  DELNET  and  other  similar  agencies.  It  brings  knowledge  to  life  with  intuitive  user  interfaces  and  enhanced  discoverability for journals and reference work from  other  resources  also.  
2.4  DESIDOC’s role  for  Information Access  for All 
Believing  that  the  measure  of  the  impact  of  researches  is  not  the  returns  to  the  individuals,  but  the  returns to the society, DESIDOC fulfils its responsibility  in  the  national  effort  of  creating  common  repositories  of  sharable  data  /research  and  information.  
• Organising Conferences- DESIDOC collaborates with  
academicians, scientists, researchers, librarians, and  
scholars  to  popularize  S&T  through  literary  pursuit  
and by organising and sponsoring conferences in the  
country. 
• National Digital Library- DESIDOC is also contributing  
in  the  ‘National  Digital  Library’  mission.  • National  Data  Sharing  and  Accessibility  Policy -  
DRDO has mega research and development projects  
which  generate  a  mammoth  amount  of  intellectual  
output. Research data, scientific and research papers,  
articles, essays, project reports, annual reports, patents.  
DRDO  Scientists  persue  PhD  and  Masters  Degree  
which  also  generates  dissertation  and  thesis.  Under  
the ‘National Data Sharing and Accessibility Policy’,  
DESIDOC  is  providing  access  to  the  unrestricted  
data  for  their  potential  value  to  be  fully  realised.  • Publishing DrDO Monographs 
8-  Started  in  1994.  
DRDO  retired  scientists  write  monographs  in  the  
areas  of  their  expertise.  A  monograph  is  aimed  to  
benefit  DRDO  scientists,  students,  researchers,  and  
academicians.  Till  date  36  monographs  have  been  
published.  Few  Monographs  are  free  accessible  in  
PDF  and  E-pub  format. 
• Open Access of Publications and Journals 
9-10 
 (Print  
and  Digital)-  DESIDOC  has  pursued  the  academic  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
pursuit  of  DRDO  through  in-house  publications,  and  literary  work.  It  is  regularly  publishing  large  number  of  books  and  journals  which  are  available  either  in  abstract  form  or  full  text  as  open  access. Defence Science Journal -  First  published  in  1949,  is a peer-reviewed, open access, bi-monthly research  journal  in  the  area  of  defence  science,  engineering  and technology. More than 3,000 articles have been  published  till  date  and  all  are  freely  accessible. Defence  Life  Science  Journal -  This  journal  caters  to the needs of Life Science scientists. Its first issue  was  released  on  29  May  2016.  
DESIDOC  Journal  of  Library  &  Information  Technology  -  First  published  in  1981,  is  a  bi- monthly,  peer  reviewed,  open  access  journal  in  the  field of Library and Information Science. More than  1,000  articles  have  been  published  till  date  and  all  are  freely  accessible. 
DrDO  Newsletter–  a  monthly  newsletter  that  publishes events, visits, technology demonstrations;  and  achievements  of  DRDO  labs.  It  endeavors  to  communicate achievements, policies and activities of  the organisation. All are freely accessible at DRDO  website. 
DrDO  Samachar-  is  the  Hindi  version  of  DRDO  Newletter; published monthly. All are freely accessible  at  DRDO  website. 
technology  Focus-  covers  products,  processes,  systems and technologies developed by DRDO. The  magazine  is  available  at  DRDO  website. All  issues  are  available  in  pdf  and  since  Jan  2016  all  issues  of  TF  are  available  in  the  e-book  format  also.  All  are  freely  accessible  at  DRDO  website. 
Prodyogiki vishesh  - is a Hindi version of Technology  Focus. It is published quarterly. All are freely accessible  at  DRDO  website. 
3.      DESIDOC’S   F UtUrE rOLE 
DESIDOC  embracing  advanced  technologies  to  provide  library  and  information  services  on  emerging  digital  platforms.  Developing  better  infrastructure  with  scalability  and  upwards  technology  integration.  Digital  imprint of DRDO to connect with the scientific and civil  society through online community networking. Building  a  ‘single  window’  facilitation  in  areas  of  design,  print,  multi-media  and  network  services. 
‘Data  citation’  is  another  step  where  research  is  rapidly  moving  from  an  era  of  data  scarcity,  to  one  of  abundance,  in  which  an  unprecedented  deluge  of  data  offers  major  opportunities  and  profound  challenge.  DESIDOC  is  exploiting  this  phenomenon  of  the  data  explosion  by  making  research  data  sharable  for  re-use  and  re-purposing.    
DESIDOC  has  leveraged  the  power  of  digitisation  
323 

========4========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  5, SEPTEMBER   2016 
in  empowering  its  users  and  patrons  to  contribute  in  the  national  mission  of  open  data,  on  behalf  of  DRDO  is  contributing  in  the  national  mission  of  ‘Open  Data’  by  providing  access  to  its  unrestricted  sharable  data/ researches  and  information  to  the  public  and  world  at  large. It is contributing in the ‘National Digital Library’  (NDL)  and  National  Data  Sharing  and  Accessibility  Policy (NDSAP) and exploiting the phenomenon of data  explosion by making research data sharable for re-use and  re-purposing.  The  data  sets  provided  by  DRDO  vary  in  nature and have wide coverage from technological details  of products developed by DRDO to HRM. The end user  can  download  the  data  sets  either  in  XML,  XSL,  CSV,  JSON,  JSONP,  and  ODS  format  for  exploitation  with  visual representation. DESIDOC is known for its literary  and  academic  work  and  among  a  very  few  scientific  documentation  centres  in  the  country. 
4.  CONCLUSIONS 
It  is  time  to  put  aside  access  versus  ownership  and  concentrate on access and ownership and access strategies  will  continue  to  be  enhancements  of  or  supplements  to  ownership11-12.  Users  requirements  play  a  decisive  role  in  access  and  ownership  of  information  for  libraries.  Libraries will continue to purchase materials or resources  which are in high demand and for materials or resources  in moderate or low demand, libraries will purchase access  to  the  information  from  full-text  e-databases.  Libraries  in  future  need  to  work  towards  shared  ownership  over  electronic  resources  for  cost-efficiency.  
Undoubtedly, there is a declining trend the world  over as fewer and fewer people are visiting libraries. The  libraries have to re-think, innovate and evolve. ‘Libraries  will  continue  to  exist  as  long  as  there  are  people.  It  is  therefore important to distinguish between those who read  online and those who go to reading rooms for that both  ownership  and  access  to  information  have  to  co-exist.  There is need of balancing Act –Information owned and  information accessed to become partners – to supplement  and build on one another’5.  The  future  of  libraries  will  depend on effectiveness of services not on the ownership  of collection they hold with user satisfaction is pivot to  endeavours  in  this  direction.  
As  Richard  De  Gennaro  rightly  said  that  ‘research  libraries in the next decade or two are going to be evolving  very  rapidly  towards  new  paradigm  where  it’s  not  just  what you own in any particular library, but it’s what your  library  is  able  to  provide  access  to.’  He  stated,  ‘This  evolution  toward  making  access  rather  than  ownership  the  priority  calls  for  increased  cooperation  between  libraries’12-13.  The  successful  library  of  the  future  will  consist  of  a  delicate  balance  between  materials  that  are  owned and those that are accessed. The quality of these  future libraries will not be determined by size but, rather,  by how effectively they fulfill the needs of the patron13.  DESIDOC  has  been  engaged  in  developing  knowledge  collection  and  innovative  products  for  scientists.  These  
324 
efforts  are  supplemented  with  the  provision  of  access  to  information  from  external  resources  and  building  consortia.  It  is  the  need  of  the  hour  that  organisations  like  DESIDOC  work  together  and  collaborate  for  better  technologies and improved infrastructure with scalability  and  upwards  technological  assimilation.  
rEFErENCES 
1. Modi, Narendra.  Tri Tribune  (Nov 9, 2015). http:// 
www.tribuneindia. com/news/nation/every-institution- 
has-to-evolve-in-tune-with-times-pm/156454.html  
(accessed  on  September  20  2016).  
2. Verzosa, Fe Angela. Access and ownership issues of  
electronic  resources  in  the  library.  Presented  at  the  
Conference sponsored by the Central Luzon Librarians  
Association, held at Holy Angel University, Angeles  
City,  Philippines  on  7  December  2009.  
3. Farb, Sharon. Libraries, licensing and the challenge of  
stewardship. First Monday, Jul. 2006. ISSN 13960466.  
http://firstmonday.org.  doi:10.5210/fm.v11i7.1364.  
(accessed  on  20  October  2016.) 
4. Levine-Clark, M. Access to everything: Building the  
future academic library collection. Portal: Libraries  
and  the Academy,   2014,  14(3),  425-37.  
5. Kane,  L.T.  Access  vs  Ownership:  Do  we  have  to  
make a Choice? College & Research Libraries, 1997,  
58(1),  58-66. 
6. Adrienne  Muir.  Digital  preservation:  Awareness,  
responsibility  and  rights  issues.  Journal  of  
Information  Science,   2004,  30(1),  73-92.  http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.1177/0165551504041680 
7. About DESIDOC. http://www.drdo.gov.in/drdo/labs/ 
DESIDOC  (accessed  on  September  20  2016). 8. http://publications.drdo.gov.in/ojs (accessed on September  
20  2016). 
9. DRDO  Monographs.  http://monographs.drdo.res.in/  
(accessed  on  September  20  2016). 
10. http://drdo.gov.in  (accessed  on  September  20  
2016). 
11. Stuart  James.  Ownership  and  access,  database  and  
OPAC: Present and future opportunities for academic  
libraries. Library  Review,   1990,  39(4),  27. 12. Rustein, Joel S., Anna L. DeMillar, and Elizabeth A,  
Fuseler. Ownership versus access: Shifting perspectives  
for  libraries. Advan.  in  Librar.,  1993, 17,  33-60. 13. Irene  B.  Hoadley,  Access  vs.  Ownership:  Myth  or  
Reality.  Lib.  Acquis.:  Prac.  and  Theo.,  1993,  17,  
192 
Contributors 
Shri Gopal Bhushan  is presently Director of Defence Scientific  Information and Documentation Centre (DESIDOC), Delhi since  30 June 2015. Prior to this appointment, he was the Director for  International  Cooperation  (DIC)  at  DRDO  Headquarters  from  

========5========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  5, SEPTEMBER   2016 
1st  January  2010. As  DIC,  he  pursued  DRDO’s  international  affairs  with  foreign  countries  at  the  government  level  and  represented DRDO in various multilateral and outreach meetings  on  disarmament  and  international  security.  He  has  a  vast  experience  of  working  with  various  Department/Ministries  of  Government  of  India  and  International  defence  research  labs,  military organisations, defence industry, and foreign academia.  He  has  a  Bachelor’s  degree  in  Science  and  Post-graduation  in  Operations  Research  and  Masters  in  Computer  Sciences  (Systems  Software).  He  is  the  recipient  of  ‘Best  Scientist  of  the Year-2010 ’ Award for his unique and distinguished services  to  International  Cooperation  in  DRDO.  In  2012,  he  attended  “Senior  Executives  in  National  and  International  Security  Program”  at  the  John  F.  Kennedy  School  of  Government  at  Harvard  University,  USA. 
325 
Dr M. Madhusudhan  is currently working as Associate Professor  in  the  Department  of  LIS,  University  of  Delhi.  He  has  17  years of teaching, administration and research experience at the  University  level.Under  his  supervision  17  MPhil,  6  PhD  and  110+ project reports have been awarded. He has published one  book,  edited  two  books,  32  International  research  articles  in  peer-reviewed journals, 20 chapters in books, 9 national articles  and  7  international  conference  papers.  He  is  also  editorial  member  of  JLIS,  IJLIS  and  reviewer  for  five  international  LIS  journals.  His  areas  of  interest  includes:  Designing  and  evaluation of websites, evaluation of web-OPACs, information  communication technology in libraries, social networking sites,  e-resources,  mobile-based  library  services,  etc. 

========6========

