DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, January 2017, pp. 9-13  DOI: 10.14429/djlit.37.1.10340 
 2017, DESIDOC 
Library and Information Science Education in Maharashtra: Current Status 
Mahesh N. Gaikwad  
Rayat Shikshan Sanstha’s Arts and Commerce College, Madha, Dist-Solapur, Maharashtra- 413 001 
E-mail: maheshgaikwad786@gmail.com 
AbStrACt 
Maharashtra is the third largest state, in India, known for its outstanding educational quality and facilities at all  levels in almost all the major disciplines of study. There are 35 districts in the state with best colleges and higher  education institutions. As we are moving ahead in all areas of developments and making massive investments in  education to convert our younger population into globally competent human resources. LIS education in India is  completing a century of its existence during the period progress have been achieved in developing LIS education  to tune with current practices. This paper traces the current scenario of LIS education in Maharashtra. It provides  an overview of the universities providing present LIS courses at various levels through regular courses. From the  Maharashtra, nine universities are imparting regular LIS education were selected for the present study. The eligibility  and admission criteria and syllabus of LIS education is discussed. It was seen that major universities in Maharashtra  have to provide an integrated two-year postgraduate course in LIS, which is being widely accepted all over the  country. It has been used to analyse the research programs offered by various universities in Maharashtra. 
Keywords’: LIS education, LIS in Maharashtra, LIS curriculum, Maharashtra.  
1. IntroduCtIon 
Library  and  Information  science  (LIS)  education  in  India  is  completing  a  century  of  its  existence  and  has  played significant role in the development of information  society. Every stage of societal development requires an  education  system  that  can  adequately  reflects  its  need  and  demands.  LIS  education  incorporates  a  field  of  professional  education  that  provides  the  training  to  the  future librarians to manage the libraries and information  centers efficiently. The vision of LIS education includes  teaching  and  research  in  the  field  of  librarianship  with  a  multidisciplinary  focus  on  the  issues  of  information  access and equality. The basic objectives of LIS education  are  to:  (i)  Familiarise  the  students  with  the  history  and  philosophy  of  the  profession  of  librarianship.  (ii)  Make  students  understand  the  concept  of  information  and  its  transmission in various environments. Universities provide  information to them about theories of library administration  and  organisation  and  also  provide  practical  knowledge  and training of information technology applications and  information  handling  procedures.  The  library  education  is such that the library professionals must withstand the  continuing  and  ever  changing  information  requirements  and  demands  of  the  users  and  come  up  as  successful  professionals. This will automatically have its impact in  the  LIS  education.  Therefore,  the  library  education  in  India  has  to  be  planned  to  keep  pace  with  the  changing  needs  of  the  Indian  society. 
2. SCopE   of th E pApEr 
The  scope  of  this  paper  is  limited  to  formal  LIS  education  programmes/courses  at  the  postgraduate  level  
Received 15 July 2016, online published 28 December 2016 
conducted by the university departments in Maharashtra.  Preliminary  enquiry  was  made  to  find  out:  Year  of  establishment of the university, The year of establishment  of  the  Department  of  LIS,  courses  conducted,  annual/ semester  pattern  of  examination,  whether  integrated/ non-integrated,  intake  capacity,  whether  credit  based,  recent  revision,  etc,.  The  study  is  a  general  overview  of  the  LIS  courses,  Discusses  the  eligibility,  admission  criteria  and  not  the  detailed  analysis  of  the  syllabus  of  each  university.  This  paper  does  not  include  courses  conducted  at  the  under-graduate  level  and  certificate  courses by various agencies such as library associations,  teachers  training  institutes,  polytechnics.  
3.   hIS tory And  CurrEnt  StAtuS   of  LIS  
EduCAtIon In  IndIA 
Library  Science  Education  started  in  India  in  the  state  of  Baroda  in  1911,  when  the  ruler  of  Baroda  state  Maharaja Sayaji Rao Gaikwad-III called Mr. W. A. Borden  from  America  to  give  suggestions  for  development  of  Libraries and initiated library movement in the state. In  1912, Punjab University invited Mr. Asa Don Dickinson  at Lahore who started library training course for 3 months  in  1915  for  development  and  progress  of  libraries  in  India. Although Dickinson stayed in India for a very short  period,  he  set  up  the  trend  of  transformation.  The  first  diploma  course  in  library  science  was  started  in  India  by Madras University in 1937 by Dr. S. R. Rangnathan.1  Aligarh Muslim University changed the Diploma to Degree  course  first  in  India  in  the  year  1958.  MLISc.  course  was  first  started  in  India  by  Delhi  University.  The  first  PhD degree in Library and Information Sciences in India  

========1========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  1, JANUARY   2017 
was  awarded  to  D.  B.  Krishna  Rao  in  1958  from  Delhi  University.  After  20  years  in  India  the  second  Ph.D  in  Library  Science  was  awarded  to  Dr.  S.K.  Pandey  in  the  year  1977  by  University  of  Delhi.  
LIS  education  in  India  did  the  milestone  efforts  in  the field of development of librarianship as a profession.  The  first  school  of  Library  Science  was  opened  in  University  of  Madras  in  the  year  1929  and  up  to  now  more than 120 universities (including distance education)  impart LIS education. A total of 105 universities provide  Bachelor of Library and Information Science (BLIS) 78  universities  provide  Master  of  Library  and  Information  Science  (MLIS),  21  are  offering  two-year  integrated  courses,  16  universities  provide  MPhil  in  Library  and  Information  Science,  63  universities  provide  PhD  in  LIS  and  2  universities  provide  D.Litt  degree.  India  maintains  its  3rd   World  leadership  in  library  research  in  library  education  and  literature  (Satija,  1998,  p.21).  The  University  Grants  Commission  (UGC)  and  Indian  Council of Social Science Research (ICSSR) are promoting  LIS  research  programmes  by  awarding  scholarships  to  doctoral  students.  Thus,  from  2001  to  2014,  there  is  a  tremendous increase in the number of institutions offering  LIS  courses  in  India  which  has  increased  by  over  35  more  universities  in  the  last  14  years. 
4. LIS  EduCA tIon  In  MAhArAShtrA 
In  Maharashtra,  due  to  the  efforts  of  D.  V.  Joshi,  ‘Maharashtriya  Vachnalaya  Sangh’  was  established  in  1921. On 25th November 1935, ‘Granthalaya Sangh’ was  formed  at  Pune.  The  credit  of  starting  Library  Science  education  in  Marathi  language  goes  to  this  Granthalaya  Sangh. Accordingly ‘Mumbai Granthalaya Sangh’ (1942),  ‘Marathi Granthalaya Sangh’ (1944), Kulaba Jilla Vachnalaya  Sangh  (1946)  started  functioning  for  promoting  library  movement  in  Maharashtra.  University  of  Mumbai  is  the  oldest university which was established in 1857 and also  has the oldest department of LIS which was established  in 1944. Upto March 31, 1960, there were 5 universities  showing rapid progress made in LIS education. Similarly  a change from Library science to library and information  science came into effect in most of the universities around  1960-2000.  Through  regular  courses,  open  university  programs  and  learning  programs  of  various  universities  in  Maharashtra,  every  possible  efforts  is  being  made  to  meet the rising aspirations of the younger generation. The  development  of  LIS  Education  is  at  top  priority  for  the  rapid  progress  of  higher  education  in  below  mentioned  Universities  of  Maharashtra.2,3 
4.1  university  of  Mumbai,  Mumbai 
The  Jawaharlal  Nehru  Library  of  University  of  Mumbai  was  established  in  the  year  1857.  In  1943,  the  Department  of  Library  and  Information  Science  was  established and since then, the department is working and  imparting  Library  science  education  in  Maharashtra.  In  1943, the Diploma in Librarianship course was instituted  
10 
by them. Then university librarian and it was discontinued  in the year 1963 and replaced by BLIS. The department  has  seminar  room,  full  equipped  conference  hall  and  a  computer  lab.  The  syllabi  of  BLISc  and  MLISc  course  were  recently  revised  since  2003-04;  the  department  offers  BLISc  and  MLISc,  MPhil  and  PhD  programs  in  Library and Information science. The Duration of BLISc  and MLISc course is one academic year of two terms and  the medium of instruction for both degrees are English.  Total  intake  capacity  for  the  course  is  40  students  for  BLISc  and  20  students  for  MLISc.  The  examination  consists  of  two  parts  of  written  examination  as  well  as  practical  examination.4 
4.2  Savitribai phule pune university, pune 
Savitribai Phule University of Pune was established  in  the  year  of  1948.  Jayakar  Library  was  established  in  January 1950 and the training in Library science started  in the year 1958 with the first Diploma course in Library  science.  This  Diploma  course  was  converted  into  the  Bachelors degree in the year 1965. Department of Library  and Information Science in the Jayakar Library was started  in the year 1978. It was established under the faculty of  Mental, Moral and Social Science. It introduced 2 years  integrated  MLISc  course  programs  and  the  medium  of  instruction was English. Intake capacity of LIS department  for integrated course is 30. The examination consists of  semester-wise  and  credit-based  and  conducted  in  two  parts, i.e., written examination and practical examination.  It  has  a  Departmental  library  along  with  ICT  facilities.  Department started MPhil and PhD in Library Science in  1981  and  since  then,  more  than  40  scholars  have  been  awarded  the  PhD  in  Library  Science. 
4.3 rashtrasant tukdoji  Maharaj nagpur  
university, nagpur 
The Rashtrasant Tukdoji Maharaj, Nagpur University  was  established  along  with  the  central  Library  in  1923.  The  Department  of  Library  and  Information  science  was  started  on  20th   August  1956  and  it  is  one  of  the  oldest  Department  of  Library  and  Information  Science  not only in Maharashtra but also in the country. Firstly,  the  department  started  Diploma  course  in  Library  and  Information  Science.  This  Diploma  course  upgraded  to  BLISc.  The  Department  started  MLISc  of  one  year  in  the  year  1984  and  in  year  2003,  the  MLISc  two  years  integrated course as per the UGC guidelines was started  since 1987. It also provides PhD program in Library and  Information  Science.  The  Department  has  upgraded  its  standard as one of the leading LIS educational institutes  because  of  the  contribution  made  by  the  Heads  of  the  departments  from  time  to  time  by  their  academic  and  administrative skills. Currently, the department conducts  MLISc  two  years  integrated  course  with  English  as  a  medium  of  instruction  and  intake  capacity  of  40+40  students.  MPhil  &  PhD  program  is  also  being  offered  by  the  department. 

========2========

GAIKWAD:  LIBRARY AND  I NFORMATION  S CIENCE  E DUCATION IN  M AHARASHTRA: CURRENT  S TATUS 
4.4  S.n.d.t. Women’s university,  Mumbai 
The central library of S.N.D.T. Women’s University  has it’s headquarter at the Bombay campus and branches  at  Juhu  and  Pune  campus.  It  was  founded  in  the  year  1916  and  the  department  of  Library  and  Information  Science namely ‘Shri. Hansraj Pragji Thackersey school  of library Science’ popularly known as ‘S.H.P.T. School  of  Library  Science’  was  established  in  the  year  1961.  The department started 1 year BLISc and 1 year MLISc  from 2012-13, the course converted into two years MLISc  Degree  Course  with  English  language  and  also  PhD  programs in Library and Information science. The intake  capacity for this integrated course is 25. The examination  pattern  consists  of  semester-wise  and  credit-based.  The  department allows computer laboratory to all students to  become  familiar  with  computer  applications  in  Library  and  information  science.  Full  time  access  to  internet  provides  additional  facility  to  the  students. 
4.5  Shivaji university,  Kolhapur 
Shivaji University, Kolhapur was established in 1962.  The  department  of  Library  and  Information  Science  of  Shivaji  University  started  in  year  1964.  It  is  one  of  the  oldest  departments  which  were  started  immediately  after  establishment  of  the  university.  Initially  it  started  post  graduate  diploma  as  Bachelor  in  Library  Science  (BLSc)  and  changed  its  name  as  Bachelor  in  Library  and  Information  Science  (BLISc).  In  year  1986,  the  department  started  MPhil  in  Library  and  Information  Science.  It  has  also  made  provision  for  PhD  degree  in  Library  and  Information  Science.  The  department  conducts  BLISc  as  well  as  MLISc  Course  of  one  year  duration.  However  the  duration  for  MPhil  is  1½  year.  6  PhD’s  have  been  awarded  by  the  department  and  right  now registered students are 11. The department has well  equipped  computer  Laboratory  having  15  computers. 
4.6 dr. babasaheb Ambedkar  Marathwada  
university, Aurangabad 
The Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University  was established in the year 1958. The university introduced  the  PG  Diploma  in  Library  course  during  June  1969,  the  nomenclature  of  the  course  was  changed  and  the  examination  of  the  course  was  conducted  as  ‘Bachelor  of  Library  Science  in  March/April,  1969. The  course  in  Library  Science  was  started  by  the  university  in  1968  but  the  Department  of  the  Library  Science  was  started  in  the  year  1979.  However,  Master  of  Library  Science  course  was  introduced  in  the  year  1985-86.  The  PhD  program in Library and Information Science was started  by  the  department  from  the  year  1996.  Since  2002,  the  university  introduced  2  year  integrated  MLISc  course  with semester pattern. The course consists of 16 modules  with  64  credits.  The  intake  capacity  for  MLISc  is  22  students  with  the  duration  of  2  year  and  for  MPhil  the  intake  capacity  is  15  students  with  duration  of  1  year.  The examination consists semeste were and credit-based  
written  examination  as  well  as  practical  examination.  The teaching faculty consists of one professor and head  along  with  one  reader  and  one  lecturer. 
4.7  Sant  Gadge baba Amravati university,  
Amravati 
The department of Library and Information Science  of Sant Gadge Baba University, Amravati is established  under  the  faculty  of  Social  Sciences  in  the  year  1983  and the department of LIS started in the year 1990. The  BLISc and MLISc course are offered by the department  for  the  duration  of  1  year  for  each. The  intake  capacity  for BLISc is 30 where as it is 20 for MLISc. The students  have to complete project work for successful completion  of the course. Database search facilities as well as e-mail  and  internet  facilities  are  available  to  students.5 
4.8  Swami ramanand teerth  Marathwada  
university, nanded 
The Swami Ramanand Teerth Marathwada University,  Nanded was established in 1994. The Department of Library  and Information Science was started in 1999. This is also  one  of  the  Newest  Department  of  LIS  in  Maharashtra.  The Department started two year integrated M.Lib&Inf.Sc  with English as a medium of instruction. Intake capacity  of  the  course  is  20  per  year.  The  examination  consists  semester-wise  and  credit-based  and  conducted  in  two  parts, i.e., written examination and practical examination.  It  also  provides  PhD  program  in  LIS  as  per  the  UGC  guidelines,  and  more  than  7  PhD  degrees  have    been  awarded  in  LIS  subject  from  this  department.  
4.9 north  Maharashtra university,  Jalgaon 
The  North  Maharashtra  University,  Jalgaon  was  established in the year 1989. The department of Library  and Information Science was established in the year 2000.  This is the newest Department of LIS in Maharashtra. It  was  established  under  the  faculty  of  Mental,  Moral  and  Social  Sciences.  It  offers  integrated  BLISc  and  MLISc  course with an intake capacity of 20 students. Examination  pattern  is  semister-wise  since  2010-2011.6 
The  Solapur  University,  Solapur  do  not  provide  Library  and  Information  Science  education,  as  this  is  newly  established  university  in  Maharashtra. 
5.   E LIGIbILIty And AdMISSIon  CrItErIA 
Table 1 gives details of eligibility conditions to different  courses  offered  in  universities  in  Maharashtra. 
Table 1 shows that all BLISc course require at least  a  graduate  degree  for  admission.  Most  of  these  give  admission  on  the  basis  of  merit  while  some  have  more  rigorous  criteria  involving  entrance  tests. 
6. CourSE   Cont Ent And  SyLLAbuS   of  LIS 
The University Grants Commission (UGC), from time  to time recommended the broader outlines of courses of  Library  and  Information  Science.  The  UGC  and  other  
11 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  1, JANUARY   2017 
table 1. university-wise courses and required eligibility 
S.no. 
university name 
b.Lib & Inf.Sc (bLISc) 
1 
University of Mumbai, Mumbai 
2 3 4 
Savitribai Phule Pune University RTM University, Nagpur SNDT Women’s University,  Mumbai 
Shivaji University, Kolhapur 
Graduate from any faculty  (ET+PI) 
- 
- 
- 
5 
Graduate from any faculty (ET) 
6 BAMU, Aurangabad 7 Sant Gadge Baba Amravati  
University 
8 SRTMU, Nanded 
9 North Maharashtra University,  
Jalgaon 
ET: Entrance test; PI: Personal interview 
- 
Graduate from any faculty (ET) 
- - 
higher  bodies’  now  give  emphasis  to  semester  system  rather  than  annual  system,  and  credit-based  rather  than  marks-based  system.  Every  university  in  Maharashtra  being  autonomous  is  free  to  frame  its  own  course  of  studies, and syllabi of many universities/schools are quite  modernised. All university programs to educate librarians  share certain characteristics. Programmes typically offer  courses in the history of books and librarianship to give  students  a  background  in  the  professions  past.  It  also  includes courses in knowledge organisation (classification,  cataloguing, bibliography, indexing & abstracting, metadata,  semantic  &  syntactic  analysis,  controlled  vocabularies,  etc.),  collection  development  (acquisition),  information  seeking  behaviours  of  users,  search  strategies,  library  services (dissemination of the acquired library materials,  reference), and management of the collection (preservation  & conservation of documents). It also includes contents  related to scholarly communication (bibliometrics, infometrics,  scientometrics, webometrics), digital libraries and virtual  libraries. 
Technology  in  LIS  has  been  used  extensively  to  store  and  retrieve  information  in  different  forms  and  structures. This new dimension is reflected in the course  structure of almost all universities that provides courses  in LIS. The courses include topics that impart new skill  in  organising  web  resources,  and  providing  web-based  services.  All  universities  in  Maharashtra  provide  scope  of  practical  knowledge  rather  than  restricting  to  only  theory  part.  
7. ConCLuSIonS 
Library and Information Science education has reached  a global dimension since it has harmoniously adopted the  developments in information and communication technologies.  It  is  a  change  from  managing  libraries  by  librarians  to  manage the flow of information by one and all. Earlier,  
12 
M.Lib & Inf.Sc. 2 years integrated M.Lib & Inf. (MLISc) Sc course 
B.Lib&Inf.Sc from any  - 
university (ET+PI) 
- Graduate from any faculty (ET+PI) - Graduate from any faculty (ET+PI) - Graduate from any faculty (ET+PI) 
B.Lib&Inf.Sc from any  - 
university (ET) 
- Graduate from any faculty (ET+PI) B.Lib&Inf.Sc from any  - 
university (ET) 
- Graduate from any faculty (ET) - Graduate from any faculty (ET) 
LIS students after the education became librarians, now  professionals teach this science and learners choose this  profession  to  manage  the  information.  LIS  education  in  India  started  with  an  aim  of  training  in-house  library  workers  in  handling  various  related  functions.  
UGC Model Curriculum (2001)7  is an eye-opener to  restructure the LIS educational programme suiting to the  requirement of the information society in the state. Now  there  is  a  need  to  design  fresh  syllabus  of  LIS  for  the  purpose  of  rendering  better  services.  UGC  has  given  a  model curriculum for an integrated two-year MLIS course,  so  there  should  be  more  and  more  of  the  universities  adapting  to  such  programs  in  the  future.  As  far  as  the  information and communication technology (ICT) aspect  of the education is concerned, universities in Maharashtra  to  incorporate  ICT  into  their  curriculum  at  all  levels,  both  in  theory  as  well  as  in  practice, Also,  there  has  to  be  provision  for  computer  laboratories  for  the  students  to  hone  upon  their  skills  in  ICT.  Provision  for  internet  connectivity  and  subscribed  content  along  with  library  automation  and  digitisation  software  for  practice  are  a  must.  Students  must  undergo  internship  of  3-4  months  in a library supervised by a mentor. It helps students to  acquire  essential  practical  experience  required  to  work  in  a  library.  The  well-planned  internship  prepares  the  intern  for  future  job  responsibilities  and  a  chance  to  put  his  knowledge  to  work  and  prepare  for  future  job  responsibilities.8  They should also be paid stipend during  the  training  period.  The  need  of  the  hour  is  to  devise  uniform  eligibility  criteria  and  selection  policy  that  can  really  attract  those  students  with  aptitude  and  attitude  for  the  profession. 
rEfErEnCES 
1. Satija,  M.P.  Research  in  librarianship  before  and  
after Ranganathan, Navalani, K and Satija, M.P, eds.  

========4========

GAIKWAD:  LIBRARY AND  I NFORMATION  S CIENCE  E DUCATION IN  M AHARASHTRA: CURRENT  S TATUS 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
Pettits  petals:  A  tribute  to  S  R  Ranganathan,  New  Delhi, ABC  Publishing  House,  1993,  pp.27-45. Gokhale, P. Library and information science education  in Maharashtra: A perspective, DESIDOC J. of Lib.  &  Inf.  Tec.,  2010, 30(5),  48-55. 
Joshi, M. K. Library and information science education  in India: Some government initiatives, DESIDOC J.  of  Lib.  &  Inf.  Tec.,  2010, 30(5),  67-73. 
Joshi & Laxmanshastri. Marathi Vishvakosh. Mumbai;  Maharashtra Rajya Sahitya Sanskriti Mandal., 1995,  5(1),  304. 
Kaur,  P.  &  Kaur  P.  W.  Library  and  information  science  education  in  Chhattisgarh  and  Madhya  Pradesh.  DESIDOC  J.  of  Lib.  &  Inf.  Tec.,  2010,  30(5),  91-6. 
Panigrahi, P. Library and information science ducation  
7. 
8. 
in East and North-East India: Retrospect and prospects,  DESIDOC  J.  of  Lib.  &  Inf.  Tec.,  2010,  30(5),  32- 47. 
University Grants Commission (India). UGC model  curriculum:  Library  and  information  science.  (Chairman  C.R.Karisiddappa).  New  Delhi,  UGC,  2001,  pp.105.  
Walia, P. Library and information science education  in  North  India,  DESIDOC  J.  of  Lib.  &  Inf.  Tec.,  2010, 30(5),  9-18. 
Contributor 
Mr  Mahesh  n.Gaikwad  has  done  B.Com.,  MLISc  and  has  qualified the UGC-NET. Presently, he is working as Librarian  at Arts  and  Commerce  College,  Madha,  Dist-Solapur.  He  has  published  more  than  12  research  papers  and  has  attended  15  seminars.  He  has  about  5  years  of  professional  experience  in  LIS  field. 
13 

========5========

