DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 2, March 2017, pp. 135-143 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.37.2.10392 
 2017, DESIDOC 
Patent Search Tools for Competitive Intelligence for Product Design and Development  
of CBRN Decon Device  
Nidhi Sandal*, Prem Chand Gupta**, Rakesh Kumar Sharma***, Naval Kishore Sepat*  
and  Avinash Kumar* 
*Directorate of ER&IPR, DRDO Bhawan, Rajaji Marg, New Delhi-110 011 
**Institute of Nuclear Medicines and Allied Sciences, Brig. S.K. Mazumdar Road, Timarpur Delhi-110 054 
***Defence Food Research Laboratory, Siddarth Nagar, Mysuru, Karnataka-570 011 
ABSTRACT 
Product design and development needs a lot of relevant and background information at the initial stage itself  and literature review is one of the initial and important process in the new product design (NPD) process. In NPD,  patent analysis is an important part of literature review, since the patent documents represent a huge reservoir of  most systematic and updated information about any particular technology and product. A systematic search on a  trusted global patent database with proper analytical tools could be used as powerful R&D tool to not only identify  the state-of-art but also to extract leads to solution for critical R&D problems. Therefore, a focused search on  professional patent database was performed to extract most relevant patent documents for R&D work related to the  chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) decontamination device. Semantic keyword search and IPC  based search followed by a thorough screening and analysis of the searched documents resulted in useful patent  documents. These patent documents disclosed various aspects related to CBRN decontamination device which  helped in the design & development of a novel CBRN Decon device.  
Keywords: Product design, patent patent map, visualisation, decontamination, CBRN 
1.  INTRoDuCTIoN 
Product design and development: Product development  process is described as ‘the sequence of steps or activities  that  an  enterprise  employs  to  conceive,  design,  and  commercialises a product’.1  The design process helps to  make sure not to overlook any of important aspects, set  the unbiased solutions and enhance the team creativity. A  product development process is viewed as a transformation  or  a  translation  of  a  market  opportunity  into  a  physical  artifact  available  for  sale.2 
In the new product development (NPD), the designer  has  to  study  the  existing  related  data  which  can  be  gathered  through  various  means.  One  of  the  means  is  prior art, i.e., related existing patents. This prior art study  can  give  a  lot  of  information  pertaining  to  the  products  like  commercial  potential,  technical  difficulties,  type  of  novelty,  i.e.,  radical  or  incremental  innovation  and    its  national or international status. It also helps in taking a  well-informed decision to whether to design and develop  the  product/technology  or  not.  This  paper  discusses  in  detail  the  use  of  patent  search  tools,  techniques  and  methods  in  the  process  of  new  product  design  and  development. 
Published patent documents represent a huge reservoir  of  most  systematic  and  updated  information  about  any  particular product or technology. Patent documents have lot  of information in a very systematic manner. A systematic  search  on  a  trusted  global  patent  database  with  proper  
Received 26 July 2016, online published 24 March 2017 
analytical  tools  could  be  used  as  a  powerful  R&D  tool  to  not  only  identify  the  state-of-art  but  also  to  extract  business critical insights.3  The  first  page  of  each  patent  document  provides  information  about  its  inventors,  assignees,  examiners,  prior  art  documents,  its  technical  classifications  as  per  Cooperative  Patent  Classification  (CPC)  or  International  Patent  Classification  (IPC).  The  more  advantageous  aspect  of  a  patent  document  is  that  all  this  information  is  searchable  not  only  through  paid  databases  but  also  through  freely  available  patent  databases.  
Further,  the  technical  description  in  each  patent  is  also organised and presented under several subtitles and  all of these subtitles of a patent are searchable. There are  millions of patent documents publicly available and each  of  such  patent  document  bears  loads  of  information  on  most recent technologies. However, searching information  from  patent  documents  in  itself  is  a  highly  skilled  job  requiring experience, perception and thorough knowledge of  databases and search tools. Appropriate use of keywords,  classification codes and use of logic gate operators affect  the  search  results.  Researchers  are  not  only  working  on  development of searchable databases but also on advanced  systems for searching these databases.4,5  Like Nidhi,  et al.  have  used  patent  documents  to    solve  a  practical  R&D  problem,  wherein,  scientists  had  imposed  the  problem  of  developing  a  drug  delivery  device  for  releasing  the  vapours  of  drug. A  systematic  search  was  performed  to  extract most relevant patent documents using various patent  

========1========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  2,  MARCH   2017 
analytical tools.6  In another study by Nidhi et al , patent  information  has  been  used  to  find  out  the  appropriate  collaborators based on their patent portfolios.7  Shih,  et al. have used patent data for competitive intelligence in the  area of semiconductor industry in Taiwan. They studied  patent  trends  to  understand  the  R&D  activities  of  a  company,  the  R&D  activities  of  the  industry,  company  activities in the industry and industry activities working  in the area of semiconductors.8  Also  patent  information  has  also  been  used  to  identify  new  business  areas,  insight  into  the  technology  sector,  competitors,  niche  areas,  etc. Abbas9,10, et  al.,  have  addressed  how  patent  information  can  be  used  for  competitor  monitoring,  technology  assessment,  R&D  portfolio  management,  the  identification  and  assessment  of  potential  sources  for  the  external  generation  of  technological  knowledge,  especially  by  means  of  mergers  and  acquisitions,  and  human  resource  management.11 
In the present study, scientists were working for the  development  of  an  automated  external  monitoring  and  decontamination system for subjects exposed to chemical,  biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) contamination.  Their primary requirement was to understand the state of  the art documents which address the problems that may  come during the development of such system along with  the  probable  solutions.  Patent  documents  are  the  best  source  for  this  kind  of  information  as  patent  document,  generally,  provides  a  solution  to  a  particular  technical  problem. Thus, the authors used patent information for two  purposes:  a)  to  understand  the  overall  technology  trend  for  such  systems  which  included  key  areas  of  research,  filing trend over the years, top industry/inventors working  in  this  area  etc  and  b)  to  identify  patent  documents  addressing  different  aspects  of  CBRN  Decontamination  Device/System  so  as  to  provide  relevant  information  to  the  scientists  for  their  further  research  work.  Patent  documents  focused  on  the  design  aspect  of  the  CBRN  Decontamination  device  were  searched  and  discussed  with  the  scientists. 
Initially,  CBRN  Decontamination  Device/System  was  discussed  in  detail  with  the  scientists  to  identify  its  key  features. The  system  had  advantages  like  higher  portability,  ease  to  use  and  quick  to  assemble  at  the  required locations for the batch or mass decontamination  management  before  medical  treatment.  A  preliminary  prior  art  search  was  conducted  with  the  help  of  freely  available databases. This resulted in prior art documents  that provided details about various types of decontamination  equipment/devices available globally, as shown in table 1.  The  preliminary  search  helped  in  better  understanding  the  many  facets  of  the  R&D  problem  itself.  
2.  GloBAl  PATeNT   I NDex SeARChING 
ToolS 
Subsequently,  a  more  focused  prior  art  search  was  conducted  on  a  specialised  database,  i.e.,  Global  Patent  Index (GPI). Global Patent Index is an advanced online  tool  for  searching  the  European  Patent  Office  (EPO's)  
136 
Table 1. 
Detail  about  various  types  of  decontamination  equipment/devices available globally 
Patent Brief Disclosure 
EP2029838 Mobile  mass  decontamination  unit  for  use  in  
nuclear,  radiological,  biological  or  chemical  
(NRBC)  accidents  for  evacuating  categorising  
and decontaminating victims. 
WO2012/134960 Mobile  unit  for  responding  to  radiological  
emergency  situations  that  employs  automatic  
whole body personnel contamination monitors  
for alpha and/or beta emitting contaminants. US6446277  A  high  capacity  chemical  and/or  radiological  
decontamination system comprising showering  
the  contaminated  persons  individually  with  a  
regeneratable active product for a predetermined  
period  ranging  between  5  and  20  seconds,  
continuously collecting the used shower liquid  
and regenerating the collected liquid to store its  
active capacity with a view to recycling US 7203979  An apparatus for decontaminating persons and  
objects, and securing and limiting access to spe- 
cifc areas. 
US  A  personnel  decontamination  system.  The  20030037812  system includes a plurality of components for  
establishment  of  a  multi-station  decontamina- 
tion facility to decontaminate personnel and to  
collect the contaminants during decontamination  
process. 
worldwide  bibliographic  data  collection  catering  more  than 80 million patents from the EPO's worldwide patent  data collection (over 90 patent granting authorities).12 GPI  searches are concentrated on the Bibliographic data and  abstracts  of  the  patent  documents  and  the  keyword  or  the classification or any other search is done in the first  page of a patent document. GPI is updated regularly and  searching is fast, precise, simple, and can be customised  as per the requirement. GPI has the capability to search  even  long  and  complex  queries. 
3.  MeThoDoloGy 
3.1  Method  of  Patent  Search 
The  first  step  was  to  make  a  list  of  keywords  and  find  out  the  best  fit  classifications  for  the  problem  to  retrieve best possible results. The keyword selection is a  very important part of search as it must include not only  the narrower terms but also the broadest possible terms.  In  the  present  case,  the  technical  field  was  automated  external  contamination  monitoring  and  decontamination  system.  Further,  the  followings  could  be  enumerated  as  characterising  features  of  this  system: 
i. It is to be used for chemical, biological, radiological,  
and  nuclear  contamination 
ii. It  is  a  portable  system 
iii. It  can  decontaminate  group  of  people 

========2========

NIDHI  S ANDAL, et al: PATENT  S EARCH TOOLS FOR  C OMPETITIVE  I NTELLIGENCE FOR  P RODUCT DESIGN 
iv. It  requires minimal time for scanning and decontaminating  
the  contaminated  human,  and 
v. It ensures safe collection & handling of the effluents  
with  customised  storage  effluent  bag. 
Based on these key features of the decontamination  system, the keywords were identified and their synonyms  including the specific and generic words were captured.  The web of these keywords is shown in Table 2. Another  aspect  of  searching  includes  the  use  of  classification  based  searching.  The  patent  offices  worldwide  use  the  International  Patent  Classification  (IPC).  There  are  approximately  70,000  different  IPC  codes  for  different  technical areas. Each patent, depending upon the technical  field/fields  that  it  covers,  is  assigned  an  international  patent classification. The IPC class of each patent is an  important part of the bibliographic data, which is also the  searchable field in patent databases. In case of complex  systems,  more  than  one  IPC  class  may  be  assigned  to  a  single  patent.  Similarly,  searching  patent  databases  for  any  system  or  technical  field  require  the  combinations  of  the  IPC  class.  The  IPC  class  of  a  system  may  be  determined  online.13 
appropriate algorithms. Appropriate combinations of the  keywords and the classification are very important as the  search results will be dependent upon the same. However,  to  begin  the  search,  it  is  desirable  to  use  more  generic  keywords so as to cover maximum possible relevant patent  documents. In the present case, patent search was initially  carried out with the keywords viz. mobile, decontamination,  chemical,  biological,  and  nuclear.  Additionally,  even  single  keyword  or  a  phrase  as  such  may  be  used  to  get  prior  art  documents  related  to  the  system. As  such,  the  search was carried out with the following word/phrase: 
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 
Mobile  Decontamination  System Removal  of  Chemical  
Removal  of  Biological  
Removal  of  Nuclear 
Chemical  Biological  Nuclear Decontaminate  Human/Subject Contaminate  Human 
Radiation  Exposure  Decontamination 
Table 2. Semantic keywords for the present technical problem 
Mobile 
Transportable Portable Stationary  Shifting Removable Folding Aircraft ambulance Movable Itinerant Fixed 
Roaming Travelling  
Decontamination Contamination Cleansing Purifcation Dressing Shower Bathing Surgical Sanitisation Poisoning  Detoxifcation 
Chemical Compound Element substance Metal Heavy metal Material  
Biological Bacteria Bacterial 
Virus Viral Disease 
Natural  Live-forms 
Genetic 
Mutated Organism Micro-organism 
Apart  from  IPC  classification,  other  classifications  developed and managed by national patent offices also exist. Cooperative Patent Classification (CPC) is an extension of  the IPC and has been jointly developed by the European  Patent  Office  and  the  US  Patent  and  Trademark  Office.  CPC  includes  an  additional  section Y  related  to  general  tagging of new technological developments, which is also  sub-divided into classes, sub-classes, groups and sub-groups.  USPTO has US patent classification termed as current US  Classification. For the present case, patent search based  on IPC classification was conducted after identifying the  relevant classes for the decontamination systems.  Search  was carried out alone as well as in combination with the  keywords. Table 3 provides the details of the IPC classification. 
Once  the  keywords  and  the  classifications  were  identified, the search was carried out on GPI after making  
Nuclear  Radio Radiation Beam  Emission Heavy material Transmission Radionuclide Radioactive Uranium Fission products 
Human Subject Personal Individual Animal Mammals Being Creature Human-being Someone Living being Man Woman 
Radiation Emission Ray Atomic Explosion High energy Waves Nuclear waves 
The search with above keywords resulted into more  than  50,000  patent  documents.  This  was  followed  by  the  narrower  keywords  in  combination  with  the  IPC  classification  codes.  Table  4  enlists  the  results  with  respect to each algorithm. The search results having less  than 500 hits were analysed. A cursory analysis of these  results indicated that the searched algorithms need to be  refined further and a better set of patent documents using  more appropriate keyword should be searched. Keeping in  view the hints captured from the already done searches,  many combinations were made and searched. The serial  number  1-4  of  the  table  4  yielded  most  appropriate  search  results,  as  patent  documents  in  these  sets  were  found  to  be  most  relevant.    Further  analysis  of  these  sets  was  carried  out  to  deduce  useful  information  about  the  mobile  decontamination  system. 
137 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  2,  MARCH   2017 
Table 3. Defnitions of relevant IPC classes 
S. No. Classifcation Description 
1. A47K 3/28 Showers 
2. B08B Cleaning In General; Prevention Of  
Fouling In General 
3. B60P3005 Vehicles adapted to transport, to carry or  
to comprise special loads or objects 4. G21F9 Treating radioactively contaminated 
material; Decontamination arrangements  5. E04H2 Buildings or like structures for particular  
purposes; swimming or splash baths or  
pools; masts; fencing; tents or canopies 6. G01T1 Measuring X-radiation, gamma  
radiation, corpuscular radiation, or  
cosmic radiation (G01T 3/00, G01T  
5/00 take precedence) 
7. A47K3 Baths: Showers; Appurtenances there- 
fore  
8. A47K7 Body washing or cleaning implements 9. B60P3/005 for use in contaminated areas, e.g.  
N.B.C. intervention vehicles 
10. B60P3 Vehicles adapted to transport, to carry or  
to comprise special loads or objects 11. G01 Instruments, Measuring; Testing 12. G21F Protection against x-radiation, gamma  
radiation, corpuscular radiation or parti- 
cle bombardment; treating radioactively  
contaminated material; decontamination  
arrangements therefore  
13. C23G Cleaning or de-greasing of metallic 
material by chemical methods other than  
electrolysis 
14. G06 Computing; calculating; counting 15. G01N Investigating or analysing materials by  
determining their chemical or physical  
properties 
16. B60H Arrangements or adaptations of heating,  
cooling, ventilating, or other air-treating  
devices specially for passenger or goods  
spaces of vehicles 
4.  ReSulTS   &  D ISCuSSIoNS 
4.1  Patent  Data Analysis 
Subsequent  to  the  search,  many  methodologies  are  employed to draw a meaning of the search result. These  methodologies  have  been  developed  to  recognise  those  progresses of technologies, and one of them is to analyse  patent information. Visualisation methods are considered  to  be  proper  for  representing  patent  information  and  its  analysis results.14 Statistical analysis of the relevant patent  dataset provides visualisation of the results using patent  maps.  Different  patent  maps  help  in  understanding  the  various aspects about the searched system/technology like  top  patent  assignees,  top  inventors,  time  based  analysis  provides the trends of information. In general, Statistical  
138 
Table 4. 
Search algorithms comprising keyword and IPC  classifications  and  their  hits  achieved  on  GPI,  ePo. 
S. No.  Result 
1. 
46 
2. 
97 
3. 
150 
4. 
156 
5. 
157 
6. 
270 
7. 
6079 
8. 
6080 
9. 
12996 
10. 
0 
11. 
21924 
Query 
Word= “Mobile Decontamination”  +(B60P3005 AND G21F9)+ (G01T1 OR  E04H2 OR A47K OR B08B) 
Word=human AND B08B OR G01 OR  G21F9 OR C23G 
Word= Mobile AND Decontamination OR  B60P3 OR G21F9 OR G01T1 OR E04H2 Word= Mobile AND Decontamination OR  B60P3 OR G21F9 OR G01T1 OR E04H2  OR A47K 
Word= Mobile AND Decontamination OR  B60P3005 OR G21F9 OR G01T1 OR E04H2  OR A47K OR B08B 
Word= Mobile AND Decontamination OR  B60P3 OR G21F9 OR G01T1 OR E04H2 Word= Human AND *Mobile Decontamina- tion* +1w B60P3 
Word= Human AND *Mobile Decontamina- tion* +1w B60P3 OR G21F9 + G01T1 Word= Human AND *Mobile Decontamina- tion* AND/OR B60P3 
Word=human AND decontamination AND  apparatus AND chemical and radiation Word=human AND decontamination AND  apparatus ND chemical and radiation 
12. 
283472 
Word= Mobile AND Decontamination OR  B60P3/005 OR G21F9 OR G01T1 OR  E04H2 OR A47K OR B08B 
13. 
1541931 
Word= *Mobile Decontamination* +1W  B60P3 AND G21F9 OR G01T1 OR E04H2 
14. 
14838835 
Word=*Mobile Decontamination* +1W  
B60P3 OR G21F9 OR G01T1 OR E04H2 
Analysis  Map  includes  Rate  Map,  Number  Map,  Trend  Map, Relation Map, Radar Map, Portion Map, etc.15  The  trend  patent  map  of  the  broadest  dataset  with  the  year  of  priority/filing/publication  on  x  scale  and  inventors/ assignee  name  on  y  scale  provided  a  key  insight  of  the  technology. Cross-mapping of the patent document further  provides  useful  information,  etc.  
Patent statistics can be used to ascertain the maturity  of certain technologies or to identify technological trends.  By  comparing  the  number  of  applications  with  the  number  of  applicants,  it  is  possible  to  identify  whether  research  activities  are  clustered  or  scattered.  This  can  then  be  illustrated  in  a  patent  map.  In  the  present  case,  patent maps of the selected patent dataset were prepared  and  analysed to understand the status of  the  state-of-art  of  the  decontamination  systems  worldwide.  It  may  be  noted  that  different  types  of  maps  may  be  prepared  as  

========4========

NIDHI  S ANDAL, et al: PATENT  S EARCH TOOLS FOR  C OMPETITIVE  I NTELLIGENCE FOR  P RODUCT DESIGN 
per  the  requirement.  Figure  1  provides  the  time  scale  map  of  the  international  patent  classification  (IPC)  and  technology on the time scale. As evident from the trend  map,  although  patents  in  various  fields  had  been  filed  over  the  years,  the  focus  of  the  technology  could  be  defined  by  A61K,  B01J,  G01N,  G03F,  and  H01L  and  these  IPC  codes  described  as  under:  
(a) A61k:  Preparations  for  medical,  dental  or  toilet  
purposes 
(b) B01J:  Chemical  or  physical  processes 
(c) G01N:  Investigating  or  analysing  materials  by  
determining  their  chemical  or  physical  properties (d) G03F:  Photomechanical  production  of  textured  or  
patterned  surfaces 
(e) H01L-Semiconductor  devices;  electric  Solid  State  
Devices 
These  technology  areas  are  of  prime  interest  for  the  researchers  and  lot  of  patents  have  been  generated  in  these  technology  areas.  Class  A61K  encompasses  patents in the area of medical, dental or toilet purposes,  which  is  among  the  most  relevant  IPC  classification  for  a  mobile  decontamination  apparatus.  Also,  the  IPC  classification B01J and G01N relate to patents in the area  of  chemical  or  physical  processes/properties  which  are  again closely relevant classes for this present apparatus.  The  classes  G03F  and  H01L  were  maximally  exploited  by  the  researchers  as  seen  in  Fig.  1.  It  requires  further  detailing to understand the relevant aspects of the present  decontamination apparatus. Apart from these classifications,  other  IPC  classes  also  show  quite  a  good  number  of  patents  filed  during  the  period  2000-2004.  These  IPC  classes  are:  
(a) C08F:  Macromolecular  Compounds  Obtained  By  
Reactions Only Involving Carbon-To-Carbon Unsaturated  
Bonds.  
(b) C08J: Working-up; general processes of compounding;  
after-treatment. 
(c) C08K:  Use  of  inorganic  or  non-macromolecular  
organic  substances  as  compounding  ingredients  
(paints,  inks,  varnishes,  dyes,  polishes,  adhesive). 
Figure  1.  Technology  trend  map(date  of  filing  vs  IPC  
classifcation). 
(d) C 0 8 L :   C o m p o s i t i o n s   o f   m a c r o m o l e c u l a r  
compounds. 
The  decreasing  trend  in  patent  filing  indicates  that  the  technology  has  not  been  worked  upon  further  after 2004 in these areas. To understand the applicants’  technology focus, their research work, strategy, planning  in  a  particular  area  of  technology,  study  of  patent  maps  overlapping  one  over  another  is  an  useful  technique.  Overlapping  the  information  deduced  from  one  patent  map  over  another  yields  useful  results  and  provide  interesting  facts  not  only  about  the  technology  but  also  about  the  assignees/inventors.  Similarly,  in  the  present  study,  patent-map  overlapping  with  time  was  used  to  understand the global status of the research activities in  the CBRN decontamination technology area. Patents maps  of  the  top  20  applicants/inventors  over  the  time  scale,  i.e.,  date  of  filing  and  IPC  classification  were  prepared  using  statistical  tools  of  GPI  database.  These  patent  maps  are  found  useful  in  analysing  the  growth  of  the  technology  with  respect  to  each  applicant/inventor  over  the years. The time scale map (Fig. 2) of the applicants  indicated  that  Tokyo  Ohka  Kogyo  Co.  Ltd,  Fuji  Photo  Film  Co.  Ltd,  Fujifilm  Corpo.,  Cem  Corporation,  JSR  Corpo,  3D  System  Inc.,  and  ASML  Netherlands  are  among top applicants in this area of technology. The IPC  classification  based  patent  map  indicates  that  the  above  applicants  have  filed  patents  mostly  in  the  technology  areas as covered within IPC classes B01J, B29C (shaping  or joining of plastics; shaping of substances in a plastic  state, in general; after-treatment of the shaped products),  G03F,  and  H01L.  
Figure 2. Patent map showing Top twenty applicant vs deate  
of fling. 
The  time  scale  for  inventors  indicates  that  all  the  top  twenty  inventors  of  this  technology  area  are  very  active as shown in the patent map (Fig. 3) The scattered  bubble  diagram  shows  no  peculiar  trend,  however,  it  does  show  the  fairly  good  amount  of  work  done  by  each  inventor  as  measured  by  the  number  of  patents  filed  by  them.  It  is  observed  that  inventors  interest  area  are  similar  to  applicant’s  key  interest  area  and  the  technology  trend  (as  shown  in  trend  map  (Fig.  1)).  The  inventors’  interest  areas  are  A61K,  B01J,  B29C,  C09K,  G01N,  G03F,  and  H01L. 
139 

========5========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  2,  MARCH   2017 
of  efficient  decontamination  technologies  and  safe  skin  formulation  at  global  level  in  civilian  domains.    
There  may  be  two  types  of  contamination  during  the nuclear fallout and/or radiological dispersal incidents  viz  external  and  internal  contamination.  The  external  contamination is internalised through broken/intact skin,  inhalation  or  ingestion  of  radioactive  material.  The  material resides in the lungs or gastrointestinal tract for  a while and slowly absorbed by the blood and eventually  become  resident  in  an  organ  or  tissue  depending  on  its  biological and chemical affinity. The external radiological  
Figure 3. 
Patent map showing 3 top twenty inventors vs date  
contamination  has  higher  probability  of  spread  and  
of fling. 
Another Patent relation map was prepared to capture  the relationship between the inventors and the applicants.  The  relation  map  as  shown  in  Fig.  4.  provided  an  interesting piece of information. Thirteen among the top  twenty  inventors  had  affiliations  to  the  top  applicants  namely  Tokyo  Ohka  Kogyo  Co.  Ltd,  Fuji  Photo  Film  Co. Ltd, Fujifilm Corpo., Cem Corporation, JSR Corpo,  and  3D  System  Inc. 
Figure 4. Patent  map  showing  top  twenty  inventors  vs  
applicants. 
5. DeDuCING   I NFoRMATIoN FoR   CBRN  
DeCoNTAMINATIoN   Dev ICe/SySTeM 
CBRN Decontamination Device/Systems are unique  systems  required  for  very  specific  purposes  and  are  not  commonly  available.  These  systems  are  required  to  decontaminate the persons, equipment, vehicles, animals  etc  which  get  chemical,  biological,  radiological  and  nuclear  (CBRN)  contamination.  To  assure  safety  of  human,  they  are  required  to  be  decontaminated  as  soon  as possible. Further, the decontamination process should  be conducted in the best manner possible without further  contamination  of  other  people  including  volunteers  and  equipment.With  the  increased  perception  of  terrorist  threats  and  possibility  of  mass  casualty  events  like  incidents  of  nuclear  power  plants  involving  chemical,  biological,  radiological  and  nuclear  (CBRN)  agents,  medical  preparedness  is  a  dire  necessity.  The  triple  disaster  in  Japan  and  chemical  attack  in  Syria  and  Iraq  leading  to  world’s  most  critical  nuclear  and  chemical  emergencies  in  the  recent  years  has  exposed  the  lack  
140 
can  be  dangerous  to  the  co-workers  and  responders;  hence, its quick and safe decontamination is an absolute  necessity.  Therefore,  due  to  increasing  possibilities  of  intentional and unintentional events of radiological/nuclear  contamination, it is highly desirable to set up a portable  decontamination facility close to the site of accident where  people  have  been  exposed  to  CBRN  agents,  so  that  the  contaminated  people  are  not  required  to  be  transported  to a remote decontamination centres/facilities and delay  in the required medical treatment can be avoided. It will  enhance  the  confidence  level  of  the  nation. 
As  a  case  study,  it  was  decided  to  identify  the  state-of-the  for  such  systems  through  patent  documents  addressing  different  aspect  of  CBRN  Decontamination  Device/System  so  as  to  provide  a  lead  to  the  scientists  for  their  further  research  work.  Initially,  the  patent  documents  searched  using  different  combinations  of  the keywords and IPC classification resulted in datasets  comprising large number of patents. Four Patent datasets  mentioned  at  point  1-4  were  found  to  be  most  relevant  for  the  decontamination  system. Therefore,  patent  maps  were prepared of the selected datasets to understand the  progress of technology over the years. However, for the  purposes  of  product  design,  a  thorough  study  of  these  selected  datasets  was  done  by  manual  text  mining.  The  set  of  patent  documents  received  at  point  number  1-4  of  the  Table  4  were  collated  and  the  abstract  of  each  document  was  studied  to  find  out  the  most  relevant  patents  documents  so  as  to  provide  leads  for  the  R&D  work in the area of development of an Automated CBRN  External Contamination Monitoring and Decontamination  System.  12  patent  documents  were  of  direct  relevance  for the present work listed in Table 5 and Table 6. These  patent  documents  were  studied  in  details.  
Based  on  information  disclosed  in  these  patent  documents,  a  novel  Decontamination  System-  the  Automated  CBRN  External  Contamination  Monitoring  and Decontamination System was designed and developed  as  shown  in  Fig.  5  with  the  following  feature: 
(1) The device can detect the external CBRN contamination  
and  subsequently  decontaminate  the  victim  on  a  
single  platform 
(2) Fully Automated  and  self  operated  device  

========6========

NIDHI  S ANDAL, et al: PATENT  S EARCH TOOLS FOR  C OMPETITIVE  I NTELLIGENCE FOR  P RODUCT DESIGN 
Table 5.  Patented inventions for CBRN decontamination system 
System/process CBRN detection  
Title 
CBRN attack detection system  
Decontamination system 
High-capacity method and system of chemical and/or  
radiological decontamination 
Containment device CBRN detection  
Chemical biological explosive containment system 
CBRN attack detection system 
Micro emulsion system 
Aqueous based chemical & biological warfare decontaminating  
Decontaminating Kit 
systemfor extreme temperature applications Kit systems for granulated decontamination formulations 
Nano particle System 
Reactive nanoparticles as destructive adsorbents for biological  
and chemical contamination 
Patent/Application no. Applicant U.S. 0269770 A1 Lockheed Martin  
Corporation U.S. 6446277 Prevor International 
U.S. 5864767 U.S.0294060 A1 
U.S. 7829520. 
U.S. Army Lockheed Martin  Corporation U.S Navy 
U.S. 7750199 
Sandia Corp 
WO20020073 A2 
Univ Kansas State 
Table 6.  Patented CBRN decontamination system with salient features 
S. No. 
Figure/Concept 
Patent No and date Decontamination gate  apparatus  (water gate”) US 7203979 Apr 2007 
Decontamination and  Contaminant Processing  System Method  US 37812,Feb.27,2003 
Portable emergency  Decontamination Shower  US 5469587 Nov, 1995 
Chemical & radiation  Decontamination US 4796311, Jan, 1989 
Portable Shower US 3925828 Dec, 1975 
Salient Features  
•	Combination of security &decontamination gate for large venues/  areas 
•	Contains a plurality of liquid conduits and spray heads  •	Decontamination by walking through the activated water gate •	Faster rate of decontamination minimizes the potential harm from   the exposure 
•	Have different types of nozzles for different volumes &  pressures  of liquid  
•	Fixed Structure  
•	 Collapsible frame 
•	 Decontamination agent to be disposed from the dispenser con- 
tainer while remaining in the holster portion 
•	 Portable 
•	 Quickly deployed on site 
•	  Designed to decontaminate the responders from   chemical spill 
•	 Mobile or prefabricated unit design 
•	 Handles victims of a chemical contamination disaster without  
exposing the emergency room  
•	 Easy to operate 
•	 Collapsible frame structure 
•	 Shower head with in housing  
•	 Pump used with desired  input and output for specifc container 
141 

========7========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  2,  MARCH   2017 
Figure 5.  Block diagram of SuSNAN the automated CBRN  
external contamination monitoring and decontamination  
system. 
(3) No  cross  contamination  
(4) Portable,  easy  to  transport,  assemble  and  use (5) Suitable  for  field  conditions  (Petrol  run  kerosene  
operated  water  supply  pump) 
(6) Power/Battery  operated 
(7) Minimal  requirement  of  liquid  (Water/Chemical  
Solution) 
(8) Minimal  quantity  of  liquid  effluent,  and  (9) Environment  friendly 
6.  CoNCluSIo NS 
Patent documents provide very important information  which  may  help  researchers  to  know  the  state  of  art  in  any technological area as 80% of all available technical  information  is  published  often  only  in  Patents  and  nowhere  else.16   It  may  help  them  to  identify  potential  collaborators, source of chemicals/devices/products, joint  development  partners,  licensors/licensees  etc.  However,  conducting patent search demands certain skill sets and,  generally,  it  is  done  by  an  IPR  Expert  in  cooperation  with  the  researchers  having  domain  expertise.  With  an  effective  searching  method  researchers  have  more  information and opportunities to allocate their resources  in  the  early  stage  of  new  product  development.  In  the  present paper, a search methodology based on keywords  and IPC classification was used. From generic search to  specific  search  for  the  CBRN  decontamination  system,  200 patents were found to be relevant. This patent dataset  of  200  patent  documents  was  used  to  generate  patent  maps to understand progress of the technology over the  years. Key focus areas of researchers were identified as  the IPC classes A61K, B01J, B29C, C09K, G01N, G03F  and  H01L.  The  major  stakeholders  in  this  technology  were  Tokyo  Ohka  Kogyo  Co.  Ltd,  Fuji  Photo  Film  Co  Ltd,  Fujifilm  Corpo.,  Cem  Corporation,  JSR  Corpo,  3D  System Inc., and ASML, Netherlands as evident by their  patent  filing  trend  over  the  years. The  researchers  were  also  appraised  about  the  other  researchers  who  were  
142 
working  in  similar  areas.  However,  out  of  around  200  searched patent documents, 13 disclose the most relevant  information  about  a  CBRN  decontamination  system.  Researchers  used  this  information  gathered  from  the  patent documents and developed a novel Decontamination  System-the  Automated  CBRN  External  Contamination  Monitoring and Decontamination System which has been  further  protected via   02  patent  applications. 
ReFeReNCeS 
1. Ulrich,  K.T.  &    Eppinger,  S.D.  Product  design  and  
development,  3rd  ed.,  McGraw-Hill,  New  York,  
1995,  398-404.    
2. Krishnan & Ulrich, Product development decisions:  
A  review  of  the  literature.  Management  Science ,  
2001, 47(1)  1-21. 
3. Magdy  W.;  Lopez  P.  &  Jones,  G.J.F.,  Simple  vs.  
sophisticated approaches for patent prior-art search.  
http://doras.dcu.ie/16396/1/Simple_vs._Sophisticated_ 
Approaches_for_Patent_Prior-Art_Search.pdf (accessed  
on  10  January  2015). 
4. Dou,  H.J.M.  Benchmarking  R&D  and  companies  
through  patent  analysis  using  free  databases  and  
special  software:  A  tool  to  improve  innovative  
thinking, World  Patent  Info. ,  2004, 26(4)  297-309. 5. Li,  Y.R.;  Wang,  L.H.  &  Hong,  C.F.  Extracting  the  
signifcant-rare keywords for patent analysis, Expert  
Sys. Appli.,  2009,  36,  5200-04. 
6. Sandal,  N.  &  Kumar,  A.  Searching  and  analysing  
patent  document  to  solve  R&D  problems,  J.  Lib.   
Info.  Tech.,  2016, 36,  65-96.  
7. Sandal, N. & Kumar, A. Integrated Silicon Photonics:  
Visualisation of patent datasets for mapping technology,  
J.  Lib.  &  Info.  Tech.,   2015,  35  132-37.    8. Shih, M.J.; Liu, D.R. & Ming-Li Hsu, M.L. Discovering  
competitive intelligence by mining changes in patent  
trends, Expert  Sys. Appli.,  2010, 37,  2882-90. 9. Seol; H., Lee; S. & Kim, C. Identifying new business  
areas using patent information: A DEA and text mining  
approach, Expert  Sys. Appli.,  2011, 38,  2933-41. 10. Mehrotra, D.; Sabitha, S.; Nagpal, R. & Mattas, N.  
Landscape  analysis  of  patent  dataset,  J.  Intellect.  
Property  Rights,  2016, 21,  211-25. 
11. Holger  Ernst,  H.  Patent  information  for  strategic  
technology  management, World  Patent  Info.,  2003,  
25,  233-42. 
12. Global  Patent  Index  (GPI).  http://www.epo.org/ 
searching/subscription/gpi/about.html  (accessed  on  
22  December  2014). 
13. International  Patent  Classification  (IPC)  Official  
Publication.  http://web2.wipo.int/ipcpub/search/full 
text/#version=20140101&lang=en  (accessed  on  28  
December  2014). 

========8========

NIDHI  S ANDAL, et al: PATENT  S EARCH TOOLS FOR  C OMPETITIVE  I NTELLIGENCE FOR  P RODUCT DESIGN 
14. Kim, Y.G.;  Suh,  J.H.  &  Park,  S.C.  Visualisation  of  
patent analysis for emerging technology, Expert Sys.  
Appli.,  2008, 34,  1804-12.  
15. Patent  Statistics  and  Patent  Mapping.  http://www. 
epo.org/searching/essentials/business/stats/faq.html  
(28  December  2014). 
16. Why  researchers  should  care  about  patents.  http:// 
ec.europa.eu/invest-in-research/pdf/download_en/ 
patents_for_researchers.pdf  (accessed  on  18  March  
2015). 
Contributors 
Dr  Nidhi  Sandal   is  presently  working  as  Joint  Director,  Directorate of ER & IPR of Defence Research & Development  Organisation  under  Ministry  of  Defence,  New  Delhi.  She  is  M.Pharm from University of Delhi and Ph.d in Pharmaceutics  from  Guru  Jambheshwar  University,  Hisar.  She  holds  a  Post- graduate Diploma in Intellectual Property Rights from Nalsar,  Law University, Hyderabad. She was awarded Thangam Vasudevan  Award in 2003 and India Vasudevan Award in 2005 by Indian  Association of Bio-medical Scientists. She holds 4 granted Indian  Patents  and  4  under  prosecution.  She  has  presented  several  papers in International and National conferences. She also has  8 papers published in national and international journals. Her  area of interests include: Use of patent information for defence  R&D  projects,  patentability,  patent  validity  and  opposition,  Freedom  to  operate  analysis,  discovery,  litigations. 
Dr  Naval  Kishore  Sepat   is  presently  working  as  Deputy  Director,  Directorate  of  ER  &  IPR  of  Defence  Research  &  Development  Organisation  under  Ministry  of  Defence,  New  Delhi.  He  is  PhD  in  Agronomy  from  I.A.R.I.,  New  Delhi.   
His  area  of  interests  include:  Use  of  patent  information  for  defence  R&D  projects. 
Mr Avinash Kumar  is presently working as Additional Director,  Directorate of ER & IPR of Defence Research & Development  Organisation under Ministry of Defence, New Delhi. He is MSc  in  Physics  from  BHU  &  MTech  in  Applied  Optics  from  IIT,  Delhi. Prior to this assignment, he has worked as Examiner of  Patents  &  Designs  in  Delhi  Patent  Office  and  as  an Assistant  Engineer in HAL Korwa Div, and then as Optical Designer in  IRDE  Dehradun.  Presently,  he  is  leading  the  IPR  Group  and  handling entire range of IPR- related issues of DRDO including  IPR-related  provisions  in  collaborative  R&D  agreements. 
Dr Rakesh Kumar Sharma  is presently working as Scientist  ‘G’ & Director of Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore,  Karnataka.  He  did  his  Masters  in  Pharmaceutical  Chemistry  from  Panjab  University,  Chandigarh  in  1981  and  PhD  from  University  of  Delhi,  Delhi  in  1999.  He  has  more  than  30  research articles to his credit and 20 filled patents. His research  interest includes: Nanomaterial synthesis, characterisation and  application  in  drug  delivery  systems.    
Dr  Prem  Chand  Gupta   is  presently  working  as  Scientist  ‘E’  &  Head  of  Workshop  in  Institite  of  Nuclear  Medicine  &  Allied  Sciences  (INMAS),  DRDO,  Delhi.  He  did  his  Masters  in Production & Industrial Engineering from Delhi College of  Engineering,  Delhi  in  2002  and  PhD  from  the  University  of  Delhi, Delhi in 2013. He has more than 11 successful products,  8  publications,  one  awarded  patent  and  2  awarded  design  registrations and 8 filled patents. His research interest includes:  Product  design,  cryogenics  and  application  of  reliability  and  quality  in  product  design. 
143 

========9========

