DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 2, March 2017, pp. 73-78 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.37.2.10508 
 2017, DESIDOC 
Investigating Knowledge Management Strategies in Central University 
 Libraries in India 
P.M. Naushad Ali* and Daud Khan** 
Department of Library and Information Science, AMU, Aligarh, UP-202 002 
E-mail: *nasuhadali.ls@amu.ac.in; **daudk297@gmail.com 
ABSTRACT 
The aim of this research paper is to investigate the knowledge management strategies adopted by the libraries  of  central  universities  in  India.  Review  of  literature,  reveals  that  codifcation  and  personalisation  have  been  considered knowledge management strategies for sharing explicit and tacit knowledge within the library system. To  determine the most used knowledge management strategies in libraries, 14 tools (seven each for codifcation and  personalisation) were recognised from the literature review and taken for examination. A total of 116 library and  information science professionals of 23 central universities spread across India were surveyed through a web-based  questionnaire to explore the knowledge management strategies followed and data analyses were conducted by using  SPSS version 22.0. The fndings of the research show that both codifcation and personalisation have been used in  libraries, though the balance of codifcation and personalisation was not in 80-20 ratio. Between codifcation and  personalisation, codifcation was found to be the most useful strategy with collective mean difference, i.e., 0.312.  This study has practical implications for those who are not fully aware of the prominence of knowledge management  and how knowledge management strategies can be used to gain a competitive advantage. 
Keywords: Knowledge management, codifcation strategy, personalisation strategy, central university, libraries,  
India 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
The  knowledge,  as  such,  being  the  most  important  resource  must  be  protected,  cultivated  and  above  all  shared  among  the  organisational  members.  Now,  the  dissemination of knowledge (among the individual members)  aids in the exposition of some innate/inherent virtuosity  and  prowess  that  through  the  mode  of  managing  ‘tacit  knowledge’  proves  handy  for  the  collective  workforce  of  an  organisation.  However,  managing  strategies  of  ‘explicit  knowledge’  run  parallel  to  tacital  expertise  in  gearing  up  in  the  competitive  ambience  as  in  ways  that  makes  information  easy  to  find  and  facilitates  learning  skills.  Both  the  types  of  knowledge  (explicit  and  tacit)  can  be  inculcated  in  a  healthy  working  environment  by  maintaining  proper  knowledge  management  strategies.    
A Knowledge Management (KM) strategy is simply  a  plan  that  describes  how  an  organisation  will  manage  its  knowledge  better  for  the  benefit  of  that  organisation  and  its  users.  A  good  knowledge  management  strategy  is closely aligned with the organisations overall strategy  and  objectives1. 
2. 
CODIFICATION AND  PeRSONALISATION:  AN  OVeRVIeW 
The  ultimate  aim  of  each  and  every  organisation  is  to  manage  knowledge  in  order  to  gain  competitive  advantage. An organisations internal competitive strategy  should be reflected through its KM strategy2. According to  Hansen2, et al., there are two types of knowledge strategies  
Received 17 November 2016, online published 24 March 2017 
for sharing and managing knowledge in the organisation,  viz.,  codification  strategy  and  personalisation  strategy.  
The  codification  strategy  deals  with  the  extraction  of  explicit  knowledge  from  the  person  who  generate  it,  stored  it  in  databases,  make  it  available  so  that  it  can  be  exploited  by  anyone  in  the  organisation3.  The  accomplishment of the codification strategy relies on the  usage of information technologies, for example groupware,  decision support tools, intranets, knowledge repositories  and  data  warehousing4,  to  improve  the  quality  and  promptness of knowledge creation and its dissemination  within the organisation5. The key advantage of codification  strategy is the reuse of explicit knowledge through which  an  organisation  can  save  money,  time  and  manpower6.  Codification heavily depends on the Information technology  as  it  requires  IT  for  constructing  and  maintaining  web  pages, expert systems, repositories, etc.3  On the other hand,  personalisation  strategy  focuses  on  the  tacit  knowledge  and its sharing within the organisation. This can happen  from  the  development  of  networks  by  which  employees  can  share  their  tacit  knowledge.  The  knowledge  which  embedded in the minds of people7  difficult to codify and  can  be transferred in one to one talk, dialogue between  employees,  brainstorming  sessions,  e-mail,  etc.2,3. 
In summing up, both codification and personalisation  strategies are considered as the key function of a library and  offer various kinds of benefits. In this competitive age, for  the survival of the organisation, managing both codification  and personalisation strategy should be done with utmost  care  and  should  be  the  prime  motto  of  any  library. 

========1========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  2, MARCH   2017 
3. BALANCING  CODIFICATION AND  
PeRSONALISATION 
To  get  the  optimum  advantage,  how  much  an  organisation balance the two strategies, i.e., codification  and  personalisation?  Few  scholars  preferred  a  biased  approach, However others recommended that both strategies  have  equal  prominence.  Hansen2, et  al. ,  suggested  that  companies in their products inclined to accept one of the  two  strategies  predominantly  and  merely  use  the  other  as  a  complementary  strategy.  For  example,  in Andersen  Consulting,  Ernst  and  Young,  and  Dell  focused  on  the  retrieval of codified knowledge and codification strategy  predominantly followed, however, in all these companies,  personalisation was not omitted, but followed in a scanty  manner. Conversely, McKinsey, Boston Consulting Group  and  Bain  &  Company,  it  is  found  that  personalisation  strategy most suitable in these organisations and dominated  over  codification  strategy.  
If  organisations  want  to  successfully  manage  their  knowledge,  then  they  must  use  both  codification  and  personalisation  in  80-20  ratio,  i.e.,  an  organisation  must  implement  either  80%  personalisation  and  20%  codification  or  vice-versa,  to  efficaciously  manage  its  knowledge. Some scholars also mentioned that trying to  focus  equally  on  both  the  strategies  can  create  hazard  within  the  organisation.  
In support of these opinions, many studies have been  conducted  by  scholars  such  as  Haesli  &  Boxall8,  who  conducted a study of two high technology manufacturing  companies,  the  result  of  the  study  shows  that  both  companies followed one strategy in a predominant way.  Though,  Jasimuddinet9,  et  al.,  argued  that  in  order  to  gain  key  benefits,  both  codification  and  personalisation  need to be integrated. The combination of both strategies  led to a great need for companies to improve the way in  which they manage their knowledge. Choe10 enlightened  that  a  KM  strategy  as  integrated  approach,  i.e.,  it’s  a  combination  of  both  codification  and  personalisation  strategy.  In  this  integrated  approach,  the  balance  of  the  exploitation  and  exploration  are  well  achieved  and  
Figure 1. An integrated KM strategy model. 
74 
maintained.  Furthermore,  Ng,  Alex  Hou  Hong11,  et  al.  explained  the  relation  between  personalisation  strategy  and  codification  strategy  into  a  concept  of  integrated  KM  strategy  as  shown  in  Fig.  1. 
These strategies comprise sociological and organisational  change and also procedures that depend on ICT. Furthermore,  no  single  solution  can  address  the  KM  needs  of  an  entire  organisation,  and  both  human/organisational  and  computational  aspects  of  KM  will  be  applicable  in  any  organisation12. The knowledge management strategy must  be  in  accordance  with  the  organisations  objectives  and  strategies and intended to create a sustainable environment  within  the  organisation6. 
4. 
OBJeCTIVeS 
The  ultimate  purpose  of  this  study  is  to  explore  the  knowledge  management  strategies  followed  by  the  central  university  libraries  in  India.  The  objectives  of  the  present  study  are  to: 
(a) Ascertain the current state of adoption of the knowledge  
management strategies–codification and personalisation  
in  the  central  university  libraries  in  India. (b) Explore the tools and techniques used for managing  
and  sharing  knowledge  in  the  central  university  
libraries  in  India,  and  
(c) Investigate  the  dominated  knowledge  management  
strategy  (codification  or  Personalisation)  in  central  
university  libraries  in  India. 
5. 
ReSeARCH  MeTHODOLOGY 
There are various methods of research available such  as descriptive, experimental historical, etc., the researcher  has  adopted  survey  method  as  one  of  the  descriptive  research methods to investigate the knowledge management  strategies  followed  by  the  central  university  libraries  in  India  through  different  data  collection  techniques. 
5.1 Literature  Survey 
The  researcher  has  conducted  a  survey  of  relevant  published  literature  to  collect  the  required  information  and  to  understand  and  comprehend  the  state  of  the  art  of    knowledge  strategies,  etc. 
5.2 Population  and  Selection  of  Sample 
The  population  of  the  present  study  consists  of  the  staff  of  central  university  libraries  in  India,  which  have  library website and have mentioned e-mail IDs of librarians  in  their  websites.  Due  to  a  large  number  of  libraries,  it  was not feasible to include all the libraries in the study.  Therefore, only selected libraries have been included in  the study. For this study, the investigators have selected  thirty central university libraries out of 45 with the help  of simple random sampling. Out of 30 Central university  libraries, 7 libraries didn’t respond inspite of reminders;  therefore,  the  present  study  was  conducted  only  on  23  Central  university  libraries  in  India. 

========2========

aLI  &  KHaN: INVESTIGaTING  K NOwLEDGE  Ma NaGEMENT  S TRaTEGIES IN  C ENTRaL  U NIVERSITy LIBRaRIES IN  I NDIa 
To get the maximum accuracy in the results, census  sampling method was used in which potential participants  for the study comprised of all academic librarians (university  librarian,  deputy  librarian,  assistant  librarian),  therefore  no sample was drawn and e-mail IDs of all the librarians  were taken from the library websites. For the purpose of  data collection, a web-based questionnaire was prepared   (https://freeonlinesurveys.com). a  total of 116 questionnaires  were sent to the librarians through e-mail, out of which  only  68  completely  filled  questionnaires  were  received,  representing  the  response  rate  of  about  58.62%. 
5.3 Content  of  Questionnaire 
The  questionnaire  was  organised  in  two  parts.  Part  A contained the demographic details such as age, gender,  
Table 1. 
Technologies, tools and processes supporting codifcation  strategy, rated on fve point scale 
Knowledge Technologies, tools, and processesCode Mean strategy 
Intranet C1 4.250 
Information retrieval system C2 4.250 
Document management/content  C3 3.687 
management system 
web-based training C4 3.312 
Data mining C5 3.187 
Multimedia repositories C6 2.812 
Benchmarking C7 2.312 
Codifcation 
and  designation,  etc.  and  Part  B  contained  14  tools  
the library in a more robust manner. It is very interesting  
that  mean  values  for  Document  management  and web- 
(7  each  for  codification  and  personalisation)  identified  from literature review and taken for analysis. The scoring  was  done  using  five  point  Likertscale  where  1  denotes  
based training were 3.687, 3.312 respectively, and these  two  codification  strategies,  used  by  the  librarians’  for  
to  augment  something  or  to  eliminate  lacunae  in  the  questionnaire,  a  pilot  study  was  conducted  prior  to  administration  of  questionnaire  to  the  librarians. 
‘Not  Used’  and  5  denotes  ‘Extreamely  Used’.  In  order  
the  purpose  of  catering  information  needs  and  delivery  
of  documents  to  their  users.  The  mean  score  value  of  
5.4 Data  Collection  Methods 
For the present study, several techniques are adopted  for  collecting  relevant  and  authentic  data.  Investigators  have used a web-based questionnaire and document review  methods for collecting the necessary data to achieve the  objectives  set  forth  in  the  research  work. 
6. DATA ANALYSIS  &  INT eRPReTATION 
The data collected from librarians/librarian-in-charges  of  Central  universities  through  various  data  collection  techniques have been organised, analysed, tabulated, and  interpreted. Descriptive statistics were used to engender  retort  to  the  research  queriesfor  directing  the  study.  Descriptive statistics encompassed calculations of mean,  standard  deviations,  frequencies  and  percentages. 
6.1 Usage of Codification Tools to Manage Knowledge  
in  the  Central  University  Libraries  in  India 
In  order  to  know  about  the  usage  of  codification  tools,  their  mean  score  values  are  taken  into  account  to  explore their usage in managing the knowledge within the  central university libraries in India. Analysis of data shows  mean score values of seven tools of codification ranging  from  4.250  to  2.312  as  demonstrated  in Table  1. 
Among all the tools of codification strategy, Intranet  and Information Retrieval System, with equal mean 4.250,  found to be the most utilised tool to enhance collaboration  and information transfer in all the central university libraries  undertaken for the study. In support of this, Ali & Nisha13 suggested that libraries ought to develop another web and  intranet  development  orchestrating  process  to  enhance  knowledge  sharing  culture  and  attain  the  objectives  of  
Data mining was 3.187, which shows that librarians are  efficaciously extracting information and knowledge from  different  resources  and  make  it  available  for  the  use  to  their  user.  This  is  inconsistent  with  Okerson14,  who  in  his  research  recommended  thatlibrary  professionals  build  up  the  aptitude  to  bolster  their  users  by  making  data  resources  accessible  to  them  on  propitious  terms  and  fortify  their  mining  endeavors.  Furthermore,  mean  value  of  multimedia  repositories  was  2.812,  showing  that  libraries  are  developing  multimedia  repositories  to  provide  online  learning,  and  it  also  helps  in  managing  and  sharing  the  vast  amount  of  literature  within  the  organisation.  It  was  also  found  from  the  analysis,  that  bench-marking scored lowest mean value (2.312) among  all  the  codification  strategies  as  shown  in  Fig.  2.  
Taken as a whole, all the tools of codification strategy  are  used  by  the  libraries  in  a  more  or  less  manner  and  libraries  are  well  fiercely  managing  and  sharing  the  knowledge  through  codification  strategy. 
Figure 2. Usage of Codification tools/process in central 
 university of India. 
75 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  2, MARCH   2017 
6.2 Usage  of  Personalisation  Tools  to  Manage  
Knowledge 
‘Personalisation’  approach  relies  on  the  sharing  of  inferred  learning  by  direct  contact  from  individual  to- individual;  or  in  groups.  To  know  about  the  usage  of  personalisation  tools,  mean  score  values  of  these  tools  give information of their utilisation in central university  libraries in India. An intensive examination demonstrates  that mean score values of personalisation tools are ranging  from  4.625  to  1.937  as  exhibited  in Table  2. 
In respect of personalisation strategy, e-mail and web 2.0  were scored highest mean (4.625), found to be the most  utilised tools for sharing tacit knowledge among the library  staff and users in all central university libraries in India.  Husain15 pointed out that, to induce the potential benefits,  
Table  2. Technologies,  tools  and  processes  supporting  
personalisation strategy, rated on fve point scale 
Knowlede  Technologies, tools, and  Code strategy processes 
Email and web 2.0 applications P1 
Mentoring/tutoring P2 
Phone calls P3 
Communities of practice P4 
Expertise locator P5 
Video conferencing  P6 
Story telling P7 
Mean 
Personalistion 
4.625 3.375 3.250 3.062 2.750 2.625 1.937 
Figure 3. Usage of codification tools/process in central 
 university of India. 
6.3 Leading  Knowledge  Management  Strategy  in  
Central  University  Libraries  in  India 
A wide range of mechanism can be used for organisation  members  to  share  and  transfer  knowledge.  The  choice  of  mechanism  depends  on  its  suitability  for  the  stage  of  sharing  (awareness  or  transfer),  and  the  types  of  knowledge (tacit or explicit, degree of embedded). with  the  intention  of  identifying  the  dominating  knowledge  management strategy in libraries, aggregate mean scores  of tools of both codification and personalisation strategies  were  ascertained  and  compared. 
The  rigorous  investigation  disclose  (Table  3)  that  both  the  knowledge  management  strategies  are  used  in  an  equilibrium  way.  However,  codification  strategy  is  marginally commanded over personalisation with a minor  
libraries are adopting web 2.0 applications to facilitate users distinction  in  their  aggregate  mean  scores,  i.e.,  0.312.  to apportion conceptions, opinions, events and intrigues  It  can  be  concluded  that  these  knowledge  management  within  their  individual  networks  over  the  web  through  strategies  were  known  by  majority  of  librarians  and  e-mailing and instant messaging. Moreover, mentoring was  exploited  by  the  library  professionals  to  manage  the  found to be the second most utilised personalisation strategy  organisation’s  knowledge  effectively.  The  extensive  with  the  mean  value  3.375.  By  mentoring,  experienced  usage of these KM strategies by librarians improves the  employees  communicate  their  experiences,  which  they  knowledge  sharing  culture  within  the  libraries. 
gained  throughout  their  careers  to  the  new  colleagues.  Additionally,  phone  call  stake  the  third  place  with  the  mean  3.250  to  transfer  the  information  and  knowledge  within  the  library  system.  The  explanation  behind  the  
Table 3.  KM strategies: codifcation vs personalisation 
KM  strategies Codifcation 
Mean 3.401 3.089 
Difference in mean 
0.312 
considerable length of time and library professionals are  acquainted  with  them.  Their  utilisation  is  regularly  the  
in-depth utilisation of telephone calls can be clarified by  
Personalisation the  fact  that  this  technology  has  been  accessible  for  a  
7. 
MAJOR  FINDINGS 
Following are the major findings of the study carried  
employees’  first  and  instinctual  response  when  looking  
out  to  comprehend  about  the  knowledge  management  
for  help  or  suggestion5.  Furthermore,  communities  of  practice,  expertise  locator  and  video-conferencing  were  found  to  be  used  as  a  personalisation  strategy,  but  not  as much as the above mentioned strategies. The analysis  
strategies  in  central  university  libraries  of  India. (a) The present study divulges that all the librarians are aware  
about  the  concept  of  Knowledge  Management. 
personalisation  strategy  in  Fig.  3.  
These  results  justified  by  the  fact  that  knowledge  sharing  culture  is  generally  lacking  among  the  library  professionals of Central universities in India. Ali & Daud1 6    suggested  that  to  better  engage  in  knowledge  strategy,  library  professionals  ought  to  be  more  competent  and  also  there  must  be  vestibule  programs  for  the  library  professionals. 
also  reveals  that,  story  telling  is  the  least  used  (1.937)  
(b)   a ll the 23 libraries (100%) under study have followed  
knowledge management strategies to manage and share  
76 
knowledge  within  the  central  university  libraries  in  
India. 
(c) To improve communication and better flow of information  
and knowledge within the Central university libraries  
under study, intranet and information retrieval system  
were  found  to  be  the  most  utilised  tool  among  all  
tools  of  codification  strategy.  

========4========

aLI  &  KHaN: INVESTIGaTING  K NOwLEDGE  Ma NaGEMENT  S TRaTEGIES IN  C ENTRaL  U NIVERSITy LIBRaRIES IN  I NDIa 
(d) Among  all  the  tools  of  personalisation  strategy,  
e-mail  and  web  2.0  found  to  be  the  most  utilised  
tools by the library professionals and users to share  
tacit  knowledge  in  central  university  libraries  of  
India. 
(e) Some  of  the  tools  of  both  personalisation  and  
codification  are  used  to  a  minimum  extent,  viz.,  
storytelling,  benchmarking,  it  is  due  to  the  lack  of  
understanding,  knowledge,  technical  aspect,  etc. (f)   w ith respect to the dominating knowledge strategy,  
free  flow  of  information,  the  issue  of  proper  balance  of  codification  and  personalisation  in  libraries  demands  rigorous investigation. In this direction, longitudinal studies  may  unveil  the  right  balance  of  these  two  strategies  in  the  Central  university  libraries  in  India.  
codification found to be dominated over personalisation  
2. 
with  a  slight  difference  of  0.312  in  the  collective  mean  scores. 
8. SUGGeSTIONS  AND  R e COMMeNDATIONS 
Based on the findings of the present study the following  suggestions  and  recommendations  are  as  follows: (a) The Government of India may take steps to design all  
inclusive policies to develop a knowledge management  
4. 
environment  in  each  central  university  libraries  in  
India 
(b) There  must  be  an  adequate  ICT  infrastructure  for  
setting  up  and  maintaining  knowledge  management  
strategies 
(c) There  must  be  vestibule  training  programs  for  the  
library  personnel  in  which  additional  skills  should  
be  provided  to  the  library  professionals 
(d) There  is  a  responsibility  for  the  LIS  institutes  
in  India,  to  include  some  courses  on  knowledge  
management in the LIS curriculum by which library  
professionals can better understand about the concept  
of  knowledge  management  and  its  applications  in  
academic  libraries. 
9. CONCLUSIONS 
The  ultimate  aim  of  this  study  was  to  identify  the  knowledge  management  strategies  followed  by  the  central  university  libraries  in  India.  Codification  and  personalisation  found  to  be  the  knowledge  strategies  to  manage  and  share  the  information  and  knowledge  within  the  libraries. Among  all  the  tools  of  codification  strategy,  intranet  and  information  retrieval  system  were  found  to  be  the  most  utilised  tool  in  order  to  facilitate  knowledge  sharing  culture  in  libraries.  On  the  other  hand,  e-mail  and web  2.0  were  the  most  utilised  tools  of  personalisation  strategy,  to  share  tacit  knowledge  among  library  staff  and  users.  It  is  noted  that,  some  of  the  tools  of  both  codification  and  personalisation  were  not  used  that  much  as  it  should  be,  due  to  the  lack  of  competency  in  library  professionals,  insufficient  ICT  infrastructure, lack of technical skills. However, in India,  Central university libraries involved in both the knowledge  strategy practices while, the codification strategy slightly  dominating over personalisation. It is worthy to mention  here  that,  for  the  better  knowledge  sharing  culture  and  
ReFeReNCeS 
1. Cherukuth, Beena. Organisational knowledge management  
and  knowledge  discovery  in  science  &  technology.  
J.  Know.  &  Comm.  Manag.,   2012,  2 (2),  141-53. 
Hansen, M.T.; Nohria, N. & Tierney, T. what’s your  
strategy  for  managing  knowledge?  Harvard  Buss.  
Rev.,  1999,  72(2),  106-16.  https://hbr.org/1999/03/ 
whats-your-strategy-for-managing-knowledge. 3. Kumar,  J.a.  &  Ganesh,  L.S.  Balancing  knowledge  
strategy:  Codification  and  personalisation  during  
product development. J. Know. Manag., 2011, 15(1),  
118-35.  http://doi.org/10.1108/13673271111108738. 
Ruggles, Rudy. Knowledge tools: Using technology  
to  manage  knowledge  better.  working  paper,  Ernst  
& young  Center  for  Business  Innovation,  1997. 5. Nasim,  M.  &  Mukherjee,  B.  Managing  and  sharing  
knowledge in academic libraries. J. Knowl. Manag. 
Pract., 2012, 13(2). http://eprints.rclis.org/19863/1/ 
articl305.htm. 
6. Greiner, M.E.; Böhmann, T. & Krcmar, H. a  strategy for  
knowledge management. J. Knowl. Manag., 2007, 11(6),  
3-15.  http://doi.org/10.1108/13673270710832127. 7. Maponya,  P.  Knowledge  management  practices  in  
academic  libraries: a   case  study  of  the  University  
of  Natal,  Pietermaritsburg  Libraries.  In   SCECSAL  
Proceedings,  2004,  pp.  1-31.  
8. Haesli, a. & Boxall, P. when knowledge management  
meets HR strategy: an exploration of personalisation- 
retention and codification-recruitment configurations. 
Inter. J. Human Res. Manag., 2005, 16(11), 1955-75.  
http://doi.org/10.1080/09585190500314680. 
9. Jasimuddin,  S.M.;  Klein,  J.H.  &  Connell,  C.  The  
paradox  of  using  tacit  and  explicit  knowledge. 
Management  Decision,  2005, 43(1),  102-12.  http:// 
doi.org/10.1108/00251740510572515. 
10. Choe, JM. The taxonomy of knowledge management  
strategies  in  manufacturing  firms:  Use  of  target  
costing and IT infrastructure. African J. Bus. Manag.,  
2011, 5(15),  6597-607. 
11. Ng, a.H.H.; yip,  M.w.;  Din,  S.B.  &  Bakar,  N.a.S.  
Integrated  knowledge  management  strategy:  a 
preliminary literature review. Procedia-Social Behav.  
Sci.,  2012,  57,  209-14.  http://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
sbspro.2012.09.1176. 
12.  McMahon,  C.;  Lowe,  A.  &  Culley,  S.  Knowledge  
management  in  engineering  design:  Personalisation  
and codification. J. Engin. Des., 2004, 15(4), 307-25.  
http://doi.org/10.1080/09544820410001697154. 
77 

========5========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  2, MARCH   2017 
13. Nisha, Faizul & Ali, Naushad. The application and use  
of library intranet services at the Indian Institute of  
Technology,  Delhi. Lib.  Philo.  Pract. ,  2011, 54. 14. Okerson, a. Text & data mining: a  librarian overview.  
In   IFL a world  Library  and  Information  Congress  
79th   IFL a   General  Conference  and  assembly,  2013,  
pp.  1-6.  http://library.ifla.org/252/. 
15. Hussain, a. adoption of web 2.0 in library associations  
in  the  presence  of  social  media.  Program,  2015,  
49(2),  151-69.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/PROG-02- 
2013-0007. 
16.  Naushad  Ali,  P.M.  &  Khan,  Daud.  Perception  of  
knowledge  management  among  LIS  professionals:  
A survey of central universities in North India. Lib.  
Philo. Pract. 2015, 58, 9-28. http://digitalcommons. 
unl.edu/libphilprac/1320/. 
Contributors 
Dr  P.M.  Naushad  Ali   is  presently  working  as  Professor  in  the  Department  of  Library  and  Information  Science,  Aligarh  Muslim University, aligarh, U.P India. He has over 19 years of  teaching and research experience. He has published two books  and over 60 research papers in various national and international  
78 
journals  and  conference  proceedings.  He  has  successfully  supervised 7 PhDs, 2 Mphil and more than 60 MLISc project  dissertations.  He  has  presented  research  papers  in  more  than  20  national  and  international  conferences  and  seminars  held  in  India  and  abroad.  Earlier  he  has  successfully  completed   4  research  projects  funded  by  Department  of  Science  and  Technology (DST), Indian Council of Social Science Research  (ICSSR) and two by University Grants Commission. He is the  editor-in-chief  of  Journal  of  Knowledge  and  Communication  Management(JKCM). His contribution to the organisation and  imparting  of  knowledge  is  significant  as  he  has  designed  and  developed  a  Subject  Information  Gateway  in  Information  and  Technology (http://www.itsubjectgateway.info) and an E-learning  portal in Library and Information Science (http://www.lislearning. in).  His  areas  of  interest  include:  Information  management,  knowledge  management,  e-learning  and  e-publishing. 
Mr Daud Khan  is a Junior Research Fellow (UGC) at Department  of Library and Information Science, aligarh Muslim University,  aligarh. He holds BSc (Hons) in Physics and MLISc from the  same University. He is pursuing PhD in LIS. He has published  six  research  papers  in  national  and  international  journals  and  presented  some  of  his  research  output  in  national  and  international  conferences. 

========6========

