DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 6, November 2017, pp. 437-442, DOI : 10.14429/djlit.37.10628 
 2017, DESIDOC 
Use of Open Educational Resources and Print Educational Materials by Federal  
College of Education Katsina, Nigeria: A Study 
Rufai Danmusa Gambo*  and Sani Masanawa Aliyu 
# 
*Federal University Dutsinma, Katsina State, Nigeria 
Federal College of Education Katsina, Nigeria 
*E-mail: elrufaidanmusa@gmail.com 
ABSTRACT 
This  research  work  investigates  the  usage  of  Open  Educational  Resources  (OER)  and  Print  Educational  Materials by the students of Federal College of Education Katsina, Nigeria. Using descriptive survey, 358 students  were sampled as respondents. The research fnd out that while print section still remain relevant, an alarming  negative attitudes by the students toward print educational materials have been found. Factors including  students’  learning needs and interest, infrastructural decay, outdated books stocks, under equipped nature of the print sections  and the unfriendly attitudes of the librarians toward clients are responsible this attitudes. However, OER enjoy an  overwhelming patronage of students. The unrestricted nature of open educational resources coupled with its ease of  access, freeness, proximity, relevance and IT infrastructural advancements are what make it an educational hotcake  of the time. Better funding of education, inculcation of reading culture in younger generation, massive development  of print materials into open educational resources and in-service training of library staff has been recommended. 
Keywords: Open educational resources; Print educational materials 
1. INTRODUCTION  
One  of  the  technological  breakthrough  of  21st   century  is internet. Originated from military, internet has become an  indispensable tool in the global educational dispensation. The  Internet  is  the  greatest  exponent  of  information  revolution.  It  is  now  a  main  source  of,  and  the  main  channel  for  vital  information. It offers the largest reservoir of vital information  in  the  world1.  The  ability  to  use  information  technology  is  becoming  increasingly  important  in  every  facet  of  life.  The  information technology used creatively, can make a difference  in the way teachers teach and the way students learn1. It is clear  today, that internet has become an indispensable tool in the in  global educational dispensation. And has eliminated distance  as  the  barrier  to  access  of  information.  The  proliferation  of  mobile technology especially the smartphones, has helped to  make the internet more popular among students2. Today, from  the comfort of their armchairs, internet connects millions of  users of hundreds nationalities through the interconnectivities  of thousands networks. The ocean of information in the internet  in variety of formats with relative ease of access are among the  reasons that bought the technology academic patronage. 
In  a  conference  hosted  by  UNESCO  in  2002;  Open  Educational  Resources  (OER)  was  defned  as:  ‘The  open  provision  of  educational  resources,  enabled  by  information  and  communication  technologies,  for  consultation,  use  and  adaptation  by  a  community  of  users  for  non-commercial  
Received : 09 September 2016, Revised : 29 September 2017  Accepted : 18 October 2017, Online published : 07 November 2017 
purposes’3. However, ‘Open Educational Resources are defned  recently  as  digitised  materials  offered  freely  and  openly  for  educators,  students  and  self-learners  to  use  and  re-use  for  teaching,  learning  and  research’4.  OER  include:  textbooks,  course  materials,  modules,  videos,  tests,  software,  and  any  other tools, materials or techniques used to support access to  knowledge,  audio-video  lectures,  sounds  and  music  lesson  plans,  quizzes,  syllabi,  instructional  modules,  simulations,  content, software tools, licenses and best practices5. The ‘open’  conceptually implies the zero cost and non-restrictive nature of  the materials. 
The shortage of learning and instructional materials and  the general underfunding of education, coupled with the recent  advance in internet infrastructure and mobile technology make  OER a hotcake in Nigeria educational enterprise. The two most  important  aspects  of  openness  in  OER  have  to  do  with  free  availability over the internet and as few restrictions as possible  on  the  use  of  the  resource.  OER  have  no  technical  barriers  (undisclosed  source  code),  no  price  barriers  (subscriptions,  licensing fees, pay-per-view fees) and as few legal permission  barriers as possible (copyright and licensing restrictions) for  the end-user6.OER have gain a wider use and application in  Nigeria  educational  community,  notably  by  the  students.  But only National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) and  National Teachers Institute (NTI) are credited as proponents of  this technology in Nigeria.  
The  current  students’  attitudinal  change  toward  the  internet and its educational packages in recent times is enough  a stimuli for a research of this kind. One of these educational  
437 

========1========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  6,  NOVEMBER   2017 
hotcake provided by internet is OER. OER include full courses,  course materials, modules, textbooks, streaming videos, tests,  software,  and  any  other  tools,  materials  or  techniques  used  to support access to knowledge7. The free encyclopedia is a  fne and convincing example. The course modules of National  Open University in Nigeria are another in addition to widely  used e-books, webinars, quizzes, computer based tests, among  others.  
While tremendous success have been achieved in library  services with the advent of internet in the developed world, the  developing world particularly Africa is recording the opposite.  Instead  of  intensifying  the  marriage  between  the  two,  the  academic library today in some African countries are becoming  a ‘grave yard’ for  their vast literature.  
Print  materials  remain  the  bank  of  Nigeria’s  literature  through which her historical heritage, norms and values and the  entire culture can be transmitted to her younger generations.  The curricular contents and its implementation rely heavenly  on the print materials, primarily books. Most of the scholarly  works:  books,  journals,  experts  and  reports  from  research  institutes are in print forms. The openness and ease at which  OER  is  accessed  due  to  the  viral  nature  at  which  internet  coverage spread, buy it the patronage of students. This in turn,  affect the attitude of students toward print materials. A critical  observation of the users of libraries (in Nigeria) today, revealed  that 75 per cent of users preferred using their mobile phone  for  research  to  using  their  library  resources2. They  felt  why  bother the librarian when I can easily have access to what I am  looking for online. 
The paradigm shift in teaching toward student-centered  approach with much emphasis on his needs and interests, and  the growing patronage OER and its appealing packages enjoy  in the hands of students make it an important tool in the entire  academic community. The addictive and appealing nature of  OER  in  addition  to  its  freeness  and  proximity  has  turned  it  into an academic hotcake in the eye of teachers and students.  But does this attitudinal shift have effect on the educational  system? This research try to do that in relative to the attitudes  of Nigeria students toward print materials. 
Library provides physical or digital access to material, and  may be a physical building or room or a visual space, or both.  Library’s collection can include books, periodicals, newspapers,  manuscripts, flms, map, prints, documents, microforms, CDs,  cassettes, videotapes, DVDs, e-books, audio- books, databases  and other formats8. Print educational materials dominate Nigeria  academic  libraries.  Library  had  an  impressively  direct  and  signifcant impact on societies all over the world for thousands  of  years.  Creating  and  providing  an  outlet  for  technological  advancements,  introducing  and  nurturing  cultural  artifacts,  supporting the rise of various religions and helping to maintain  a sense of historical structure9. 
2. LITERATURE  REVIEW 
The proliferative and dominant role of OER in education  attract many authorships and scholar works in the area with  relations to the use of print counterparts. 
Ogungbeni  &  Halisco10   in  their  study  concluded  that  internet is in competition with librarians. This reveals how far  
438 
internet has gone as an alternative source of information to clients  as oppose to the traditional librarianship.  Study by Anyanwu2,  et  al.   found  a  positive  attitude  in  the  respondents’use  of  internet and with frequent usage by majority of the respondents  (daily and weekly basis). Similar fnding were also reported  somewhere by Oriogu11,   et al. 
3. OBJECTIVES 
The specifc objectives of the study are as follows: (i) To fnd out the frequencies of visits/usage of print sections  
of the academic library and OER by the students (ii) To determine their purpose(s) of using print sections of  
the library 
(iii) To  investigate  students’  attitudes  toward  both  print  
educational materials and OER 
(iv) To identify the factors affecting students’ use of both print  
educational materials and OER 
4. METHODOLOGY 
Descriptive survey were used as the research design and  5,479  Nigeria  Certifcate  of  Education  (NCE)  students  of  Federal College of Education Katsina, Nigeria, were used as  research population from which 358 students were sampled.  Simple stratifed sampling technique were employed, all the  fve schools in the college were represented. Namely: School of  art and social sciences, School of education, School of sciences,  School of languages and School of vocational education. Close  ended questionnaire was used as instrument for data collection.  The questionnaire was validated by experts. The administration  and  retrieval  of  the  structured  questionnaires  was  done  through  collaboration  with  the  heads  of  departments  in  the  various schools and Students’ Union Government (SUG). The  questionnaires were retrieved two weeks after administration.  Data collected was analysed using tabulated frequency count and  simple percentages. 
5. ANALYSIS 
5.1 Demographic Variables 
Table 1 shows the demographic variables of the students.  Majority  of  the  respondents  fall  between  the  age  bracket  of  17 to 25 year, with male student constituting (60.3 per cent)  and the rest 39.7 per cent females. School of Art and Social  Sciences  contributed  the  highest  number  of  respondents  (31  per cent) followed by School of Sciences which contributed  29.6 per cent and most of them (43.5 per cent) are NCE III  students. 
5.2 Frequency  of  Usage  
Table 2 reveals that 32.9 per cent of the students make  daily and 24.9 per cent weekly usage of the print sections of  academic library and about 20.7 per cent making an occasional  usage  of  the  section.  In  the  other  hand,  an  overwhelming  majority (53 per cent) of the students access OER at least once  daily and 30.5 per cent occasionally. 
5.3 Purpose(s)  of  Using  Print  
Figure  1  reveals  that  majority  of  the  students  use  print  section  only  during  examinations  and  to  read  newspapers.  

========2========

GAMBO  & A LIyU : USE OF  O PEN  E DUCATIONAL  R ESOURCES AND  P RINT  E DUCATIONAL  M ATERIALS By FEDERAL  C OLLEGE 
Table 1. Demographic variables Only about 47.5 per cent visit the section to read books and  Respondents Frequency Percentage  
about 66 per cent for lecture follow-up. 
Gender Male        216        60.3 
5.4 Attitudes Toward  Educational  Materials 
Female        142        39.7 
Figure 2 shows a gross negative attitudes of the students  
toward  print  educational  material  in  the  print  section  of  Schools School of art & social  
the  library.  They  fnd  information  in  the  section  outdated,  
sciences        111       31.00 
less  relevant,  diffcult  to  search  and  ineffective  in  sourcing  
School of education        36       10.10 educational materials. 
School of languages        31       8.60 
However as shown in Figure 3, the students demonstrated  
School of sciences        106                                                   29.60 
a  positive  attitude  toward  OER.  They  fnd  information  
School of vocational  associated  with  OER  up-to-date  and  effective  in  making  
education                                           74       20.70 
specifc information available. They on the other hand fnd data  Level of  100 Level       98       27.40 
retrieval system in OER less reliable. 
Study 
200 Level       104       29.10 
5.5 Factors Affecting  Usage 
300 Level       156       43.50 
Figure 4 reveals the level of infrastructural decay and the  
under  equipped  condition  of  the  print  section  of  the  library  Age 17-25       223       62.30 coupled with the under trained librarians as factors affecting  
25-Above       135       37.70 
students’ use print educational materials. 
Figure  5  reveals  delay  in  internet  connectivity,  power  
outrage  and  diffculties  in  locating  relevant  information  in  Table 2.  Frequency of usage of print Sections of the academic library  browsing  OER  as  challenges  affecting  the  use  of  OER  
and OER Packages  by the students. The students do not fnd referencing and  Frequency of visit Print Sections OER 
citation of information sources in OER challenging. 
Frequency Percentage Frequency Percentage 
6. FINDINGS 
1-6 Hours                                                  
The  following  form  the  major  fndings  of  the  
-  -  74  20.7 
research: 
Daily 
118  32.9   67 18.7 
(i) Print sections of academic library still remain relevant  Twice daily 
- 49 13.6 
in Nigeria educational enterprise. About 57.8 per cent  
of the students visit the section at least once a week,  Weekly 
   89 24.9 57 15.9 
despite students’ interest and learning habit shifting  Monthly  
73  20.4 0.0 0.0 
toward educational IT packages, pronouncedly OER,  
which enjoy students’ frequent visit (access). Occasionally 
74  20.7  109 30.5 (ii) The research fnd out an alarming growth of negative  Not at all 
04  1.10                       02  0.6 
        attitudes  by  the  students  toward  Print  Educational  
      Materials  in  academic  library.  Factors  including Total 
358 100 358 100         infrastructural  decay,  outdated  books  stocks,  under  
Figure 1. Purpose(s) of using print materials of the library. 
439 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  6,  NOVEMBER   2017 
Figure 2.  Attitudes of students toward print materials in the library. 
Figure 3. Students’ attitude to OER. 
Figure 4. Factors affecting use of print sections of library. 
440 

========4========

GAMBO  & A LIyU : USE OF  O PEN  E DUCATIONAL  R ESOURCES AND  P RINT  E DUCATIONAL  M ATERIALS By FEDERAL  C OLLEGE 
Figure 5. Factors affecting use of OER. 
equipped nature of the print sections and the unfriendly  
attitudes of the librarians toward clients are responsible  
this  attitudes.  However,  OER  enjoy  an  overwhelming  
patronage of students. 
(iii) The  openness,  ease  of  access,  wider  internet  coverages  
and the proliferation of mobile technologies play crucial  
role  in  the  attitude  change  of  the  students  toward  print  
materials. Poor internet connectivity, cost, power outrage  
and  diffculties  in  locating  relevant  information  are  the  
challenges found associated with OER.  
7. RECOMMENDATIONS 
(i) The  government  should  undertake  a  novel  project  that  
would  enable  the  development  of  our  print  materials,  
indigenous literatures and print artifacts in our academic  
libraries into OER to meet the students’ needs and interest  
and at the same time meet up the trend of this globalised  
world. 
(ii) Higher  institutions  of  learning  should  support  the  
development of OER packages for improved teaching and  
learning.  
(iii) All educational stake holders help in reviving the reading  
culture in youth and promote their patronage toward print  
materials. 
(iv) A  better  funding  of  the  academic  libraries  in  Nigeria  
institutions of learning to provide better and state-of-the- 
art libraries, supporting OER technologies that can meet  
the educational needs of our students. Like all universities,  
all Colleges of education and Polytechnics spend 10 per  
cent of the recurrent annual budget on library and library  
services. 
(v) Provide  our  librarians  with  in-service  training  to  better  
their services toward their clients (students). 
8. CONCLUSIONS 
Print  educational  materials  are  tailored  to  address  the  educational needs of Nigerian students depending on the laid  down objectives of the given institution and it is largely upon  which the implementation of the national curriculum depend.  The infrastructural decay of the print sections and the paradigm  shift of the learning interest of the students is keeping them  
off the print section’s register. The growing IT infrastructures,  ease of access and current contents and proximity associated  with OER have made it an educational hotcake. Though print  stocks still remain relevant, their contribution to educational  dispensation in Nigeria is still unsatisfactory. 
REFERENCES 
1. Nwezeh,  C.M.T.  Information  and  Communication  
Technologies  for  educational  development:  the  Case  
of  cyber  cafes  at  ObafemiAwolowo  University,  Ile-Ife,  
Nigerian.  Library  Philosophy  and  Practice.,  (2010),  
ISSN  1522-0222  www.webpages.uidaho.edu/~mbolin/ 
nwezeh2.pdf 
2. Anyanwu, U.E & Ossai-Onah. Use of internet by Higher  
National  Diploma  (HND)  Students  of  library  science  
students in federal Polytechnic Nekede, Imo State.  J. Lib.  
Info. Sci., 2013, 1(1), pp 9-16. 
3. UNESCO 2002. Forum on the impact of open courseware  
for higher education in developing countries. UNESCO,  
Paris, 1-3 July 2002.  
4. OECD 2007. Giving knowledge for free: the emergence  
of Open Educational Resources. Paris. OECD Publishing.  
www.oecd.org/edu/imhe/38947231.pdf  (Accessed  on  12  
October 2017). 
5. Chidinma,  H.  O.  Harnessing  the  Benefts  of  Open  
Educational Resources (OER): Prospectsand Challenges  
for  National  Open  University  of  Nigeria  (NOUN).Pan- 
Commonwealth Forum 7 (PCF7), 2013  [269]  http://hdl. 
handle.net/11599/1824  (Accessed on 10 October, 2017). 6. Hylen, J. Open Educational Resources: Opportunities and  
Challenges. OECD Centre for Educational Research and  
Innovation Paris, France. 2014. www.oecd.org/edu/ceris 7. Narendra, D.D &S udhakar, C.A.  Development of Open  
Educational  Resources:  Opportunities  and  Challenges.  
Pan-Commonwealth Forum 6 (PCF6,2010), 2010. 
http://hdl.handle.net/11599/2249 
8. http://www.studymode.com/essays/Library-1349249. 
html  (Accessed on 12 october, 2017). 
9. The  history  of  library  through  ages.  http://www. 
zencollegelife.com/the-history-of-libraries-through-the- 
ages/  (Accessed on 12 October, 2017) 
441 

========5========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  6,  NOVEMBER   2017 
10. Ogungbeni,  J.I.  &  Halisco yacob.  Internet  vs  Library:  
Coping strategies for academic librarian in Lagos State,  
Nigeria. Info. Knowledge Manag., 2014, 4(1), 61.  www. 
iiste.org. (Accessed on 21 February 2017). 
11. Oriogu,  C.D.;  Ogbuiyi,  D.C.;  Onyebuchi,  C.A.  &  
Ogbuiyi, S. U. Assesment of Internet use in the provision  
of  information  to  students  in  university  libraries  in  
Nigeria: A Casestudy of AfeBabalola University Library,  
EkitiState,Nigeria. Adv.  Social  Sci.  Res.  J.,   2015,  2(1),  
216.  
doi:10.14738/assrj.21.827 
442 
CONTRIBUTORS 
Mr  Rufai  Gambo  Danmusa   is  currently  a  lecturer  in  the  Department of Biological Sciences, Federal University Dutsinma.  Nigeria. He has authored and co-authored number of research  papers  and  review  articles.  
He  conducted  the  research  work  and  wrote  the  manuscript. 
Dr Aliyu Sani Masanawa  is has a PhD in Educational Management  and Planning. He is currently the head of department, Educational  Foundation  at  Federal  College  of  Education  Katsina  Nigeria.  He  taught  English  and  Education  for  thirty  years  in  primary,  secondary and tertiary institutions in Nigeria. Authored number  of  research  papers  and  books. 
Contribution in the current study, he has supervised and edited  the  manuscript.  

========6========

