DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, January 2017, pp. 24-29  DOI: 10.14429/djlit.37.1.10653 
 2017, DESIDOC 
Evidence-Based Library and Information Practice & Educational Needs of Health  
Librarians: National and International Trends 
Kiran Chaturvedi 
Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi-221 005 
E-mail: kiranbhu96@gmail.com 
ABsTrAcT 
The  health  care  knowledge  base,  documented  in  the  healthcare  literature  is  vast  and  ever  increasing  and  changing. Changes in medical information and technology are revolutionising health care. The clinicians today  are trying to incorporate research into practice and are increasingly depend on technology to bring evidence to the  bedside to improve quality and patient outcomes.  Today, given the signifcance of evidence-based practice, health  librarianship is given higher priority in many centers. Responses vary, but there seems to be a more towards ‘clinical  information scientists’ - ‘informationists’ who might be educated in both clinical and information disciplines. But  adaptation to change is not enough. Even as we have increased our roles in health environment as value-added  educators and information providers, there is need to continue education and training in different facets: conferences,  short courses, seminars etc should be conducted. Conferences are required to be organised at national level in order  to improve health care services and recognition of health librarianship.   
Keywords: Medical librarianship, health science librarians, clinical librarianship, evidence based medicine, India. 
1.  INTroducTIoN 
Over  the  past  few  decades,  the  role  of  the  medical  librarian  has  become  increasingly  complex,  due  to  the  explosion  of  information,  and  the  way  information  is  now digitised, libraries are increasingly virtual. Now the  additional  problem  is  that  clinicians  need  information  but  not  any  information. They  need  evidence  from  high  quality  research.  The  information  is  available,  but  they  may  have  not  time  to  search  effectively.  To  meet  their  needs,  the  librarian  must  adopt  the  role  of  going  out  of  the library to meet the clinicians, themselves. A clinical  librarian  must  be  able  to  interact  effectively  with  other  health professionals and have the ability to assess a need  and  respond  quickly  with  relevant  information  support.  Today,  Evidence-based  medicine  (EBM)  extends  the  librarian's  role  beyond  identification  of  the  literature  to  get  involved  in  practicing  and  teaching  quality  filtering  and  critical  appraisal  of  the  literature.  These  activities  require librarians to obtain expert knowledge of medical  terminology,  etc. This  is  the  only  way  to  meet  all  these  rapid  changes.  The  new  role  of  the  clinical  librarian  as  an educator, using evidence as the basis of practice at the  ‘point of care’1, reflects the change in approach which has  taken place in medical practice. The increasing emphasis  of  EBM  calls  for  the  integration  of  clinical  expertise  with  the  best  available  external  evidence.  Librarians  are therefore involved in part of the progress of getting  research  into  practice,  getting  evidence  to  the  bedside  that  involves  resolution  of  clinical  problems,  with  best,  available,  up  to  date  external  evidence  from  systematic  
Received 15 September 2016, online published 28 December 2016 
research, clinically relevant and applicable to the problem  at  hand.  In  addition,  the  librarian  has  been  assumed  an  educator  by  teaching  other  health  care  professionals  or  students  how  to  search  for  EBM  themselves.  How  and  why information is communicated among patients, health  care providers, administrators, evaluators, and planners is  also of importance to health librarians. Today, given the  significance of evidence-based practice, health librarianship  is given higher priority in many centers. Responses vary,  but there seems to be more towards ‘clinical information  scientists’-‘informationists’  who  might  be  educated  in  both  clinical  and  information  disciplines. 
But  adaptation  to  change  is  not  enough.  Even  as  we  have  increased  our  roles  in  health  environment  as  value-added educators and information providers, we need  to  continue  education  and  training  in  different  facets:  conferences, short courses, seminars, etc. Librarians have  to migrate into the clinical setting and to avoid doing that  is  likely  to  deny  our  future  in  the  information  age.2 
2.   cHAN gEs IN   Hos PITAL/HEALTH/ 
cLINIcAL/mEdIcAL   L IBrArIANsHIP:  
INTErNATIoNAL   sc ENcE. 
The  1980s  was  a  decade  of  change  in  medical  librarianship. A  review  of  literature  shows  that  clinical  medical  librarianship  had  not  been  analysed  from  a  historical  perspective  until  the  mid  1980s. 
Gertrude Lamb identified a gap between what medicine  as  a  discipline  knew  about  good  patient  care  and  the  knowledge  that  was  actually  applied  to  the  care  of  

========1========

CHATuRVEDI: EVIDENCE-BASED  L IBRARy AND  I NfORMATION  P RACTICE  & EDuCATIONAL NEEDS Of HEALTH LIBRARIANS 
patients3. Seeing an opportunity for medical librarians to  help make the connection, she pioneered the concept of  librarians who participated on clinical rounds to identify  and  meet  information  needs  related  to  current  cases.  Lamb  established  the  first  clinical  medical  librarian  (CML)  program  at  the  university  of  Missouri–Kansas  City (uMKC) School of Medicine in 1971 and continued  her  efforts  at  Hartford  Hospital  and  the  university  of  Connecticut Health Center in 1974.4-5  Cimpl summarised the  reasons clinical library services were offered: ‘to provide  information quickly to physicians and other members of  the health care team; to influence the information-seeking  behaviour  of  clinicians  and  improve  their  library  skills;  and  to  establish  the  medical  librarian’s  role  as  a  valid  member of the health care team’6. Davidoff and florence,  in a 2000 Annals of Internal Medicine  editorial, saw the  same  literature-practice  gap  as  that  identified  by  Lamb  in  the  early  1970s’,  despite  an  emphasis  on  evidence- based  medicine  and  developments  in  technology  and  information sources. They proposed a national program,  modelled  on  the  experience  of  clinical  librarianship,  to  train,  credential,  and  pay  for  a  new  profession  of  ‘informationists,’ educated in both clinical and information  disciplines,  with  the  potential  to  improve  the  quality  of  care as well as its cost-effectiveness7. The 2000 ‘Annals  of  Internal Medicine’   editorial  proved  a  stimulus  to  librarians  already  exploring  ways  to  better  integrate  information  into  the  clinical  context8.  
Guise  echoes  the  need  for  clinical  librarians  to  develop ‘a high level of clinical knowledge that supports  their  ability  to  interact  on  rounds,  to  search  effectively,  and-crucially to interpret the medical literature’9.  Thus,  the new profile as compiled from various recent writings  on  clinical  librarianship  are:10: 
(a) Expert  knowledge 
(b) Be involved in a professional team as a part of their  
work 
(c) Attend bedside rounds or clinical meetings where individual  
patients  were  discussed;  maintain  diaries (d) Contribute  to  continuing  education 
(e) Make  an  impact  on  patient  care 
(f) Provide  quality  filtered,  case  specific  information  
to  the  physician  in  support  of  clinical  decision  
making 
(g) May  be  critical  in  a  time  dependent  nature (h) May  be  a  resource  to  assist  physicians  to  improve  
the  quality  of  healthcare  service  (specially  in  the  
Emergency  medicine,  for  e.g.) 
(i) Provide immediate responses to information requests  
at  the  ‘point  of  care’. 
(j) Define  the  clinical  problem. 
Clinical  librarianship  has  perhaps  been  one  of  the  most  innovative  concepts  to  be  introduced  into  health  sciences libraries. The ideas behind it continue to inspire  
health sciences librarians and to guide priorities. It moves  the hospital librarian beyond the support and service role  toward  a  more  direct  role  in  patient  care11. 
3. WorLdWIdE   c HANgEs IN NATurE   of  
mEdIcAL   L ITErATurE 
Health sciences librarians have been advocating the  use of indexes and abstracts for as long as these products  have  been  available.  More  than  twenty  years  ago,  the  National  Library  of  Medicine  pioneered  online  access  to the literature with the introduction of Medlars online  (Medline)12. The Cochrane collaboration is a network of  health  care  professionals,  consumers,  and  researchers  whose major goals are to produce and distribute systematic  reviews  of  the  effects  of  health  care  interventions. 
Today,  the  internet  has  dramatically  increased  the  amount of electronically accessible medical information.  The internet enables the medical profession and consumers  to have more information to make decisions and this could  lead to better medical decisions and outcomes. Doctors need  clinical information to justify individual clinical decisions  with explicit reference to evidence. However, without the  assistance  from  professional  clinical-medical  librarians,  retrieving  and  filtering  new  and  relevant  information  from  databases  and  Internet  remains  a  challenge.  The  health care librarian can bring expertise in the selection,  preparation,  and  dissemination  of  systematic  reviews  to  the  health  care  profession.  
4.   cHAN gEs IN   H EALTH/mEdIcAL 
LIBrArIANsHIP: NATIoNAL scENE 
The  history  of  medicine  in  India  is  also  ages  old.  Long  before  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons  came  into  being,  students  from  far  off  lands  were  making  their  way  to  India’s  Nalanda  and  Taxila  universities  to  study  medicine. The country had witnessed so many developments  in the field of health, education and research during past  two  decades.  ICMR  was  founded  in  1911.  The  Medical  Council  of  India  came  as  a  glimmer  of  hope  in  1934.  All  India  Institute  of  Medical  Sciences  (AIIMS)  came  into  existence  in  1956.  Thus  medical  libraries  emerged  in  medical  schools  and  colleges  and  are  functioning  as  bridge  between  the  medical  information  resources  and  the  users  of  the  medical  community  where  they  are  working. 
With the implementation of the recommendations of  National  knowledge  commission,  which  emphasised  the  significant  role  of  different  types  of  libraries  including  biomedical  in  promoting  knowledge  sharing  among  the  user  groups,  the  need  of  health  knowledge  workers  is  realised. further, the demand of medical librarians with  knowledge and experience in library automation will be  much  in  demand  in  view  of  the  Ministry  of  Health  &  family Welfare, Government of India to develop digital  medical  library  infrastructure  in  all  medical  colleges. 
In  order  to  improve  health  care  sector,  the  Pradhan  Mantri Swasthya Suraksha yojana (PMSSy) was announced  
25 

========2========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  1,  JANuARy   2017 
in  2003  to  augment  facilities  for  medical  education,  setting  up  of  AIIMS  like  institutions  and  up  gradation  of  Govt.  medical  college  institutions. 
However, a number of studies indicate that the health  science library professionals should also upgrade their skills  in information and communication technology (ICT) and  communication skills13. Another study of  the techniques  and  methods  adopted  in  the  medical  college  libraries  located  in  the  districts  of  southern  Karnataka  plateau  reveals  that  whatever  the  ICT  infrastructure  available  in  most  of  the  libraries  is  inadequate14.  Soudbakhsh  &  farzin  in  2006  described  that  medical  library  and  information  centers  are  witnessing  major  revolution  in  their  activities  and  services  and  this  has  caused  the  librarians  to  feel  that  in  addition  to  their  traditional  activities,  they  need  to  achieve  modern  knowledge  and  skills.  A  survey  of  medical  college  libraries  of  Andhra  Pradesh  also  revealed  that  most  of  the  medical  college  libraries  are  not  automated  and  librarians  (36.36%)  do  not  have  training  in  computer  applications.  Thus,  more  stress need to be given on human resource management  as  suggested  by  Srinivasulu  &  Reddy  in  2010. further,  according  to  Bhutt  in  2012  there  is  an  urgent  need  to  plan,  implement  and  develop  ICT  infrastructure  to  be  fit  in  facing  the  challenges  ahead  of  them15.  
further, in 2014, Khan and Siddiqui16  also surveyed  the  use  of  Information  Technology17   and  services  by  medical students of Sanjay Gandhi Post graduate Institute  of  Medical  Sciences  (SGPGIMS),  Lucknow,  uP,  India,  where  library  has  managed  to  adopt  latest  technologies.  After exhaustive research, it was found that the library of  SGPGIMS is providing IT-enabled services and resources,  but it needs to improve its collection and services. Students  have reacted positively toward the IT implementation in  their  library  and  want  to  have  more  improved  services.  Students  should  be  provided  with  enough  number  of  systems  and  round-the-clock  access  to  the  e-resources. 
Hence,  in  order  to  cope  up  with  the  information  challenges of the 21st century and to meet the increasing  and changing needs and requirements of the users more  effectively and efficiently and to keep pace with the ever- increasing technological changes, the Medical Library and  Information Science (MLIS) professionals should acquire  knowledge  and  skills  in  Information  technology17. 
However,  the  evidence-based  library  practice  and  health librarianship in India is still to be considered and  improvement  in  the  infrastructure  of  Medical  libraries  is  need  of  the  day.  It  is  a  privilege  for  the  medical  librarians that India is going to host the 12th  International  Congress  on  Medical  Librarianship  (ICML)  schedule  to  be  held  in  New  Delhi  during  2017. 
5. EvIdENcE-BAsEd  LIBrArIANsHIP ANd  
roLE   of  HEALTH LIBrArIANs 
The development of the concept of Evidence Based  Librarrianship (EBL) was described for the first time in  1997,  by  Eldredge  in  1997. As  with  the  evidence-based  
26 
practice  movement,  EBL  began  in  the  medical  arena  under the auspices of Medical Library Association in the  uSA and Canada, and under the Health Libraries Group  in  the  uK18.  The  evidence  based  movement  originated  as  evidence  based  medicine  (EBM)  and  eclipsed  by  a  much  broader  movement,  referred  to  as  evidence  based  health  care.  EBL  adapts  its  core  characteristics  from  the  EBM  and  EBHC  movements.  Librarians  operate  their  libraries  in  the  real  world  context  of  providing  services  and  collections  through  managing  budgets  and  resources.  Thus  EBL  constitutes  an  applied  rather  than  theoretical  science.  EBM  shares  with  librarianship  the  goal  of  applying  the  best  scientific  research  toward  the  immediate, practical need to provide efficient, compassionate  medical services to patients19. The pervasive use of EBM  resources  in  answering  clinical  questions  is  making  it  imperative  for  information  specialists  to  develop  an  expertise  on  their  appropriate  use.  By  exploring  their  use in answering complex clinical questions and general  care  management  questions,  this  paper  underlines  the  strengths  and  weakness  of  EBM  resources  and  provides  information specialists with some basic knowledge about  how  these  resources  can  be  combined  with  the  primary  literature  to  strengthen  their  effectiveness20. 
Indeed, librarians have played a central and critical  role in the evidence-based movement. The informationist  role  has  been  well  described  in  the  Health  sciences  library  literature.  Informationist  now  typically  refers  to  an  individual  with  a  thorough  understanding  of  both  a  health care domain and information seeking and appraisal,  who  employs  that  combination  of  expertise  as  part  of  a  health  care  or  research  team21.  
  ‘Some  of  the  most  robust  evidence-based  library  and  information  practice  (EBLIP)  work  originated  in  countries  such  as  Australia,  Canada,  Sweden  uK  and  the  uS’22.  The  global  interest  has  been  reinforced  by  the International Conference on Evidence-based Library  and  Information  Practice   that  has  been  held  every  two  years since 2001. The Seventh International Conference  on  EBLIP  held  in  2013  in  Canada  had  an  International  advisory  group  representing  14  different  countries.  In  2006,  an  open  source  journal  “Evidence-based  Library  and  Information  Practice  was  started  at  university  of  Alberta  in  Canada  in  2006  as  a  major  development  in  this  area  (http://ejournals.library.ualberta.ca/index.php/ EBLIP/).  It  provides  a  forum  for  librarians  and  other  information  professionals  to  discover  research  that  may  contribute  to  decision  making  in  professional  practice. 
6.   sT udIEs  dEmoNsTrATINg vALuE   of  
mEdIcAL LIBrArIANs IN   E Bc 
Many  studies  have  demonstrated  the  value  of  supplementing  the  information  in  doctor’s  heads  with  information  from  the  published  literature  delivered  to  the  point  of  care.  Earlier  Janet  Doe,  in  1943  conducted  a  survey  of  the  ailing  Army  Medical  Library  which  resulted in the new National Library of Medicine, uSA  

========3========

CHATuRVEDI: EVIDENCE-BASED  L IBRARy AND  I NfORMATION  P RACTICE  & EDuCATIONAL NEEDS Of HEALTH LIBRARIANS 
building  in  1956.23-24 
Recent researches have shown the value of information  in  patient  care  and  highlight  the  role  of  the  library  and  Librarian in supporting this information revolution25. At  some centers librarians are also becoming more embedded  into  patient  safety  and  quality  improvement  initiatives  and  into  research  and  clinical  teams. This  research  also  demonstrated  that  when  clinical  librarians  are  involved  in providing information in patient care settings, answers  to  clinical  questions  can  be  obtained  more  quickly  and  efficiently26. Key roles in teaching evidence based practice  (EBP)  are  of  interest  to  many  hospital  and  academic  librarians27.  In  a  large-scale  critical  incident  survey  of  physicians  and  residents  at  56  library  sites  serving  118  hospitals in the uSA and Canada, out of 4,520 respondents,  75% said that they definitely or probably handled patient  care  differently  using  information  obtained  through  the  library. The outcomes were examined in relation to four  information  access  methods:  (i)  Asking  librarian  for  assistance;  (ii)  Performing  search  in  a  physical  library;  (iii) Searching library's web site; or (iv) Searching library  resources  on  an  institutional  intranet. All  library  access  methods  had  consistently  positive  relationships  with  the  clinical  outcomes,  providing  evidence  that  library  services have a positive impact on patient care quality28.  further, studies also describe that the medical librarians,  skilled in identifying appropriate resources and working  with multiple complex interfaces, can support clinician’s  efforts to practice EBM by providing time and expertise  in  articulating  the  clinical  question  and  identifying  the  best  evidence29. 
Thus,  the  advent  of  EBL  and  Information  Practice  and  the  leadership  role  that  health  science  librarians  were playing in its development seemed to be the perfect  way  to  illustrate  the  practical  value  of  linking  research  to  practice30. 
Besides, librarians also play a role in managing the  electronic information resources of a health care institution.  Librarians and their health care technology support staff  choose  what  publications  are  to  be  published.  
7.   cHALLEN gEs BEforE   H EALTH 
LIBrArIANs 
The  overarching  rationale  for  the  informationist  profession is the growing amount of biomedical information  that  challenges  health  care  practitioners  to  stay  current.  Davidoff  &  florence  pointed  out  that  this  information  resides  in  scattered  formats  with  inconsistent  indexing  and  accessibility  and  requires  time,  domain  knowledge,  retrieval, and critical appraisal skills to convey the best  of  it  to  the  point  of  care31.  Lindberg  &  Humphreys's  futuristic vision of Medical libraries proposed a marked  increase in electronic information but also more in-context  work by librarians ‘to improve quality, to reduce the risks  associated with inefficient or incomplete retrieval of the  available  evidence,  and  to  do  community  outreach’32. 
Several studies have identified the gaps in skills and  
knowledge between those acquired at library schools and  the requirements of librarians working in health librarians.  Librarians  need  to  develop  skills  in  understanding  how  clinical research is done, reported and indexed. Plutchak  noted that there is much work to be done by libraries in  making the products of research accessible and usable to  our library users and to ourselves. Despite the increasing  abundance  of  research  and  scholarship  linking  research  to  practice  continues  to  be  a  challenge33. 
8. TrAININg ANd EducATIoN   for  
LIBrArIANs WorKINg IN HEALTH 
sEcTor 
Internationally,  a  number  of    studies  indicate  the  efforts  made  towards  the  educational  and  professional  development opportunities for prospective or early career  health  information  professionals34.  The  extent  to  which  health  science  librarians  are  engaged  in  research  was  also assessed35. Another study by Akers, et al. ,  describer  ORCID(open  researcher  and  contributor  ID)  registry  as  a  primer  for  librarians,  by  assigning  unique  16  digit  author identifiers that enable automatic linkages between  researchers  and  their  scholarly  activities36.  further,  a  study by Pearce- Smith also demonstrated that a Journal  club  is  an  effective  tool  for    librarians,  which  aimed  to  develop  appraisal  skills  and  assist  in  the  application  of  research  to  practice37. 
In  view  of  the  above  studies,  the  present  study  suggests  some  initiatives  to  be  taken  for  health  library  professionals  in  India: 
1. The Library Associations should collaborate with Medical  
Council of India (MCI) to work together and organise  
training  programmes  for  health  librarians. 2. An apprenticeship program can be included as a part  
of curriculum to visit medical libraries, hospitals as  
well  as  health  care  providers  in  order  to  acquaint  
themselves with their requirements, related to research,  
patient  care  and  terminology. 
3. International  conferences  on  EBL  and  information  
practice for health librarianship should be organised  
from time to time in academic and Medical libraries,  
e.g.,  AIIMS  and  National  Medical  Library  (NML),  
New  Delhi. 
4. The curriculum should be designed to develop some  
subject  knowledge  relevant  for  the  health  sector  
especially for non-science background students e.g.  
knowledge  of  anatomy  and  physiology,  origin  and  
meanings of medical terms, project management skills,  
literature searching skills, knowledge of evidence based  
practice,  research  methods  and  epidemiology. 
9. coNcLusIoNs 
‘Information will increasingly become the currency of  healthcare in the future, and our ability to access, understand  and interpret it at individual and population level will be a key  determinant in the future success of our healthcare system.’ 
27 

========4========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  1,  JANuARy   2017 
Thus  it  is  evident  that  the  importance  of  Library  and  Information  Services  in  health  care  sector  is  very  well  recognised  throughout  the  world.  Library  &  Knowledge  Services staff are vital to healthcare and underpin clinical  and management decision making. The services you provide  enable  staff,  patients  and  their  caretakers  to  access  the  right  knowledge  and  evidence  to  achieve  high  quality  healthcare  and  health  improvement.  Health  Library  and  Information professionals need to stay a step ahead, and  right now the need has never been greater-(CILIP Health  Libraries  Group  Conference  2016).38 
2014, 3(1),  1-9. 
15.  Waris,  A.  Medical  librarianship  in  India:  A  review  
of historical developments and current perspectives,  
2013.(https://www.researchgate.net/.../260041450_ 
medical_librarianship_in_india). 
16.  Khan,  A.M.  &  Siddiqui,  M.  use  of  information  
technology and services by medical students. Library  
Hi  Tech  News,  2014,  31(8),  19-21.  (http://www. 
emeraldinsight.com/doi/pdfplus/10.1108/LHTN-06- 
2014-0044). 
17.  Tavassoli-farahi,  M.  &  Gandhi,  R.T.D.  IT  skills  
among LIs professionals of medical libraries in India  
and Iran: A comparative study.  Annals  of  Lib.  and  
Info. Stud.,  2011, 58,  161-69. 
18.  Bayley, L. & McKibbon, A. Evidence-based librarianship:  
A  personal  perspective  from  the  medical/  nursing  
realm. Library Hi Tech., 2006, 24(3), 317-23. (http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.1108/07378830610692091). 19.  Eldredge,  J.D.  Evidence-based  Librarianship:An  
overview. Bull. Med. Lib. Assoc.  2000,  88(4), 289- 
302. 
rEfErENcEs 
1. Giuse,  N.B.  et  al.,  Clinical  medical  librarianship:  
the  Vanderbilt  experience.   Bull.  Med.  Lib.  Assoc .,  
1998, 86,  412-6. 
2. Giuse,  N.B.  Advancing  the  practice  of  clinical  
medical librarianship. Bull. Med. Lib. Assoc .  1997,  
85,  437-8. 
3. Acari, R. & Lamb, G. The librarian in clinical care.  
Hosp.  Med.  Staff.,  1977 6(12),  18-23.  
4. 
care  setting  at  the university  of  Missouri–Kansas  
City  School  of  Medicine.  Bull.  Med.  Lib.  Assoc .,  
1974, 62(4),  354–8.  
5. Lamb,  G;  Jefferson. A. White  C. And  now,  clinical  
librarians  on  rounds.  Hartford.  Hosp.  Bull .,  1975,  
30(2),77–86.  
6.  Cimpl,  K.  Clinical  medical  librarianship:  a  review  
of the literature. Bull. Med Lib. Assoc., 1985, 73 (1),  
21-8.  
7. Davidoff  f.  &  florance,  V.  The  informationist:  A  
new health profession? [editorial]. Ann Intern Med .  
2000, 132(12),  996–8.  
8.  Grefsheim,  S.f. et  al.  The  informationist:  Building  
evidence for an emerging health profession.  J. Med.  
Lib. Assoc.  2010, 98(2),  147-56. 
9.  Guise,  N.B.  et  al.  Clinical  medical  librarianship:  
The  Vanderbilt  experience.  Bull.  Med.  Lib.  Assoc.  
1998, 86(3),  412–6.  
10.  Schacher,  L.f.  Clinical  librarianship:  Its  value  in  
medical  care.  Ann.  Intern.  Med.  2001,  134,  717- 
20. 
11.  Marshall, J.G.  Issues in clinical information delivery.  
Libary  Trends.,  1993  42(1),  83-107. 
12.  http://www.nlh.nih.gov/factsheets/dif_med_pub. 
html. 
13.  Pathan,  A.M. Education for medical librarianship in  
India.  Intl. Lib. Rev ., 1978, 10,187-203. (www.tandfonline. 
com/doi/pdf/10.1016/0020-7837(78)90051-1). 14. Waris, A. & Vasanthakumar, M. The techniques and  
methods  adopted  in  the  medical  college  libraries  
located in the districts of southern Karnataka plateau:  
A  study.  Inter.  J.  of  Lib.  and  Info.  Sci.  (IJLIS) .,  
Algermissen,  V.  Biomedical  librarians  in  a  patient  
20. Koonce T.y. et al., Evidence-based databases versus  
28 
primary medical literature: An in-house investigation  
on their optimal use. J Med Libr Assoc. 2004, 92(4),  
407-11. 
21.  Sathe,  N.A.  et  al.,  Librarian-perceived  barriers  to  
the implementation of the informationist/information  
specialist in context role. J. Med. Lib. Assoc.  2007  
95(3),  270-4. 
22. Eldredge J.D. The evolution of evidence-based library  
and  information  practice,  part-I:  Defining  EBLIP.  
Evid.  based.  Lib.  Inf.  Pract.  2012,  7 (4),139-45. 23.  Schacher,  L.f.  Clinical  Librarianship:  Its  value  
in  medical  care.  Ann.  Intern.  Med.  2001,  134(8),  
717-20. 
24. Doe, J. The survey and after. Bull. Med. Libr. Assoc.,  
1961, 49(3),  361-8. 
25. Marshall, J.G. et al. The value of library and information  
services in patient care: Results of a multisite study.  
J.  Med.  Lib. Assoc.,  2013,  101(1),  38-46. 26. Sollenberger,  J.f.  Holloway,  RG  Jr.  The  evolving  
role  and  value  of  libraries  and  librarians  in  health  
care.  JAMA,  2013,  310(12),1231-2.  doi:  10.1001/ 
jama.2013.277050.  
27.  Blake,  L.  &  Balance,  D.  Teaching  evidence  based  
practice in the hospital and the library: Two different  
groups, one course. Med. Ref. Serv. Q., 2013, 32(1),  
100-10. 
28.  Marshall, J.G., et al., Library and information services:  
Impact  on  patient  care  quality. Int.  J.  Health  Care  
Qual. Assur.,  2014, 27(8),  672-83. 
29.  yaeger,  L.H.  Kelly,  B.  Evidence-based  medicine:  
Medical  librarians  providing  evidence  at  the  point  
of  care. MO  Med.,  2014, 111(5),  413-5. 

========5========

CHATuRVEDI: EVIDENCE-BASED  L IBRARy AND  I NfORMATION  P RACTICE  & EDuCATIONAL NEEDS Of HEALTH LIBRARIANS 
30. Marshall, J.G. Linking research to practice: The rise of  
evidence-based health sciences librarianship. J. Med.  
Libr. Assoc.  2014,  102(1), 14-21. doi: 10.3163/1536- 
5050.102.1.005. 
31.  Rankin,  J.A.,  et  al.  The  emerging  informationist   
specialty:  A  systematic  review  of  the  literature.  
J.  Med.  Libr.  Assoc.,   2008,  96(3),  194-206.  doi:  
10.3163/1536-5050.96.3.005.  
32. Lindberg, D.A. & Humphreys, B.L. 2015-The future  
of  medical  libraries.  N.  England  J.  Med.,  2005,  
352(11),  1067-70.  
33.  Plutchak, TS. Breaking the barriers of time and space:  
The dawning of the great age of librarians. J. Med.  
Libr. Assoc., 2012, 100(1), 10-9. doi: 10.3163/1536- 
5050.100.1.004. 
34.  Myers, B. A. & Rodrignez, B. How do early career  
health  sciences  information  professionals  gain  
competencies?  J.  Med.  Libr.  Assoc.,  2016,  104(3),  
215-20.  doi:  10.3163/1536-5050.104.3.006. 35.  Lessick,  S.  Research  engagement  of  health  science  
librarians:  A  survey  of  research  related  activities  
and  attitudes.  J.  Med.  Libr.  Assoc.,  2016,  104(2),  
166-73. 
36.  Akers,  K.G.,  et  al.,  ORCID  another  identifiers:  A  
prime  for  librarians.  2016, 35(2),  135-44. 37.  Pearce-Smith, N. A journal club is an effective tool  
for  assisting  librarians  in  the  practice  of  evidence- 
based  librarianship:  A  case  study.  Health  Inf.  Lib.  
J.,  2006, 23(1),  32-40. 
38. http://www.cilip.org.uk/health-libraries-group/events/ 
cilip-health-libraries-group-conference-2016. 
29 

========6========

