DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, November 2017, pp. 30-37  DOI: 10.14429/djlit.37.1.10672 
 2017, DESIDOC 
Research Activities of Library and Information Science Professionals in Indian Higher  
Educational Institutions: Competencies, Support and Engagements 
Raj Kumar Bhardwaj   St Stephen's College, University of Delhi, Delhi-110 007 
E-mail: raajchd@gmail.com 
AbStRACt  
The present study is an attempt to understand the research attitude, engagement and competencies of LIS  professionals in higher educational institutions in India. It was found that out of 170 respondents, 145 (85.3%)  respondents read research literature regularly and 75 (44.1)  expressed that reading research based articles is their  regular activity. But 95 (55.9) do not read journal articles. 155 (91.2) respondents revealed that they have conducted  research after obtaining the formal degree. Majority of respondents 47 (27.6) revealed that their preferred mode  of dissemination of research has been publishing paper in conference proceedings, followed by publishing a paper  in refereed journals 35 (20.6). Maximum respondents 72 (40.0) followed a theoretical approach in conducting  research, followed by survey method 55 (30.6). 'E-resources' (160) and 'Bibliometric Study’ (120) has been the  most preferred areas of research publishing. ‘Lack of funding support’ (160), ‘time constraints’ (155) and ‘Problems  in data collection’ (150), have been identifed as major constraints in carrying out research. The main purpose for  conducting research is to fnd the academic performance indicators (APIs) 150, followed by personal growth (102).  The study suggests that funding agencies and universities need to come forward to encourage LIS professionals to  pursue research and publishing. This will add value in delivering the best library services to academic community  and also improve research activities in academic institutions. 
Keywords: Research competencies, research involvements, librarians, research activities, universities, India 
1.  IntRoduCtIon  
Professionals  have  been  arguing  for  long  whether  library  professionals  should  pursue  publication  despite  heavy  professional  and  administrative  responsibilities.  Some  people  believe  that  librarians  are  ill-prepared  for  conducting research and enormous work pressure does not  allow them to conduct research. Undoubtedly, conducting  research  by  library  professionals  is  crucial  and  utmost  needed to enhance day to day problem solving and better  decision making in libraries. In addition, it makes librarians  critical  consumers  of  research  publications  and  equips  them to provide efficient information services to research  scholars  and  faculty  members.  Therefore,  hindrances  faced  by  academic  librarians  need  to  be  identified  to  overcome  their  problems.  It  is  essential  for  academic  librarians to read and apply the findings of the study in  daily  library  operations.  It  is  also  imperative  to  know  whether exiting research literature impacts their own area  of study. Academic librarians consider and ponder upon  their  own  work  and  the  research  questions  that  arise.  Librarians must strive to bridge the gap between research  and  practice  so  that  library  resources  can  be  utilised  optimally  and  users  can  get  the  best  services.  Library  and information science research is equally important for  the  education  system  and  the  growth  of  LIS  research.  Majority of research conducted in the field are published  in National journals. For global visibility, research in the  subject  should  be  published  in  International  journals  as  
Received 19 September 2016, online published 28 December 2016 
well4. We need to enhance the engagement of practioner  librarians in contributing to research publication. It will  help us minimise the gap between research and practice.  Supporting the research of academic librarians is important  and strongly recommended by professionals. Studies reveal  that research helps librarians in career development. The  present study is an attempt to understand the attitude and  engagement towards research among library professionals  in  academic  libraries  in  India.  
2.  LItERAtuRE   R EvIEw  
Several  studies  related  to  library  and  information  science research, research skills and attitude of librarians  were reviewed. Berg, Jacobs Cornwall1   discussed  about  viewpoint of library administrators in Canadian Association  of Research Libraries (CARL) regarding research in library  functioning  particularly  in  academic  librarianship.  The  study found that university librarians' expectations from  research are inconsistent and only a few institutions provide  documentation  outline  in  a  formal  way.  Furthermore,  the  study  found  lack  of  understanding  among  library  professional about the recent research practices occurring  across Canadian academic libraries. Bolin2   found  in  her  study that some librarians consider demands of research  writing  irrational  and  tedious.  Furthermore,  it  states,  ‘a  contingent  of  authors  and  librarians  feel  librarians  are  ill-prepared to take on research due to lack of education  in research skills’. The major reason of lack of research  

========1========

BhARdwAj: ReseARCh ACTIvITIes of LIBRARy And InfoRmATIon sCIenCe PRofessIonALs  
is heavy workload at workplace. Powell, Lynda & Joseph3 identified  that  lack  of  time,  lack  of  training  in  research  methods, lack of institutional support and research funding  are  identified  the  major  inhibits  library  professionals  confront  in  conducting  research.  The  study  suggested  overcoming these barriers so that librarians can be motivated  to  conduct  research.  Tumbleson  &  Burke4   opined  that  there is lack of formal collaboration and communication  among LIS teachers and practicing librarians. Hence, the  study suggested that the collaboration must be enhanced  so  that  research  in  the  field  of  LIS  may  be  accelerated  with major contribution from practicing librarians. Mittal5 conducted  a  study  to  know  the  research  trends  in  the  field  of  LIS  during  1990  to  2010.  The  study  analysed  the  co-occurrence  of  4735  descriptors  in  1408  journals  and  found  that  a  topic  of  high  activity  has  significant  implication  in  planning  library  services. 
Sarah6   conducted  a  study  in  public  universities  in  Nigeria and found that librarians publish maximum research  in  International  journals  rather  than  local.  The  major  motivating force behind research publishing of librarians  is  career  promotion.  Further,  the  study  found  several  hindrances faced by librarians in publishing such as, (i)  lack  of  interpretation  skills,  (ii)  exorbitant  publication  fees by journal outfits and (iii) indiscriminate rejection of  manuscripts by journals. The study suggested organising  data analysis training programme for librarians from time  to time. Koufogiannakis & Crumley7  postulated that certain  areas in the LIS have evidence based research publications  but more work needs to be done so that practioners can  take decisions based on evidence. Furthermore, the study  identified  lack  of  time  as  one  of  the  major  problems  faced  by  librarians  in  conducting  research.  It  further  suggested  that  every  library  professional  has  a  part  to  play  in  building  an  evidence  base.  Research  outcome  in the field is directly relevant to their decision-making  needs. 
Ogbomo8  revealed that heavy demands of daily work  routine, journal rating, lack of research orientation, academic  freedom and lack of interest are major difficulties limiting  publication output of librarians. Wilkinson9  supported the  research  outcome  of  Ogbomo’s  study  which  found  that  librarians often do not research, major inhibiting factors  being lack of time and lack of research skills. The study  suggests that time management and collaboration can help  to  overcome  these  barriers.  Verzosa10   expressed  that  it  is  vital  for  librarians  to  engage  in  research  because  it  adds value to librarianship. The author further stated that  the quantum of research in librarianship is disappointing  and  there  is  a  shortage  of  research-oriented  librarians.  Ocholla,  Ocholla  &  Onyancha11   revealed  that  visibility  of the research outcomes of academic librarians is poor.  Publications  of  librarians  and  directors  of  libraries  in  universities  are  few.  Majority  of  librarians  prefer  to  publish  research  individually  rather  than  conducting  research  in  groups.  Bresnahan  &  Johnson12   suggested  
training in research data topics on priority basis, addressing  hands-on  methods  for  librarians.  It  can  help  librarians  to develop tangible skills which help them in individual  outreach  activities. 
3.  objECtIvES 
The  objectives  of  the  present  study  are  to: (i) Gauge  the  level  of  their  research  competencies (ii) Understand the problems faced by them in conducting  
research 
(iii) Understand  their  attitude  to  conduct  research (iv) Identify  the  major  intentions  of  conducting  
research 
(v) Understand  the  research  support  available  to  them (vi)  Suggest  ways  to  overcome  barriers  in  conducting  
research.  
4.  MEtHodoLogy 
An  online  survey  was  conducted  using  a  structured  online  questionnaire  circulated  among  LIS  professional  in  academic  institutions  in  India.  The  questionnaire  was  distributed  during  july  2014  to  April  2015  among  the  selected  group  and  completed  by  the  end  of  May  2015.  Questionnaires  were  distributed  through  all  the  major  forums  and  Facebook  groups.  Total  170  filled-in  questionnaires  were  received  back  by  the  investigator.  The  online  questionnaire  was  designed  using  Google.  Doc platform. Two questionnaires used in the studies of  Kennedy & Brancolini13  and Berg, Jacobs & Cornwall 
15  were referred to prepare the final questionnaire. Majority  of  questions  in  the  questionnaire  have  been  taken  from  these two studies. Simple Percentage method was used to  analyse the data collected. Questionnaire used dichotomous,  multiple  choice  and  open-ended  questions.    
5.  LIMItAtIonS   of t HE Study 
The  study  covers  library  professionals  working  at  various  levels  in  higher  educational  institutions.  It  does  not  categorise  the  perceptions  of  different  levels  of  librarians. There could be differences in the perceptions  of different levels of librarians such as, Chief Librarians  of the University, deputy Librarians, Assistant Librarians,  College Librarians, etc., The survey was conducted using  an  online  questionnaire  designed  using  Google  -Doc  spreadsheet. The survey could collect only 170 responses  from library professionals working in higher educational  institutions.  (It  may  be  noted  that  there  are  more  than  35,000  colleges  and  750  universities  in  India).  The  questionnaire  used  in  data  collection  does  not  facilitate  respondents  to  explain  anomalies  in  obtaining  research  assistance such as, funds, study leave, etc., The responses  of the questionnaire do not represent all states of India.  In  addition,  the  study  used  a  simple  percentage  method  in  data  analysis.  Other  statistical  tools  have  not  been  
31 

========2========

djLIT, voL.  37, no.  1, jAnUARy   2017 
used  to  correlate  the  results.  
6. AnALySIS And   I ntERPREtAtIonS 
All the 170 questionnaires received from the respondents  were  selected  for  analysis  and  interpretation  of  data.  Responses to 15 questions were analysed and are presented  in the form of Tables and Figures using different simple  percentage  methods. 
6.1  Reading  Research  Literature 
Reading  research  literature  is  crucial  for  librarians.  Literature  reading  helps  the  librarians  to  understand  recent  trends.  In  addition,  it  also  helps  to  understand  the  latest  technology  implemented  in  various  libraries.  Therefore,  a  question  was  posed  about  reading  research  literature by librarians. The dataset was analysed and is  presented in Fig. 1. 145 (85.3%) respondents stated that  they read the literature and 15 (8.8%) revealed that they  do  not  read  research  literature.  Besides  this,  10  (5.9%)  
figure 1. Reading research literature.  
respondents  did  not  note  their  response  about  reading  literature.  
New academic librarians are not aware of publications  of great importance that can help them to be good academic  librarians.  In  fact,  professionals  are  not  prepared  for  the  queries  and  hurdles  they  may  face  after  joining  the  library in higher educational intuitions. Therefore, library  professionals  must  read  the  relevant  research  literature  so  that  they  can  help  users  and  handle  challenging  situations.  
figure 2. Preference  in  spending  time  reading  research      
literature. 
6.3  Reading  the table  of  Contents  
Another question was asked to respondents on whether  they  read  the  Table  of  Contents  (TOC)  page.  Table  of  Contents  helps  to  understand  the  coverage  of  journals  and  books.  Reading  the  same  can  assist  librarians  to  answer  queries  of  users.  It  was  found  that  120  (70.6%)  respondents  read  the  Table  of  Contents  and  44  (25.9%)  do not read TOC.  One of the respondent answered, ‘do  not  know’.  (Fig.3) 
6.4  Reading  journal Articles  on  Regular  basis 
Reading  journal  articles  regularly  helps  library  professionals  to  keep  abreast  of  recent  developments.  Therefore,  it  was  asked  whether  the  respondents  read  the  journals  articles  on  a  regular  basis  or  not.  It  is  shows  that  75  (44.1%)  respondents  read  research  based  articles on a regular basis while 95 (55.9%) do not read  journal  articles.  It  is  surprising  that  more  than  50%  of  the respondents do not read journal articles on a regular  basis. However, it is very crucial for any professional to  
figure 3. Scanning of ‘tables of contents’. 
keep up to date about recent developments in the field. It  can  be  generalised  from  the  dataset  that  a  major  reason  of  not  being  up  to  date  in  the  field  themselves  is  that  
6.2 Preference  in  Spending time  Reading  Research  
Literature  
A  question  was  asked  to  know  the  respondents’  preferences in spending time to read research literature in  the field of LIs 
(91.2%)  respondents  preferred  spending  time  in  reading  research  literature  while  10  (5.9%)  stated  that  they  do  not  read  research  literature.  5  (2.9%)  respondents  gave  no  comments  about  this  (fig.  2).  
. Analysis of responses revealed that 155  
they  do  not  read  journal  articles. 
32 
6.5 Major  Reasons  of  not  Reading  Research  
Articles 
Respondents  were  asked  about  the  major  reasons  of  not  reading  research  based  articles.  The  responses  

========3========

BhARdwAj: ReseARCh ACTIvITIes of LIBRARy And InfoRmATIon sCIenCe PRofessIonALs  
received were analysed and are shown in Fig. 4. Majority  of respondents (36) stated that they do not have time to  read  research  based  articles,  followed  by  other  reasons  (18), LIS users these that prefer to read essays, opinions,  etc., In addition, (12) respondents revealed that they do  not consider reading research based articles, followed by  do  not  have  expertise  in  research  methods  (8).  Further,  6  respondents  revealed  that  librarians  are  not  expected  
figure 4. Major reasons of not reading research articles. 
to  read  research  based  articles.    
6.6 Conducting  Research After obtaining  Master  
degree  
Continuous lifelong learning is essential for advancement.  Conducting  research  after  obtaining  a  formal  degree  helps  fellow  librarians  to  follow  progress  in  the  field.  Research publications of librarians assist LIS professional  working in other libraries to counter and solve problems in  efficient ways. Therefore, it was asked from respondents  whether they have conducted research after obtaining the  formal degree. It was found that 155 (91.2%) respondents  revealed that they have conducted research after obtaining  the  formal  degree  while  15  (35.3%)  stated  they  have  not  conducted  any  research  after  obtaining  the  formal  degree.  Majority  of  respondents  (95%)  stated  that  they  perused M.Phil and PhD and have written research articles  in  conference  proceedings  and  journals.  However,  less  
figure 5. Mode of dissemination of research. 
than  5%  respondents  revealed  that  they  have  conducted  research  through  research  projects  funded  by  some  agency.  Therefore,  it  is  clear  from  the  study  that  only  a  few  professionals  have  research  projects.  
Further,  respondents  were  asked  to  specify  the  preferred mode of research dissemination. The responses  were  analysed  and  are  shown  in  Fig.  5.  Majority  of  
respondents 47 (27.6%) stated that they have conducted  surveys and published in conference proceedings, followed  by  published  paper  in  refereed  journal  35  (20.6%),  presented at a national conference 30 (17.6%), published  in  non-refereed  journal  15  (8.8%),  published  a  book  solely or co-authored 9 (5.3%), published a book chapter  8  (4.7%),  presented  at  a  regional  conference  8  (4.7%),  presented at home institution in a formal forum 8 (4.7%).  Besides  this,  10  respondents  mentioned  other  modes  of  dissemination  of  research  but  did  not  reveal  which  in  the  questionnaire.  
6.7  Methodology used  in  Conducting  Research  
Over the years library science has evolved dramatically.  Several  types  of  research  methods  have  been  used  by  library  professionals.  Data,  indicators  and  types  of  methodology  being  followed  do  not  always  render  potential  solutions  to  the  identified  problems.  Hence,  LIS  needs  methodological  developments  so  that  the  
33 

========4========

djLIT, voL.  37, no.  1, jAnUARy   2017 
nature  and  characteristics  of  the  Science  in  different  parts  of  world  can  be  understood. The  subject  has  been  linked  to  descriptive  methodologies,  channeled  to  meet  the confronts of professional practice.14. A question was  
answers  were  allowed.  The  intension  of  research  and  publication helps us to understand the level of motivation.  The  respondents  were  allowed  to  tick  multiple  options  provided  in  the  questionnaire.  It  was  found  that  for  
asked  in  the  questionnaire  about  which  methodologies  majority of respondents, the intension in conducting and  they followed most in conducting research. It was found  publishing research was to achieve academic performance  that  majority  of  respondents  72  (40.0%)  followed  the  indicator (API) 150, followed by Personal growth (102),  theoretical approach in conducting research, followed by  Job security (100), Library services and advancement (79),  survey method 55 (30.6%), content analysis 33 (18.3%),  Status and prestige improvement (78), Professional growth  interview18(10.0%) and experiment 2 (1.1%). The findings  (67),  Innovative  approach  to  improve  the  functioning  
are supported by the study of Chu15   wherein  the  author  reported that content analysis, experiment and theoretical  approach  have  become  the  top  choices  in  LIS  research  compared to questionnaire survey and historical method,  which  dominated  literature  in  the  field.  Respondents  were  asked  preferred  areas  of  research.  Table  1  below  shows that 'E-resources' (160) is the most preferred area  of  research  in  publishing,  followed  by  'Bibliometric  Study’  (120),  'Information  seeking  behaviour'  (110),  'User  studies'  (100),  'Information  system'  (99),  'Social  networking sites' (90), 'ICT in libraries’ (89), 'Academic  libraries'  (80)  and  'LIS  education'  (80).  
6.8  Intention behind  Research  and  Publishing  
In the questionnaire, respondents were asked to reveal  the  purpose  of  publishing  research.  In  Fig.  6.  multiple  
table 1. Preferred research area in publishing  
S.no 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 7. 8. 9. 10. 
Most popular area of research number of responses E-resources 160 Bibliometric study 120 Information seeking behaviour  110 User studies 100 Information system 99 Social networking sites 90 ICT in libraries  89 Academic libraries  80 LIS education  80 
of  library  (59).  Besides  this,  Knowledge  gain  (29)  and  Enhancement of income (19) are the lowest intension and  motivation force to conduct research and publishing. Fox16 also  asked  this  question  in  their  study  to  ascertain  the  major  motivation  force  behind  research  and  publishing  of  librarians.  The  outcome  of  this  study  revealed  that  promotion  or  tenure  is  the  major  factor  in  conducting  research  and  publishing.  In  the  present  study,  the  main  factor  identified  is  to  achieve  API  to  get  promotion.  Therefore,  the  outcome  of  the  two  studies  supports  the  results.    
6.9 Problems faced  in  Conducting  and  Publishing  
LIS  Research 
Library  professionals  face  several  problems  in  conducting  research.  They  have  been  complaining  that  the  facilities  provided  to  them  in  research  are  limited.  Therefore,  a  question  was  posed  in  the  questionnaire  to  know  the  constraints  being  faced  by  librarians  in  doing  research  and  publishing  it.  Ten  options  were  given  to  the respondents in the questionnaire to reveal the major  hindrances they encounter in conducting and publishing  research.  Respondents  were  allowed  multiple  answers.  Fig.7 below shows that Lack of funding support (160) is  the major constraints followed by Time constraints (155),  Problems in data collection to do the research (150), Data  analysis using statistical tools (120). A considerable number  of respondents reported problem in writing the research  outcome (100) and Research experience constraints (79).  In addition, other problems revealed by respondents were  
figure 6. Major intentions in research and publishing.   
34 

========5========

BhARdwAj: ReseARCh ACTIvITIes of LIBRARy And InfoRmATIon sCIenCe PRofessIonALs  
figure 7. Problems in conducting and publishing research.  
lack  of  selection  in  research  area  (49),  Difficulties  in  research associate (47), Unavailability of quality journals  (24).  The  lowest  number  of  respondents  said  that  they  face  difficulty  in  conducting  and  publishing  research  because  of  lack  of  knowledge  about  research  (19).  
Limited  financial  support  is  available  to  Indian  librarians.  Ministry  of  Human  Resources  Development  must  consider  this  and  provide  financial  support  to  librarians  in  research  projects.  
6.10  Support Available  to Academic  Librarians  
The  study  also  identifies  the  support  available  to  librarians  working  in  higher  educational  institutions  as  shows  in  Fig.  8.  Fennewald17   described  that  librarians  without  formal  research  training  learn  and  do  research  with  the  help  of  colleagues.  Therefore,  a  question  was  added  in  the  questionnaire  to  know  support  available  to  academic  librarians.  It  was  found  that  Funding  to  present the research paper (139) was the support available  to  majority  of  respondents,  followed  by  provision  of  sabbatical  leave  (120),  Provision  of  study  leave  (119),  Provision  of  travel  grant  (110),  Training  of  research  methodology (67), Time to do research (39), Support of  peer  group  (29),  Research  funding  by  other  universities  (19),  Research  funding  by  university  (9).  Interestingly,  
figure 8.   Supports available to librarians in higher educational  
institutes. 
none  of  the  respondent  stated  that  they  have  research  assistants  to  conduct  research.    
6.11  Level  of  Research  Collaboration 
Collaboration with other professionals for conducting  research  is  essential  to  foster  growth  of  literature.  It  also  helps  to  develop  innovative  approach  in  research  and  blend  different  ideas  of  researchers.  In  order  to  understand the level of collaboration, several authorship  patterns  studies  have  been  conducted  around  the  world.  A question was asked to know the level of collaboration  among  LIS  professionals  to  do  research  and  publish  it.  Respondents were allowed to tick multiple answers. It was  asked first whether they carried out any research project  (yes/no). secondly, it was asked whether they published  papers  in  collaboration.  It  was  found  that  majority  of  respondents conducted research projects individually 39  (22.9%). However, 131 (77.1%) revealed that they have  not  carried  out  any  research  project  so  far.  Further,  the  study  also  sought  responses  about  authorship  pattern.  The  responses  received  through  the  questionnaire  were  analysed and are presented in Table 2 shows that maximum  number  of  respondents  stated  that  they  conducted  the  research  individually  as  sole  researcher  130,  followed  by  double  authored    115,  three  authors  50,  four  authors  5.  Surprisingly,  none  of  the  respondents  revealed  about  their  association  in  publishing  paper  having  five  or  more  authors.  
table 2. Authorship pattern in research publishing  
S. No 1. 2. 3. 4.. 5. 
Authorship in published research Single author 
Double authors 
Three authors 
Four authors 
Five authors or more 
Number of responses 
130 
115 
50 
5 
0 
Note: Number of the responses shown are higher than the total number  of respondents because respondents were allowed to tick multiple options. 
35 

========6========

djLIT, voL.  37, no.  1, jAnUARy   2017 
The outcome of the study is supported Thavamani19  wherein it is found that majority of research published by  librarians  are  single  authored  144  (41.9%),  followed  by  two  authors  102  (29.7%),  three  authors  60  (17.5%).  
6.12  Popular journals Among  the  Professionals 
Respondents  were  asked  which  journals  they  read  the  most  and  used  in  publishing.  Dataset  was  analysed  using  number  of  responses  received.  Study  identified  the  top  14  journals  popular  among  LIS  professionals.  This  is  listed  in  Table  3.  It  was  found  that  Annals  of  Library & Information Studies  (145) is the most popular  journal used in reading and publishing research articles,  followed by DESIDOC Journal of library and information  technology  (138),  Library Hi-Tech News  (120),  Library  Hi-Tech   (109).  Respondents  also  revealed  that  these  journals  published  innovative  and  application  oriented  research which motivates them to refer such journals.  It  
table 3. Popular journals among LIS professionals 
Rank 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 
journal(s) 
Annals of Library and Information Studies 
DESIDOCJournal of Library and Information Technology 
Library Hi-Tech News 
Library Hi-Tech 
SRELS Journal of Information Management Electronic Library 
University News 
Journal of Indian Library Association 
D-Lib Magazine 
PEARL Asia Pacifc Journal of Library & Information Science 
Library Management Library Hearld 
Scientometrics 
Reference Services Review 
can  be  concluded  from  the  dataset  that  Indian  journals  are  most  popular  among  the  LIS  fraternity  in  higher  educational institutes. Out of the 14 most popular journals,  8  originate  from  India  (Table  3). 
7.  dISCuSSIonS 
The  findings  of  the  study  demonstrate  that  LIS  professionals  are  in  conducting  research.  It  was  found  during  the  study  that  60%  of  the  respondents  possess  mA,  msc  or  Phd   degree  in  addition  to  the  degree  in  Library  and  Information  Science.  However,  the  major  motivation  factor  in  conducting  research  has  been  to  achieve API score to get promotion in the job, followed  by  personal  growth  and  job  security.  Only  a  few  have  been  involved  in  research  for  self-satisfaction.  It  was  also  ascertained  that  only  64%  of  the  respondents  felt  that  Masters  in  Library  and  Information  Science  has  prepared  them  adequately  to  do  research.  
A  large  number  of  responses  55  (91.2%)  show  that  library  professionals  prefer  spending  time  in  reading  research literature. However, large number of respondents  95 (55.9%) do not read journal articles on a regular basis.  Hence, it may be concluded that research article readings  are not done regularly. There are several reasons identified  
36 
in the study and the major one is been found to be lack  of funding to the librarians by Government agencies and  parent institutions, time constructs and problems in data  collection  and  its  analysis  using  statistical  tools.  It  is  also  ascertained  that  majority  of  librarians  do  research  on theoretical aspects and follow survey method in their  study.  The  areas  of  research  approach  are  very  limited.  This  is  also  the  major  reason  for  research  approaches  in  the  area  being  not  innovative.  
Therefore,  librarians  should  come  forward  to  adopt  new  approaches  and  select  new  areas  of  research.  The  most  favorite  areas  of  research  in  library  sciences  have  been  identified  as  E-resources  and  bibliometric  studies.  Library professionals should collaborate with each other  forming research groups so that libraries can be benefited  in  the  application  of  new  tools  and  techniques. And  the  five  laws  of  library  science  can  be  fulfilled  in  the  real  sense  in  the  digital  age.          
Country of origin India 
India 
United Kingdom United Kingdom India 
United Kingdom India 
India 
United States India 
United Kingdom India 
Netherlands United Kingdom 
number of responses by users 
145 
138 
120 
109 
102 
98 
98 
97 
95 
75 
72 
72 
71 
71 
8.  ConCLuSIonS 
Librarians in academic libraries in India are competent  to pursue research and development activities. However,  resources and research support available to these professionals  are  limited.  The  rankings  of  Indian  universities  are  far  lower  compared  to  universities  in  western  countries  and  other  developed  nations.  The  major  reasons  for  lower  ranking  identified  by  various  studies  have  been  inferior  quality  and  less  volume  of  research.  Therefore,  funding  agencies  and  universities  should  come  forward  to  encourage  LIS  professionals  to  pursue  research  and  publishing.  This  will  not  only  add  value  in  delivering  the  best  services  to  students,  research  scholars  and  faculty members, but also improve the level of research  in  academic  institutions.  Group  based  and  collaborative  research ought to be encouraged so that concrete research  outcomes can be expected from these professionals. This  will  also  help  in  developing  the  culture  of  research  in  academic  institutions.  In  addition,  research  oriented  training programmes ought to be conducted on a periodic  basis  so  that  new  entrants  in  the  profession  can  also  learn the nuances of conducting pure, applied and action  research.  Course  curriculum  of  the  Master  programme  of library and information science must incorporate case  

========7========

BhARdwAj: ReseARCh ACTIvITIes of LIBRARy And InfoRmATIon sCIenCe PRofessIonALs  
studies  on  conducting  applied  research  to  resolve  day  to  day  problems.    
REfEREnCES 
1. Berg, s.A.; jacobs, h.L.; & Cornwall, d. Academic  
librarians and research: A study of Canadian library  
administrator  perspectives. College  and  Rese.  Lib. ,  
2013, 74(6),  560-72. 
2. Bolin, m.K. A  Typology  of  librarian  status  at  land  
grant universities. J. of Aca. Lib. , 2008, 34(3), 220- 
30. 
3. Powell, R.R.; Baker, L.m.; & mika, j.j. Library and  
information science practitioners and research. Lib.  
&  Info.  Scie.  Rese.,  2002, 24(1),  49-72. 
4. Tumbleson, B.E. & Burke, J.J. When life hands you  
lemons:  Overcome  obstacles  to  expand  services  in  
an  embedded  librarian  program.  J.  of  Aca.  Lib.,  
2010, 50(6),  972-88. 
5. Mittal, R. Library and information science research  
trends in India. Annals of Lib. and Info. Stu., 2011,  
58(4),  319-25. 
6. Sarah,  O.  Research  and  publication  productivity  
of  librarians  in  public  universities  in  South-West,  
Nigeria.  Lib.  Philo.  and  Prac .,  2015,  1.  http:// 
digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article 
=3472&context=libphilprac (accessed on September  
18,  2016). 
7. Koufogiannakis,  D.  &  Crumley,  E,  Research  in  
librarianship:  Issues  to  consider.  Library  Hi  Tech,  
2006, 24(3),  324-40. 
8. Ogbomo,  E.F.  Publication  output  of  librarians  in  
tertiary  institutions:  A  case  study  of  delta  state  
University, Abraka, nigeria. Lib.  Philo.  and  Prac.  
(e-journal). 2010, 1-9. http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/ 
libphilprac/322  (accessed  on  September  18,  2016). 9.   w ilkinson, Z.,  oh, how pinteresting! An introduction  
to  pinterest.   Library  Hi  Tech  News ,  2013  30(1),  
1-4. 
10.   v erzosa, f.A. Research in librarianship: Challenges,  
competencies, and strategies. In PLAI-STRLC seminar- 
workshop  on  research  in  librarianship,  Laguna,  
Philippines, 2007, pp. 9-10.  http://eprints.rclis.org/ 
archive/00012918/01/Research_in_Librarianship_  
keynote_speech.pdf  (accessed  8  June  2016). 
11. Ocholla,  D.,  Ocholla,  L.  &  Bosire  Onyancha,  O.  
Research  visibility,  publication  patterns  and  output  
of academic librarians in sub-saharan Africa. Aslib  
Proceedings,  2012,  64(5),  478-93.  http://dx.doi. 
org/10.1108/00012531211263102. 
12. Bresnahan, m.m. & johnson, A.m. Assessing scholarly  
communication  and  research  data  training  needs.  
Refe.  Ser.  Rev.,   2013,  41(3),  413-33.  http://dx.doi. 
org/10.1108/RSR-01-2013-0003. 
13. Kennedy,  m.  R.,  &  Brancolini,  K.R.  Academic  
librarian research: A survey of attitudes, involvement,  
and  perceived  capabilities.  College  &  Rese.  Lib., 
2011, 73(5),  431-48.  
14. Gauchi  Risso,  V.  Research  methods  used  in  library  
and information science during the 1970-2010. New  
Library World, 2016, 117(1/2), 74-93. http://dx.doi. 
org/10.1108/NLW-08-2015-0055. 
15. Chu, H. Research methods in library and information  
science: A  content  analysis. Lib.  &  Info.  Sci.  Res.  
2015, 37(1),  36-41. 
16.   f ox, d., finding  time  for  scholarship: A  survey  of  
Canadian research university librarians. Portal: Lib.  
and Acac.,  2007, 7(4),  451-62. 
17. Fennewald, J. Research productivity among librarians:  
Factors leading to publications at Penn State. College  
&  Rese.  Lib.,  2008, 69(2),  104-16. 
18. Thavamani,  K.  A  study  of  authorship  patterns  and  
collaborative research in collaborative  librarianship,  
2009-2014.   Collaborative  Libra.,   2015,  7(2),  84- 
95. 
Contributor 
dr Raj Kumar  bhardwaj  is Librarian at St Stephen’s College,  Delhi,  India.  Prior  to  his  current  position,  he  has  served  as  Deputy  Librarian  in  Nalanda  University,  Rajgir,  Bihar,  India  and  Judges  Library,  High  Court  of  Punjab  and  Haryana,  (Chandigarh).  he  holds  mCA,  mLIs,  mPhil  and  Phd   from  University  of  Delhi.  He  has  also  qualified  UGC-NET.  He  has  contributed  30  research  articles  in  various  reputed  journals  and  has  spoken  at  various  International  conferences.  He  has  completed two major research projects. He is also the reviewer  for  four International  LIS  journals.  He  is  the  recipient  of  UNESCO fellowship for information management. His areas of  interests are: institutional repositories, legal information system,  open  access,  legal  reference  service,  judicial  and  legislative  metadata,  e-learning,  social  networking,  scientometrics  and  digital  library  design  and  development. 
37 

========8========

