DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, January 2017, pp. 3-8 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.37.1.10686 
 2017, DESIDOC 
Tradition and Transition: The Journey of an iSchoolDeep in the Heart of Texas 
Loriene Roy* and Rachel N. Simons** 
The University of Texas at Austin-78712 E-mail:*loriene@ischool.utexas.edu;**rnsimons@utexas.edu 
ABSTRACT 
The School of Information at the University of Texas at Austin (iSchool at UT-Austin) has evolved to be  a  unique  program  within  the  larger  discipline  of  Library  and  Information  Studies  by  incorporating  traditional  educational delivery while expanding the interdisciplinary nature of its faculty and curriculum. This article places  our iSchool’s experiences within the narrative of the iSchool movement and points to various aspects of change,  loss, and opportunity within the school’s history. The past and present status of both the graduate and undergraduate  curricula at the iSchool at UT-Austin is described. We offer this story of the UT-Austin iSchool’s development as  an example that helps deepen an understanding of the impact of such programs and their transformations on their  students and faculty, as well as on the feld of Library and Information Science (LIS). 
Keywords:  LIS  education,  united  states,  graduate  LIS  curriculum,  undergraduate  LIS  curriculum,  ischools,  
LIS faculty 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
Founded  at  the  University  of  Texas  (UT)  in  1948,  the program that we now call ‘The iSchool at UT-Austin’  was  first  known  as  The  Graduate  School  of  Library  Science  (GSLS).  Students  graduating  from  UT-Austin’s  GSLS  received  a  Master  of  Library  Science  (MLS)  degree.  By  the  late  1960s,  the  GSLS  added  the  option  of  a  Certificate  of  Advanced  Study  (CAS),  as  well  as  a  Doctoral  program.  
In  1980,  the  school’s  name  was  changed  to  the  Graduate  School  of  Library  and  Information  Science  (GSLIS)  as  its  curriculum  expanded  to  include  more  Information  Science  courses.  Accordingly,  the  awarded  degree  for  the  program  also  changed  in  name,  to  the  Master of Library and Information Science (MLIS). Twenty  years later, the name of the degree changed again, to the  Master  of  Science  in  Information  Studies  (MSIS);  three  years after that, in 2003, the name of the program itself  was changed to the School of Information (abbreviated as  ‘iSchool’).1  This new iSchool at the University of Texas  at Austin joined the programs at both The University of  Michigan  and  The  University  of  Washington,  becoming  the  third  official  iSchool.2 
Today, the UT-Austin iSchool has a steady enrollment  of some 300 graduate students and is a school, department,  and  college  unto  itself.  The  iSchool’s  primary  degree  remains  the  MSIS  degree,  which  is  accredited  by  the  American  Library  Association  (ALA)  as  a  terminal  professional  degree  for  librarian  positions.  In  addition,  the iSchool officially began enrolling students in a new  executive  Master’s  program  on  Security  and  Identity  Management  (MSIMS)  in  January  2016.  This  degree  is  offered  in  cooperation  with  the  UT-Austin  Center  for  
Received 19 September 2016, online published 28 December 2016 
Identity. Additionally, the iSchool includes approximately 30  students  in  its  PhD  in  Information  Studies  program. 
To  understand  iSchools  and  the  iSchool  movement,  a  general  literature  search  was  performed  in  ScoUT(the  discover tool on the webpage of the University Libraries  at UT-Austin) and in the Library & Information Science  Source specific database, using the search term ‘iSchool’  in  both.  Second,  content  was  taken  from  the  UT-Austin  iSchool’s  website  (https://www.ischool.utexas.edu)  and  course  syllabi.  Finally,  the  experiences  of  both  authors  were  also  taken  into  account.  
Although this paper tells a story about one particular  iSchool,  this  case  can  help  deepen  our  understanding  of  the  impact  of  such  programs  on  their  students  and  faculty,  as  well  as  on  the  field  of  LIS  as  a  whole.  We  have  chosen  to  focus  primarily  on  the  most  tangible  feature  of  an  academic  program:  its  curriculum.  The  paper  is  presented  in  five  segments:  A  brief  history  of  the  iSchool  at  UT-Austin;  Background  on  the  iSchool  movement;  An  explanation  of  the  past  and  present  Master’s program requirements within the iSchool at UT- Austin; An  overview  of  undergraduate  education  within  the iSchool at UT-Austin; and, finally, Some reflections  and  conclusions.  
2. THE  iSCHOOL  MOVEMENT 
Much has been written about the iSchool movement  in articles that cover its history and purpose,2, 3  compare it  with library-focused schools (sometimes called ‘L-schools’  or ‘LIS schools’),4, 5  track the overlap and collaboration  of  interdisciplinary  research  publications  within  and  between  iSchools,6,  7 or  interview  individuals  involved  with the movement.8, 9  Other articles analyse the different  

========1========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  1,  JANUARY  2017 
specialties  that  may  be  found  within  an  iSchool,  such  as  data  curation,  archives,  eScience,  or  usability.10   A  special issue of the Journal of Education for Library and  Information  Science  covered  iSchools  specifically,11   as  did  a  special  section  of  the Bulletin  of  the  Association  of Information Science and Technology.  In comparison to  these analyses of the iSchool movement as a whole, the  current  activities  of  those  participating  within  iSchools  may  be  presented  in  the  proceedings  of  the  annual  iConference,  now  an  international  conference. 
According  to  Bias,  Marty,  and  Douglas,  iSchools  emerged  from  several  needs,  including  ‘the  need  for  Library  and  Information  Studies  (LIS)  pedagogy  to  embrace new technologies, and the need for an integrated  approach to the study and practice of information use by  human  beings.’12   While  some  articles  point  to  the  first  meeting of the ‘iCaucus’ and its official founding of the  iSchools  organisation  in  2005  as  the  beginning  of  the  iSchools movement, other authors trace the origins of the  iSchool  movement  further  back  to  discussions  in  1988  among  a  ‘Gang  of  Three’  that,  by  2003,  had  expanded  to  an  acknowledged  ‘Gang  of Ten.’13 
Now an official non-profit organisation, the iCaucushas  its own bylaws, board of directors, nominating committee,  membership committee, executive committee, and member  schools. The criteria for membership in the iCaucus are  both  qualitative  and  quantitative:  A  potential  iCaucus  member must reflect strong external funding for research,  support a doctoral program that graduates students over  at  least  three  years,  and  carry  a  strong  reputation  for  both  research  and  teaching.14   Currently,  there  are  over  65  iSchools,  more  than  half  of  which  are  outside  the  U.S.9 
Many  people  affiliated  with  an  iSchool  today  feel  that  these  programs  are  critical  sites  for  innovation  and  interdisciplinary research within LIS and beyond.15, 16  Yet  the establishment and presence of iSchools has not been  completely without conflict or examination, particularly  around  the  appropriateness  of  programs’  curriculum.  Many individuals had voiced differing opinions about the  correct  balance  of  theory  and  practice-with  LIS  faculty  sometimes perceived to be sacrificing training within the  program for a theory-based education, or overly focusing  on  concepts  over  skills.17 
With the advent of the iSchool movement, much dissent  focused  on  the  changing  brand  or  identity  of  these  new  iSchools, particularly as the concept of information became  more prominent and the word library was dropped from  program names and degrees.18 For example, Jaeger,  et al .,  summarise the non-supportive iSchool sentiments within  the LIS community as follows:‘The iSchool movement is  not  universally  celebrated  by  all  scholars  in  LIS.  Some  have asserted that iSchools embody a discipline without  definable content, a branding exercise, a corporatisation  of LIS, and even a drift away from the library tradition,  among  other  criticisms.’19   Despite  these  changes  (or  perhaps  because  of  them),  data  show  that  enrollment  
4 
in iSchool programs did not decrease as these programs  shifted  from  their  traditional  groundings  as  L-schools  and  transitioned  into  the  iSchool  identity.20 
Like  many  of  these  programs,  the  iSchool  at  UT- Austin  descended  from  a  traditional  L-school  program  that  focused  specifically  on  librarianship.  Even  before  the shift to the ‘iSchool’ identity, however, students and  alumni  had  voiced  their  desire  for  changes  within  the  program’s  curriculum.  Students  had  already  questioned  the necessity of taking the core introductory course and  often  viewed  adjuncts  as  their  bridge  to  the  ‘current’  work  environment.  In  contrast  to  a  lack  of  curriculum  addressing contemporary technology in the LIS workplace,  employers  expected  new  graduates  to  be  technology  experts  and  guides  for  their  institutions. Additionally,  a  few years after graduation, many alumni would question  why  they  had  not  been  offered  more  coursework  on  management  skills,  especially  dealing  with  personnel  or  human  resources. 
Such complaints, in addition to the changing atmosphere  of the iSchool movement, contributed to the eventual re- design  of  the  Master’s  degree  program  and  curriculum  at  UT-Austin  as  the  degree  shifted  from  the  MLIS  to  the  MSIS. 
3.  CHANGING  MASTER’S  PROGRAM  
REQUIREMENTS  
Traditional L-schools were known both for producing  graduates who were generalists and for cultivating graduates  with  specific  specialty  strengths.  Students  in  the  UT- Austin GSLIS selected their 36 hours of coursework (12  three-credit courses, minimum) to demonstrate that they  would satisfy the entry-level requirements for working in  their chosen area of school, public, academic, or special  libraries.  Students  built  their  individual  programs  by  completing  their  core  courses-with  one  type  of  library  course  as  their  central  elective,  and  then  with  other  electives  selected  to  illustrate  their  personal  workforce  orientation.  In  this  way,  students  started  to  ‘specialise’  in  the  UT-Austin  program  within  their  electives.  
The  emergence  of  archival  education  significantly  changed  the  direction  of  LIS  programs  and,  eventually,  iSchools.21  Universities (including the UT-Austin GSLIS)  began  hiring  full-time  tenure-track  faculty  in  the  1980s  to  teach  archival  courses. At  UT-Austin,  this  focus  also  particularly  included  the  arrival  of  faculty,  equipment,  and  funding  for  a  conservation/preservation  program.  However,  the  later  departure  of  grant  funding  greatly  diminished this focus, although preservation courses are  still offered today as electives taught by a senior lecturer  and  several  adjuncts.  
While  the  iSchool  at  UT-Austin  was  an  L-school  (the GSLIS), Master’s students took core required classes  intended  to  teach  a  balance  of  skills  and  theory.  These  courses originally represented nearly half of the 12 classes  needed for graduation and included a general introductory  course,  along  with  courses  in  management,  reference,  

========2========

ROY  & S IMONS: TRADITION AND  T RANSITION: THE  J OURNEY OF AN ISCHOOLDEEP IN THE  H EART OF  T ExAS 
descriptive cataloging, and research.The number and focus  of the core courses changed over time and as the degree  changed  from  the  MLIS  to  the  MSIS,  often  in  response  to new faculty hires, retirements, and in consideration of  the changing job market. Many traditional subject areas  (including  cataloging,  reference,  and  management)  left  the  MSIS  core,  although  they  sometimes  remained  as  elective  courses.  Significantly,  the  UT-Austin  iSchool  administration  has  decided,  throughout  all  of  these  changes, that all MSIS instruction must be conducted in  a face-to-face environment. Unlike many other L-Schools  and  iSchools,  the  iSchool  at  UT-Austin  does  not  offer  any  online  or  distance-delivery  course  options  for  the  MSIS  program. 
In  2002,  the  number  of  allowable  electives  toward  the  MSIS  increased.  This  change  was  the  direct  result  of  decreasing  the  number  of  required  classes  while  simultaneously  increasing  the  total  number  of  courses  needed to complete the degree (from 36 to 40 credit hours). Students  seeking  an  MSIS  at  UT-Austin  now  needed  to  complete 13 three-credit courses and a single one-credit  ‘readings’course that, soon, was converted into an electronic  portfolio  requirement.  Today,  the  four  core  courses  for  the MSIS program are ‘Information in Social and Cultural  Context,’  ‘Perspectives  on  Information,’  ‘Understanding  Research’ and the ‘Capstone Experience Class.’ Students  have  four  options  for  their  capstone: A  Master’s  thesis,  A  Master’s  report, A  Professional  experienceor  project,  or A Practicum in school libraries.22  Students can enroll  in electives within the iSchool at UT-Austin and in other  UT-Austin departments, or can transfer credit from other  ALA-accredited Master’s programs for the remaining 27  elective  credit  hours  toward  their  degree. 
Since  2003,  the  iSchool  at  UT-Austin  has  added  the  new  executive  MSIMS  degree,  a  new  bachelor  of  science  in  computer  science/MSIS  degree  (BSCS/ MSIS), and several new dual Master’s degrees. The new  MSIMS, the joint BSCS/MSIS, and the dual Master’s in  English  and  MSIS  were  all  added  since  Fall  2015. This  collaboration with the Department of English brings the  total  number  of  graduate  dual  degree  options  to  seven  (along with Latin American Studies, Women’s and Gender  Studies,  Middle  Eastern  Studies,  Global  Policy  Studies,  Public  Affairs,  and  a  Juris  Doctorate  in  Law).23   Some  specialisations  may  still  have  occurred  even  if  the  UT- Austin iSchool had remained an L-School, but others have  clearly  evolved  from  the  interests  of  new  faculty  (such  as  the  BSCS/MSIS)  and  from  an  eye  toward  financial  opportunities  in  the  broader  information  workfield  (as  with  the  MSIMS).  
The  introduction  of  the  MSIMS  degree  has  also  brought new courses and a new type of student into the  iSchool  at  UT-Austin.  Currently,  the  required  courses  for  the  MSIMS  represent  a  fixed  set  of  nine  required  three-credit  courses,  plus  a  Master’s  report.24   These  courses  are  designed  to  examine  different  aspects  of  identity  within  the  contemporary  information  world;  
all  nine  are  currently  open  only  to  students  enrolled  in  the  MSIMS  program.  Unlike  the  courses  of  the  MSIS  program,  the  MSIMS  courses  are  designed  specifically  for working professionals and meet over two consecutive  days  once  every  three  weeks.24  Additionally,  unlike  the  MSIS program, MSIMS classes usually include a mixture  of  in-person  students  (many  of  whom  travel  to  Austin  for  the  weekend)  and  remote  students  (who  use  a  web  conferencing  software  to  participate).  
In  contrast  to  the  focus  on  working  professionals  within  the  MSIMS  program,  the  combined  BSCS/MSIS  program is designed to enroll more undergraduate students  from  the  Computer  Science  department  into  the  MSIS  program by allowing these students to take graduate-level  courses in the iSchool before completing their Bachelor’s  degree.23   Students  must  take  the  same  required  core  as  (and  with)  other  MSIS  students,  plus  meeting  the  requirements  of  the  Computer  Science  program.  
4.  UNDERGRADUATE  EDUCATION  WITHIN  
THE  iSCHOOL AT  UT-AUSTIN 
The UT-Austin GSLS began offering an undergraduate  ‘Children’s  Literature’  course  in  the  1970s’  that  was  primarily  intended  for  students  who  were  preparing  for  teaching careers. Based on the continuing success of that  course, the GSLIS later began testing other undergraduate  classes  during  the  late  1980s’.24,  25 
In 2002, iSchool faculty started offering classes for  undergraduates as part of a 19-credit certificate through  an  interdisciplinary  Bridging  Disciplines  Program.  This  coincided with the renaming of the GSLIS to the iSchool;  these  undergraduate  courses  accordingly  reflected  both  an increasing attention to cross-disciplinary interests and  the iSchool’sparticular grasp of information technology.25 Thus,  undergraduates  who  might  not  have  heard  of  an  ‘iSchool’ started enrolling in iSchool-sponsored classes on  topics such as ‘Technology and the Global Community’  and  ‘Tech Tools  for Academic  Success.’ 
Starting in the Spring 2005 semester, the UT-Austin  iSchool began offering undergraduatesthe option to work  toward a minor degree in Information Studies; however,  the  minor  did  not  become  ‘transcriptable’  (i.e.,  visible  on  a  printed  undergraduate  diploma  or  transcript)  until  Fall  2016,  when  UT-Austin  introduced  transcriptable  minors  across  campus.  In  order  to  receive  the  minor,  undergraduate  students  must  currently  take  four  three- credit courses within the iSchool: A single required course  (‘Introduction to Information Studies’), one lower-division  (freshman/sophomore)  elective,  and  two  higher-division  (junior/senior) electives.26  Currently, the UT-Austin iSchool  typically logs 4,000-5,000 undergraduate semester hours  per  year.  
The increased number of undergraduate courses also  provide iSchool doctoral students with valuable teaching  positions, once they have completed a required ‘Supervised  Practice  of  Teaching’  course  and  met  other  University  requirements. UT-Austin generally only permits doctoral  
5 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  1,  JANUARY  2017 
students to instruct lower-division undergraduate courses,  so  offering  multiple  sections  of  these  courses  is  crucial  for  building  doctoral  teaching  experience.  In  addition  to  receiving  a  semester-based  stipend  and  insurance  benefits,  these  students  receive  the  title  of  ‘Assistant  Instructor’  and  are  permitted  to  pay  their  tuition  at  the  rate  of  Texas  residents.  
Undergraduate course titles at the UT-Austin iSchool  are often somewhat (intentionally) broad and/or general,  particularly  the  Information  and  Culture,  Information  and People, Information in Society, and Information and  Technology courses.25   Different  sections  of  Information  and Culture typically explore topics such as young adult  literature  or  an  introduction  to  digital  cultures,  while  individual sections of  Information and People might cover  competitive intelligence or examine comics and graphic  novels.  Additionally,  undergraduate  versions  of  some  graduate-level  courses  are  offered,  such  as  Introduction  to Audio Preservation and Reformatting, Data Wrangling,  and  Historical  Museums.  Several  iSchool  faculty  have  also  taught  ‘one-off’  undergraduate  ‘signature’  courses  designed  to  provide  freshmen  or  first-year  studentswith  the  experience  of  learning  under  some  of  UT-Austin’s  best  educators.25 
Additional undergraduate courses were offered over  time, with titles such as We Like to Watch: Surveillance  &  Society  and  the  recently-added  ‘Academic  Success  in  the  Digital  University.  The  most-attended  iSchool  undergraduate  courses  today  are  the  Information  in  Cyberspace course (which evolved from an earlier ‘Internet  Resources  and  Services’  course  launched  in  1993  and  was  likely  the  first  completely  online  course  at  UT- Austin) and the longstanding Children’s Literature course  (which  offers  some  online  sections  and  some  in-person  sections).  Although  many  of  the  undergraduate  courses  are  designed  and  taught  by  a  single  instructor,  several  courses  (especially  the  most-attended)  are  taught  as  consistent  offerings  with  relatively  fixed-although  often  collaborative-course  content  and  formats. 
In  particular,  the  new  ‘Academic  Success  in  the  Digital University’ course was designed to further increase  undergraduate  enrollment  in  the  iSchool  and  to  support  UT’s goal of successful four-year undergraduate graduation  by  offering  more  course  sections  (particularly  online)  and  by  appealing  to  a  wider  range  of  students  from  different  majors.  Like  ‘Information  in  Cyberspace,’  this  course  is  offered  exclusively  online  and  operates  completely  through  the  Canvas  platform  (the  primary  digital  Learning  Management  System  at  UT-Austin).  Conceptual development first began in Fall 2015, when a  group of iSchool administrative staff, faculty, instructors,  and Teaching Assistants (TAs) discussed ideal curriculum  goals  for  preparing  incoming  undergraduate  students  (especially transfer, non-traditional, first-generation, and other  underprivileged students) for studying at a contemporary  ‘digital’  research  university  like  UT-Austin.  
Led primarily by one doctorate student (with support  
6 
from other faculty and staff), a development team of MSIS  and  PhD.  TAs’  worked  over  the  next  year  to  develop  this new lower-division course. Additionally, the iSchool  development team approached the UT-Austin Libraries for  contributions  that  provide  students  with  an  overview  of  the  Libraries’  resources  and  services.  Thus,  in  addition  to  the  iSchool  collaboration,  two  individuals  working  at the main UT-Austin library-including the Information  Studies subject area librarian-contributed content. Finally,  the  development  team  was  also  responsible  for  creating  all  learning  assessments. 
Academic Success in the Digital University officially  launched in Fall 2016 with a single section and the intention  to  expand  enrollment  to  potentially  over  100  students. The  final  course  covers  seven  topic  areas  (Introduction  to the Course and to Online Learning, The UT Libraries  and Introduction to Scholarly Communication, Academic  Honesty, Copyright and Creative Commons, and Academic  Publishing,  The  Internet  and  Networking  Basics,  Basic  Website Design and Usability, Information Security and  Privacy Basics, and Digital Citizenship and Information  Ethics)  and  is  expected  to  be  offered  every  future  semester, including summers. The core learning material  and assessments will be maintained by the iSchool, with  content  updates  provided  by  instructors  and TAs. 
Thus,  although  the  UT-Austin  iSchool  does  not  currently offer (or plan to offer) a major for undergraduate  students, undergraduate course offerings have expanded.  UT-Austin iSchool undergraduate courses offer a striking  contrast  to  MSIS  courses  in  that  many  undergraduate  classes  are  taught  entirely  online,  without  any  required  face-to-face  meetings.  These  online  courses  appeal  to  many  students  because  of  their  flexibility  and  ease  of  access;  they  additionally  reflect  an  increasing  interest  of  UT-Austin  administration  in  offering  quality  online  education, especially for undergraduate students.We may  expect  current  trends  in  undergraduate  education  within  the  iSchool  to  continue.  
5.  CONCLUSIONS  
Overall, the curriculum at the iSchool at UT-Austin  has followed what Bonicci, et al., refer to as ‘an inverted  fractal cycle’: a broadening in focus, but with the nuances  of skills-orientation.27  Curricular focus has stepped away  from an allegiance to particular settings-especially libraries- and  moved  towards  the  broader  perspectives  of  key  values  and  significant  information  tools.  The  evolution  of  the  UT-Austin  iSchool  has  brought  changes  in  the  curriculum, the faculty, and even the demographics of the  student  body. These  changes  have  also  come  with  some  amount  of  loss,  through  the  somewhat  unacknowledged  shifting  of  the  program  away  from  more  traditional  L-school areas into areas more supported by the current  information  workfield  and  marketplace.  
Offering a central program (the MSIS) that is delivered  only through in-person classes has kept graduate student  enrollment  relatively  flat  (partly  because  there  is  a  

========4========

ROY  & S IMONS: TRADITION AND  T RANSITION: THE  J OURNEY OF AN ISCHOOLDEEP IN THE  H EART OF  T ExAS 
maximum  capacity  to  the  physical  infrastructure  of  the  program) and means that students enrolling in the MSIS  program  often  do  not  seek  to  stay  in  current  positions,  but  are  instead  seeking  new  careers.  As  a  result,  the  student body of the UT-Austin iSchoolis overwhelmingly  young, with many students under the age of twenty-five  (except for the MSIMS program, which currently enrolls  around  25  students).  
MSIS  students  preparing  for  positions  in  libraries  are no longer the norm; these students might even have  difficulty  being  matched  with  a  faculty  advisor  with  similar interests. In some cases, such students leave the  UT-Austin  program  to  enroll  in  another  program  that  offers  more  library-  and/or  youth-centered  coursework.  Just  as  when  the  earlier  shifting  focus  of  the  program  to  highlight  archives,  preservation,  and  conservation  resulted  in  a  shifting  of  interests  among  students,  the  focus  of  the  current  MSIS  program  is  now  attracting  students  who  are  particularly  interested  in  design,  user  experience,  and  digital  humanities.  Even  within  those  interest  areas,  however,  students  often  overlook  more  ‘library-focused’  courses  that  might  assist  them-such  as  the  basic  reference  course.  In  fact,  the  ‘Library  Instruction  and  Information  Literacy’course  (the  last  course  at  the  iSchoolwith  the  word  ‘library’  still  in  its  title)  was  offered  for  the  final  time  in  Spring  2016  and  will  be  replaced  with  an  undergraduate  course.  
The  iSchool  at  UT-Austin  continues  teaching  for  the future of information technology, research, and work  through its course offerings.28  Courses on usability, digital  design,  and  health  informatics  continue  to  be  added  to  the  MSIS  offerings,  and  the  undergraduate  minor  added  a  specific  ‘HCI  and  Ux’  focus  with  a  tailored  track  of  coursework  in  2016.  The  most  traditional  aspect  of  the  iSchool,  though,  is  that  it  still  delivers  its  Master’s-  and  doctoral-level  courses  only  in  face-to-face  format.  Although, students may request the transfer of up to two  online  graduate  courses  from  another  program,  or  may  request  enrollment  in  an  online  course  offered  through  the  Web-based  Information  Science  Education  (WISE)  consortium, the majority of UT-Austin iSchool graduate  students  do  not  take  a  single  distance-delivery  course.  
Additionally, while MSIS students may specialise their  studies through dual degrees, portfolios, or endorsements  of specialisations, students enrolled in the Ph.D. program  or  the  MSIMS  program  do  not  have  similar  options.  Increasingly,  the  iSchool  at  UT-Austin  is  focusing  on  strengthening its doctoral program. Although enrollment  has  remained  low,  a  greater  emphasis  on  the  doctoral  program  (and  the  quality  of  research  that  it  represents)  is  more  in  line  with  how  iSchools  identify  themselves  and  define  their  membership  in  the  iCaucus.  Suchan  emphasis  at  UT-Austin  is  certainly  desirable;  however,  any program of only about 30 PhD students will struggle  to  survive  with  today’s  demand  for  greater  educational  accountability.  
Wiggins  and  Sawyer  describe  the  public  image  of  iSchools,  saying  that  ‘iSchools  present  themselves  as  a  thriving,  heterogeneous,  and  inter-  or  multidisciplinary  scholarly  community  who  focus  on  the  convergence  of  information,  computing,  and  their  roles  in  human  and  social experience.’29  Somewhat in contrast, most iSchools  (including  at  UT-Austin)  do  not  particularly  have  a  reputation of increasing diversity within the field.30  The  UT-Austin iSchool needs to continually strive to remain  a  strong  and  ‘heterogeneous’  partner  within  its  campus  and across the globe. Situated in a U.S. state that borders  Mexico  and  with  faculty  with  diverse  interests  and  backgrounds, the iSchool at UT-Austin has the potential  to  build  a  greater  reputation  for  innovative  approaches  to  better  addressing  diversity  within  its  student  body,  coursework,  and  research.  
Throughout its shifting journey from the 1948 GSLS to  the iSchool of 2016, the UT-Austin iSchool has remained  independent; it has never been merged into other colleges. The UT-Austin programhas grown into an iSchoolprimarily  through garnering more external funding and by increasing  attention on its doctoral program. However, it has yet to  fully  achieve  the  third  criterion  of  an  iSchool:  a  strong  reputation  in  research  and  teaching  across  its  campus  and  throughout  the  profession.  As  King  notes,  ‘every  I-School  finds  itself  confronting  the  catch-22  situation  of  wanting  to  look  similar  to  established  disciplines  in  order  to  legitimate  itself  in  the  academy,  yet  different  [enough]  from  established  disciplines  to  warrant  new  school status.’31   Perhaps  this  ‘catch-22’  difficulty  is  the  one  universal  element  that  all  iSchools  share. 
Regardless of these changes and challenges, the UT- Austin iSchool remains strong and steady and isbuilding  anelevated  research  presence.  Many  Master’s  students  still  graduate  to  take  positions  in  libraries;  only  now,  the  curricular  emphasis  is  on  students’  acquisition  and  understanding  of  information  tools  to  locate,  manage,  curate,  and  deliver  information  wherever  needed.  This  curricular  focus  also  prepares  students  to  take  positions  in  other  information  work  fields.  Thus,  while  change  is  inevitable,  we  can  also  anticipate  and  respond  to  it.  Communal  efforts  among  the  faculty,  students,  alumni,  and  workforce  surrounding  an  iSchool  can  ensure  that  traditional  areas  continue  to  feel  respected  while  emerging  information  work  settings,  skills,  and  studies  are  simultaneously  welcomed.  
REfERENCES 
1. ‘University of Texas at Austin School of Information.’  
From  Wikipedia,  the  free  encyclopedia.  
2.  Cronin,  B.  An  I-dentity  crisis?  The  information  
schools  movement.  Inter.  J.  of  Info.  Mana. ,  2005,  
25(4),  363-65. 
3.  Olson,  G.M.  &  Grudin,  J.  The  information  school  
phenomenon.  ACM  Interactions ,  2009,  16(March/ 
April).  
7 

========5========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  1,  JANUARY  2017 
4.  Dillon,  A.  What  it  means  to  be  an  iSchool.   J.  of  
Edu.  for  Lib.  and  Info.  Sci.,  2012, 53(4),  267-72.  5. Lopatovska,  I.,   et  al .    iSchools  and  L-Schools:  
Converging or diverging communities? Proceedings of  
the American Society for Information ScienceReceived  
7 November 2016, revised 22 November 2016, online  
published 1 January 2017and Technology Conference,  
2012, 49(1),  1-3. 
6.    Chen, C. Thematic maps of 19 iSchools. Proceedings  
of the American Society for Information Science and  
Technology  Conference,  2008, 45(1),  1-12.  7. Yu,  S-Y.  Detecting  collaboration  patterns  among  
iSchools  by  linking  scholarly  communication  to  
social  networking  at  the  macro  and  micro  levels.  
LIBRES,  2013,  23(2),  1.  
8.  Brynko, B. iSchools: Shaping the information landscape.  
Information  Today,  2012,  29(8),  34-5.  
9.  Overview  of  the  iSchool  movement:  An  interview  
with  Ronald  L.  Larsen,  iCaucus  Chair. Bulletin  of  
American  Soci.  for  Infor.  Scie.  and  Tech.,   2016,  
42(4),  12-6. 
10.    Wu,  D.;  He,  D.;  Jiang  J.;  Dong,  W.  &  Vo,  K.T.  
The  state  of  iSchools:  An  analysis  of  academic  
research  and  graduate  education.  J.  of  Info.  Scie.,  
2011, 38(1),  15-36.  
11.  Carbo,  T.  Editors’  notes:  Teaching  and  learning  in  
the  iSchools.  J.  of  Edu.  for  Lib.  and  Info.  Sci.,  
2012, 53(4),  223.  
12.  Bias,  R.G.;  Marty,  P.F.  &  Douglas,  I.  Usability/ 
User-centered  design  in  the  iSchools:  Justifying  a  
teaching  philosophy.  J.  of  Edu.  for  Lib.  and  Info.  
Sci.,  2012, 53(4),  274-89. 
13.  Chu,  H.  iSchools  and  non-iSchools  in  the  USA: An  
examination  of  their  Master’s  programs.  Edu.  for  
Info.,  2012,   29 (1),  1-17.  
14.  ‘iSchools,  About.’  http://www.ischools.org/about/ 
charter/,  2014.  (accessed  on  3  September  2016). 15.  Bruce,  H.;  Richardson,  D.J.  &  Eisenberg,  M.  The  
I-Conference: Gathering of the clans of information. 
Bulletin of  American Soc. for Info. Scie. and Tech.,  
2006, 32(4),  11-12.  
16.  Budd,  J.M.  &  Dumas,  C.  Epistemic  multiplicity  
in  iSchools:  Expanding  knowledge  through  
interdisciplinarity/La  multiplicitéépistémiquedans  
les  iSchools:  Le  développement  des  connaissances  
grâce  à  l’interdisciplinarité.  Canadian  J.  of  Info.  
and  Lib.  Scie.,   2014,  38(4),  271-86.  
17.  Van Fleet, C. & Wallace, D.P. The I-word: Semantics  
and  substance  in  library  and  information  studies  
education.  Refe.  &  User  Serv.  Quar.,   2002,  42(2),  
104-09.  
18.  Berry,  J.N.  Why  I-schools  need  library.  Library  
8 
Journal,  2007,  132,  10. 
19.  Jaeger, P.T.; Golbeck, J.; Druin, A. & Fleischmann,  
K.R.  The  first  workshop  on  the  future  of  iSchool  
doctoral education: Issues, challenges, and aspirations.  
J.  of  Edu.  for  Lib.  and  Info.  Sci.,  2010,  51(3),  
201.  
20.  Wallace, D.P. The iSchools, education for librarianship,  
and the voice of doom and gloom. J. of Acad. Libra.,  
2009, 35(5),  405-9.  
21.  Cox,  R.J.;  Mattern,  E.;  Mattock,  L.,  Rodriguez,  R.,  
& Sutherland, T. Assessing iSchools. J.  of  Edu.  for  
Lib.  and  Info.  Sci.,  2012, 53(4),  303-16.  22.  ‘MSIS.’https://www.ischool.utexas.edu/programs/ 
masters,  2016.  (accessed  24  September  2016). 23.  ‘Dual  Degrees.’    https://www.ischool.utexas.edu/ 
programs/dual_degrees,  2016.  (accessed  on  24  
September  2016). 
24. ‘Program Overview.’ http://msims.ischool.utexas.edu/,  
2016.  (accessed  on  24  September  2016). 25.  Rice-Lively,  M.L.  Undergraduate  education  in  a  
graduate  school:  The  University  of  Texas  iSchool  
experience. Bulletin  of American  Soc.  for  Info.  Sci.  
and  Tech.,  2010, 36(4),  18-21. 
26.  ‘Undergrad  Minor.’  https://www.ischool.utexas.edu/ 
programs/minor,  2016.  (accessed  on  24  September  
2016). 
27.  Bonnici,  L.J.,  Subramaniam,  M.M.,&  Burnett,  K.  
Everything  old  is  new  again:  The  evolution  of  
library and information science education from LIS  
to  iField. J.  of  Edu.  for  Lib.  and  Info.  Sci.,  2009,  
50(4),  263–74. 
28.  Cortez,  E.  Guest  editorial:  Teaching  for  the  future,  
not  the  past.  J.  of  Edu.  for  Lib.  and  Info.  Sci. ,  
2016, 57(3),  221.  
29. Wiggins, A. & Sawyer, S. Intellectual diversity and the  
faculty composition of iSchools. J. of the American  
Soc.  Info.  Sci.  and  Tech.,  2012, 63(1),  8-21.  30. Subramaniam, M.S. & Jaeger, P.T. Weaving diversity  
into LIS: An examination of diversity course offerings  
in  iSchool  programs.  Edu.  for  Info. ,  2010/2011, 
28(1),  1-19.  
31. King, J.L. Identity in the I-school movement. Bulletin  
of  American  Soc.  for  Info.  Scie.  and  Tech.,  2006,  
32(4),  13. 
Contributors 
Dr  Loriene  Roy   is  a  Professor  in  the  School  of  Information  at  the  University  of Texas  at Austin.  
Mr  Rachel  N.  Simons   is  a  Doctoral  student  and  Assistant  Instructor  in  the  School  of  Information  at  the  University  of  Texas  at Austin.  

========6========

