DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, January 2017, pp.58-63  DOI: 10.14429/djlit.37.1.10772 
 2017, DESIDOC 
RFID Technology in Libraries: A Review of Literature of Indian Perspective 
Parul Gupta* and Margam Madhusudhan** 
 Department of Library and Information Science, University of Delhi, Delhi–110 007 
E-mail: *pgupta@libinfosci.du.ac.in; **mmadhusudhan@libinfosci.du.ac.in 
ABSTRACT 
Implementation of Radio Frequency IDentifcation technology in libraries in a developing country like India  has brought remarkable improvements in the services such as shelf charging-discharging, automated handling of  materials, security, high-speed inventory and moved beyond security to become tracking systems that combine  security with more effcient tracking of materials throughout the library, reduced the data entry errors, enhanced  customer service, and records updates. This article is an attempt to assess the potential of these aspects after the  implementation of RFID technology and factors responsible for the slow infux of the technology, as revealed in the  reported literature covering the concerned libraries of India. It is hoped that the present study will help Librarians and  Library professionals in improving the return on investment and proving the long-term security of the library. 
Keywords:  RFID technology, implementation, information extraction, libraries, India 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The  term  Radio  Frequency  IDentification  (RFID)  technology  has  come  a  long  way  both  in  terms  of  the  multitude of applications and their potential uses. Despite  the  involvement  of  RFID  in  a  variety  of  areas  such  as  logistics,  inventory  control,  aviation  security,  road,  and  rail  rolling,  the  potential  implementation  and  use  of  the  technology  in  libraries  is  still  in  its  budding  stage,  particularly  in  the  case  of  countries  with  developing  economies  like  India. 
As  inferred  from  the  fifth  law  of  library  science  that  ‘library  is  a  growing  organism’,  librarians  are  always  found  interested  in  adopting  latest  technologies  
2. REVIEW  OF  RELATED  LITERATURE 
There are many articles existing on various facets of  paper reviewed articles related to the implementation of  RFID  technology  in  Indian  Libraries.  The  scope  of  this  study  is  limited  to  the  articles  published  during  2010  to  2016  in  various  journals  both  Indian  and  Foreign  by  the  Indian  authors  and  on  Indian  libraries.  The  present  review  focuses  on  the  comprehensive  reports  published  in  India  keeping  in  view  of  the  seminal  results  coming  out  of  the  relationship  between  RFID  technology  and  Indian  Libraries. 
Kumar & Kaur1  discussed the advantages, disadvantages,  components,  and  technical  features  of  a  RFID  library  
to  provide  better  and  efficient  services  to  the  patrons.  
system to provide guidelines for the evaluation of different  Indeed,  RFID  technology  has  redefined  various  library  
systems.  They  also  briefed  about  the  tentative  cost  of  related  services  and  made  every  patron’s  job  easier  and  
implementing  RFID  system  in  a  library  and  how  it  
functions  and  describes  the  role  of  librarians.  
efficient,  from  the  patrons  to  the  library  professionals,  as  compared  to  conventional  technologies  like  barcode,  
Madhusudhan2   opined  that  the  RFID  technology  
but  in  a  developing  country  like  India,  the  high  cost  of  
could  be  the  future  of  services  provided  by  libraries,  
implementation and maintenance is still the major barrier  in  the  proliferation  of  such  auspicious  technology.  
After  the  perusal  of  literature  based  on  RFID,  it  
different  aspects  of  RFID  technology  and  none  of  them  
but  the  involvement  of  high  cost  in  the  working  and  implementation  has  been  encountered  as  the  primary  challenge  in  its  proliferation.  Nevertheless,  the  author  
is  found  that  most  of  the  work  was  carried  out  on  
forecasted a decrease in the cost of the technology with  
its  adoption,  if  carried  out  in  large  numbers  in  libraries  systematically covered them keeping focus the availability  
all over India. The author concluded that the adoption of  
the technology couldn’t be given a blind eye in an era of  
of  technology  in  libraries. 
The  aim  of  the  paper  is  to  present  the  descriptive  literature  reviews  (the  abstract  section  of  the  source  papers)  and  integrative  literature  reviews  (reference  the  conclusion) on different facets of RFID technology with  emphasis  on  select  libraries  of  India  as  revealed  in  the  literature  available  online. 
constrained funding, because in spite of its limitations, it  has provided serious considerable advantages and benefits  by  curbing  many  time  consuming,  monotonous,  tedious  and  complex  problems  in  an  efficient  manner. 
Sarasvathy,  Jagadish,  &  Giddaiah3   highlighted  the  essential  role  of  RFID  in  the  management  and  security  of  the  pool  of  resources  in  a  library  and  found  it  to  be  
Received 31 August 2016, revised 19 September 2016, online published 28 December 2016 

========1========

GuPTA  & M ADhuSuDhAN: RFID TEChNOLOGy IN  L IbRARIES: A REVIEw OF  L ITERATuRE OF  I NDIAN  P ERSPECTIVE 
efficient  in  the  identification  of  multiple  objects. 
Grover  &  Ahuja 
4 
  found  that  the  efficiency  of  the  RFID-LMS system depends upon the information written  in tags and to yield better performance, good quality of  RFID  readers  and  RFID  tags  should  be  used.  
Pandey & Mahajan5  concentrated on the application  of  RFID  technology  in  libraries  and  opined  that  the  technology is not only emerging but also more effective,  convenient and cost efficient in providing library security.  It  can  also  act  as  a  security  device,  taking  the  place  of  the traditional electromagnetic security strip. The authors  found that the RFID tag contains all required identifying  information’s without being pointed to a specific position  to  be  read  by  an  RFID  reader. 
Nagalakshmi 
6 
  outlined  the  deployment,  issues  and  best practice of RFID technology in libraries. The author  opined that the deployment of the RFID in library should  come after the checking privacy policy to protect issues  and  benefits  related  to  the  patrons  and  standards  since  most of the Indian institutions have started implementing  RFID  for  tracking  the  library  materials. 
Surulinathi & Chudamani7  opined that RFID technology  as  a  unique  application  of Automatic  Identification  and  Data Capture (AIDC) technology. The authors concluded  that  more  libraries  are  gearing  to  use  RFID  technology  
operating  costs  by  reducing  the  labor  costs,  improving  automation, refining tracking and tracing, and inhibiting  the  loss  of  resources.  The  author  concluded  that  due  to  the  technology  enhanced  organisation  of  books  and  resources,  security  of  resources  and  timely  service  has  become  possible. 
Pawar  &  Rodge13   discussed  National  Information  Standards Organisation Circulation Interchange Protocol  (NCIP)  standards  related  to  development  and  practical  issues of RFID systems working in a library environment,  in  addition  to  the  basic  issues  concerning  equipment  maintenance,  support,  software  compatibility,  privacy,  and standardisation. The authors attempted to touch basis  of  all  the  areas  relating  to  use  of  RFID  in  libraries  that  could  be  used  as  a  ready  reference  for  librarians  for  implementation  of  RFID  in  their  libraries. 
Singh14  proposed the phased implementation of RFID  technology  as  the  best  approach  because  it  was  not  possible  to  commit  the  whole  library  to  RFID  services  at the same time. In initial implementation might include  the  circulation  process,  security,  the  self  check-in  and  checkout,  stock  taking  and  task  like  sorting  units.  In  the  meantime,  the  library  could  be  used  to  monitor,  contemplate and assess the returns on investments, assess  its  benefits,  patrons’  acceptance,  and  the  education  or  
because  it  has  provided  efficiency  in  terms  of  security,  
training  needs  of  the  staff.  The  author  concluded  that  convenience, and increase patron satisfaction of the user  
RFID  is  an  advantageous  technology  that  made  library  
management  operations  more  convenient  and  facilitate  
community.  
Mamdapur & Rajgoli8  discussed in detail about the  
optimum  services  for  the  patrons,  but  comes  at  a  cost  
various  applications  of  RFID  technology  with  possible  
for  which  libraries  have  to  be  prepared. 
benefits and disadvantages of RFID system. The authors  
Patel15   showed  a  vivid  picture  of  application  of  
RFID  technology  in  libraries  such  as  improvement  in  
were optimistic that when the technology becomes more  sophisticated  with  the  competition  among  the  related  industries,  the  related  components  and  accessories  such  as  tags  will  become  cheaper  in  the  near  future. 
Baidwan, Adarsh  &  Harvinder9   attempted  to  study  the  functional  barriers  and  challenges  faced  while  implementing  the  RFID  technology. The  authors  opined  that  the  application  of  this  technology  has  come  out  in  
self-check-in,  check-out,  monitoring,  shelf  charging- discharging,  reliability,  fast  inventory,  and  automatic  handling  of  materials.  The  author  also  outlined  the  challenges and their possible solutions encountered while  implementing RFID systems with an aim to cover detail  insight  for  other  academic  libraries  that  are  willing  to  deploy  RFID  system. 
Chavan16  opined that library choose to implement RFID  
technology  is  dearer  in  some  respect,  but  the  pro  has  outweighed  the  cons,  thus  making  it  cost  effective. 
Somvir & Kaushik10  provided the overview, basic structure,  function, major standards, advantages & disadvantages of  RFID technology and suggested that RFID technology that  could  bring  strong  security  and  automatic  identification  surveillance  system  in  the  libraries. 
Imran,  Dar  &  Mushtaq11   opined  that  with  the  
the  betterment  of  services  of  the  library.  Although  the  
technology  should  take  extra  precautions  to  follow  best  
practice guidelines according to well-established privacy  principles.  The  author  asserted  that  libraries  are  one  of  many  industries  that  could  increase  their  efficiency  by  preventing loss of control over our personal information  from  the  safe  implementation  of  RFID  systems. 
hasan17   enumerated  merits  of  RFID  over  barcode  and  electromagnetic  tapes.  The  author  also  discussed  
the  scope  of  the  hybrid  technology  and  listed  some  advancement  in  RFID  technology  with  larger  memory  
important  RFID  vendors  with  special  reference  to  the  
capacities,  wider  reading  ranges,  and  faster  processing,  more  and  more  libraries  are  considering  its  adoption  as  
Indian environment while keeping in mind the limitations.  
RFID  technology  could  become  the  future  of  libraries  a  solution  to  increase  the  efficiency  in  the  tracking  of  
because  of  the  advantages  it  offers  that  supports  not  
materials  at  an  enhanced  speed. 
Venkatesh12 suggested the development of an automatic  
compete  in  the  present  system. 
Saravankumar 
18 
 opined that automated identification  
RFID-based system for library material search. The author  procedures  have  become  the  order  of  the  day  in  many  also  found  that  RFID  system  could  be  used  to  reduce  library  services  that  provide  information.  The  author  
59 

========2========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  7,  JANuARy   2017 
also  discussed  RFID  system  and  traced  its  usefulness  with  regards  to  library  services  in  an  improved  manner  to  staff  and  student  community.  The  author  forecasted  that  the  utilisation  of  library  facilities  might  increase  with the introduction of this RFID technology and found  that the technology can help in stock verification to get  processed  quicker  and  reduction  in  the  theft  of  books  to  a  greater  extent. 
Jain & Sharma 
19 
 introduced the criteria for adoption,  and  pros  and  cons  of  RFID  technology.  The  authors  opined  that  the  synergy  of  RFID  in  library  systems  is  
results,  which  lead  to  precise  security  and  control  on  access.  The  author  forecasted  the  barrier  in  its  journey  as the high cost which is expected to come down further  in  the  future  with  the  adoption  of  this  technology  on  a  large  scale  in  libraries  in  India  and  across  the  world.  
Muthukrishnan & Sivaraman25  opined that deployment  of RFID technology in a library requires dedicated research,  careful planning, and training. The authors assist that the  need of the library users for information can be fulfilled  by  adopting  the  new  gadgets  of  information  technology  that would significantly increase the impact on libraries  
advantageous because of its novel communication ability  with a focus on RFID technology and its impacts on its  using  radio  waves  that  is  contactless  and  improved  application,  features  and  suitable  guidelines.  
automated  check-in  or  check-out,  detection  of  thefts,  fast  verification  of  stocks. 
Khanna20  observed that RFID technology has numerous  applications in various areas of the library. The efficiency  obtained  in  the  control  of  accession  and  management  with  available  facilities  of  touch  screen  and  drop  box  systems  enabled  users  to  save  energy  and  time.  The  author  opined  that  despite  being  expensive  in  nature,  the  RFID  technology  has  yielded  numerous  benefits,  advantages,  and  excellent  results  by  making  the  library  management  processes  efficient  and  saved  users  time  and  workload. 
Madhusudhan & Gupta 
21 
 analysed the behaviour with  the opinions of the users towards RFID technology. The  authors also found many intriguing results, for example,  the majority of users were familiar with the RFID system  and its components, but most of the users were not using  smart  cards  because  of  the  lack  of  information  despite  the conduction of several literary programs. The findings  of  the  study  suggested  the  quality  of  related  services,  patterns  of  usage,  and  satisfaction  of  the  users  towards  RFID  technology  that  enabled  an  improvement  in  the  attitude  and  satisfaction  of  users  and  service-provider.  The  authors  concluded  that  the  article  forms  the  basis  and provides a fundamental understanding of factors such  as  user-satisfaction  that  can  affect  the  proper  handling  of  the  RFID  system  for  efficient  use  by  users. 
Kumar, Singh & Manglam22  outlined various components,  working  process  of  the  RFID  technology,  operational  RFID  solution  to  reduce  operating  costs,  improving  automation,  refining  tracking  and  inhibiting  the  loss  of  the  resources  under  any  conditions  and  also  briefed  its  future  in  Indian  libraries. 
baba  &  Tripuram23   explained  the  electromagnetic  
Verma  &  Meenakshi26   provided  an  overview  of  RFID technology, its limitations and future outlook with  a  purpose  to  assist  educators  in  considering  new  course  topics into the curriculum, while involving some teaching  resources,  objectives  and  suggestions. 
Anuragi27   overviewed  importance,  components,  operations,  merits,  demerits,  and  essential  requirements  of  RFID  technology  in  the  library  system.  The  author  opined  that  the  RFID  technology  is  not  only  emerging  but  also  more  effective,  convenient  and  cost  efficient  technology  in  library  security.  
Singh28  opined that the RFID technology has helped  the libraries in numerous many ways and moved beyond  security services to become tracking systems that combine  security with more efficient tracking of materials throughout  the library and also reduced the data entry errors, records  updates to enhance customer service. The author concluded  that  the  RFID  systems  are  more  expensive  if  they  are  operated  on  higher  frequencies  and  there  is  a  need  to  standardise  the  system  for  its  full  utilisation  in  this  global  world. 
Gogoi29   investigated  the  privacy  risks  of  the  use  of  RFID  technology  in  the  libraries  and  the  methods  for  reducing such risks, while covering issues about reliability,  interference  and  attacks  on  privacy  and  security. 
Nahak & Patra30  opined that RFID is going to be the  next wave of automation in the library industry because  of  its  robust,  reliable,  efficient,  and  safe  operations  in  comparison  to  other  systems  surveillance.  The  authors  also  asserted  that  if  guidelines  for  the  implementation  of  RFID  are  practiced  religiously  than  the  technology  could serve in an auspicious manner and the returns can  be  judiciously  utilised  in  the  library. 
Nagalakshmi & Trivedi31  elucidated the deployment  
development  of  library  sector  can  only  be  realised  with  RFID  technology. 
Sinha24  opined that although the RFID Technology is  quite expensive, but the technology is set to become more  popular  in  India  with  more  deployment  in  the  coming  time in different sectors because it has yielded excellent  results by reducing the labor, costs and providing better  
system technology with a focus on its implementation as  
RFID technology. The authors concluded that the future  
of RFID systems that can bring many benefits in library  
services. The authors concluded that users, libraries and  
60 
the concerned librarians must have an awareness to come  forward to carry out effort related to public education of  RFID technology for the benefit of patrons and possible  loss  of  control  over  personal  information. 
hasan32   compared  the  traditional  technologies  such  as,  barcode  with  RFID  technology  and  electromagnetic  (EM)  strips  and  other  related  hybrid  technologies.  The  

========3========

GuPTA  & M ADhuSuDhAN: RFID TEChNOLOGy IN  L IbRARIES: A REVIEw OF  L ITERATuRE OF  I NDIAN  P ERSPECTIVE 
author  also  listed  RFID  Vendors  and  the  concerned  libraries  using  RFID. This  article  helps  in  providing  an  insight for libraries and librarians wishing to implement  the  RFID  system  in  Library  environment. 
Addepalli  &  Addepali33   proposed  RFID  LMS  for  fast transactions with additional properties of traceability  and security. The authors concluded that the technology  
errors, issue and reissuing of the books to enhance user  services  task.  The  authors  found  that  the  efficiency  of  the system depends on upon the quality of RFID readers  and  RFID  tags. 
Makhija  &  Chugan41   discussed  RFID-LMS,  with  its  various  benefits  and  challenges  and  stressed  it  as  
collections  of  books. 
Jain & Krishna 
34 
 in their book discussed   the RFID  applications  that  speeds  up  book  borrowing,  returning  and  monitoring,  and  thus  frees  staff  from  doing  manual  work so that they could be used to enhance user service  tasks. 
Sequeira35  found the significant advantages of LibRFID  systems  which  are  non-contact  and  non-line-of-sight  nature  that  could  be  tag  encrypted  ID  and  then  sends  it  to the reader that eliminated the capturing of the tag IDs  and hence the cloning of the tags. The author concluded  that the LibRFID although work for low-frequency range  tags,  but  range  can  be  extended  after  implementing  a  reader  with  high  frequency  ranges. 
Singh  &  Mahajan36   reviewed  and  highlighted  the  
can lead to significant improvements such as savings in  
one  of  the  latest  technologies  being  used  by  libraries  labor  costs,  enhancement  of  customer  services,  lower  
in  the  management  and  maintenance  of  a  library  which  book theft and provide a constant record update of new  
are  usually  very  crucial  and  time  consuming  tasks.  The  
authors  opined  that  RFID  technology  involves  direct  
concluded that comprehensive studies need to be conducted  
systems to detect the target and hence made detection of  documents (digital or print) easier and quicker, although  the  cost  was  still  a  big  challenge  in  its  adoption. 
Thakre & Khaterker42  asserted that RFID technology  is not only cost-effective but also more efficient, reliable  and  secure  in  the  library  and  replaced  the  conventional  strips  that  use  the  electromagnetic  waves. 
Kolhe,  et al., 
43 
 compared the application of barcode  and RFID technologies in libraries. The authors concluded  that  the  latest  technology  will  replace  the  traditional  tracking  systems  such  as  barcode  in  the  near  future  because  of  its  unmatched  advantages  over  them. 
Pawar,  Shegaonkar  &  Udane44   discussed  RFID- LMS  that  allowed  fast  transaction  flow  with  additional  
importance  of  RFID  system  in  libraries.  The  authors  
properties of traceability and security. The authors opined  
that  the  technology  could  lead  to  significant  savings  in  on  the  status,  actual  use  and  the  perception  of  users,  as labor  costs,  enhance  customer  service,  lower  book  theft and provide a constant record update of new collections  well  as  librarians  in  India  about  the  RFID  technology,  
because  not  many  empirical  studies  were  carried  out  
of  books.  It  also  speed  up  book  borrowing,  returning  about  the  actual  usage  of  RFID  technology  in  libraries  
and monitoring, and thus freed staff from doing manual  
work  to  do  any  other  user  services  task. 
either  in  India  or  abroad. 
Rabari37   found  out  the  technology  aspects  of  the  RFID/EM technology and the process of implementation  in the library. The article also shows an overview of the  implementation of RFID/EM hybrid system and reviewed  the  results  of  the  project. 
Sevukan & Vijyakumar38  evaluated the implementation  
Sharma & Sharma 
45 
 reviewed the design of a campus- based tracking system, with its possible up-gradation with  some  new  tools  and  components,  to  make  a  check  on  every  student  individually  based  on  RFID  and  ZigBee  wireless  network.  The  authors  found  that  the  system  reads  data  from  RFID  tags  through  RFID  reader  as  each RFID tag that is transferred to the PC node or any  
of RFID system. The authors concluded that the personnel  
mobile  device  using  custom  wireless  protocol  ZigBee  
working in library perceived that the implementation of  
and  GSM  module.  The    authors  concluded  that  RFID  
RFID system in libraries minimised a number of barriers  
and ZigBee Technology implies low-cost implementation,  
such as the lack of speed, accuracy, reliability, and time  consumption,  manpower,  besides  preventing  mutilation,  misuse  and  theft  of  library  documents. 
Sahoo & Sharma39   opined  that  application  of  RFID  system  has  yielded  efficient  results  such  as  a  marked  cut  in  the  cost  of  the  staffs,  regular  updating  of  library  materials in real-time services in addition to the enhanced  security using memories with enhanced capacities, broader  range of readers, and quicker processing. They also noted  that  RFID  technology  brought  remarkable  changes  in  libraries  all  over  the  world  because  of  the  user-friendly  processes  in  various  management  processes. 
warrier,  et  al .,40   explained  the  advancement  of  RFID  technology  to  reduce  human  intervention  and  
easy installation, and secure network technologies, so it  would be easy for an institution to apply and keep track  of  their  students. 
3.    CONCLUSIONS 
The article presents the reviews mainly on the different  theoretical  and  practical  aspects  of  the  implementation  and  use  of  RFID  technology  in  libraries,  including  the  benefits, pros, cons, challenges, and problems related to  RFID application. In conclusion, a common feature that  reappears is the improvement in the library service after  its  implementation  vis  a  vis  shortage  of  funds  for  its  implementation. The future of the library can be improved  many  times  if  generous  funding  is  done  to  perpetuate  the  technology  in  all  the  potentially  active  libraries  of  
61 

========4========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  7,  JANuARy   2017 
India. There will be no exaggeration in saying that RFID  is  right  technology  investments  for  all  stakeholders,  for  long-term  security  of  the  library. 
The  reviews  of  this  paper  will  not  only  guide  the  librarians in effective implementation of RFID technology  in their libraries, but also abreast the knowledge of RFID  technology  and  its  advantages.  The  major  limitation  of  
13. Pawar, K.P. & Rodge, S.G. It application in library- 
RFID technology. IOSR J. Humanit. Soc. Sci.,2012,  
1,  5-8. 
14. Singh, N. Deploying RFID techniology in management  
of library activities-A case study of College library.  
Innov. Prat. Manag. Agric. Libr. ICT Environ., 2012  
331-34. 
the  study  related  to  many  libraries  in  India  is  using  
15. Patel, P. Identifying the advantage of RFID implementation  
RFID  technology,  but  not  reported  in  the  form  of  an  article.  Although,  there  exist  many  related  studies  that  are  covered  in  foreign  studies,  but  these  are  excluded  due  to  Geographical  limitation.  
REFERENCES 
1. Kumar, A. & Kaur, P. RFID technology in libraries.  
Inf.  Stud.,2010, 16,  229-42. 
2. Madhusudhan, M. RFID technology implementation  
in two libraries in New Delhi. Prog.  Elec.  Lib.  Inf.  
Sys.,2010, 44,  149-57. 
3. Sarasvathy,  P.;  Jagadish,  M.  V  &  Giddaiah,  D.  
Essential of RFID in Library Management-A View. in  
National  Institute  of Technology.  2010,  pp.1-13. 4. Grover, P. & Ahuja, A. Radio frequency identification  
based library management system.  Int. J. Adv. Comput.  
Sci. Appl.,2010, 1,  41-5. 
5. Pandey,  P.  &  Mahajan,  K.  Application  of  RFID  
Technology  in  Libraries  and  Role  of  Librarian.  in  
12th   MANLIBNET  Convention  2010,  Jaipur,  India,  
2010. 
6. Nagalakshmi,  L.R.A.  Deployment  of  RFID  (Radio  
in  library. J.  Infor.,  Knowl.  Rese.  Huma.  Soc.  Sci.,  
2012, 2,75-85. 
16. Chavan,  S.P.  Use  of  RFID  technology  in  libraries.  
Online  Int.  Interdisc.  Res.  J.,  2012, 2,  235-41. 17.   h asan, N. benefits of RFID technology for libraries:  
An  Indian  perspective. Libr.  Her.,  2012, 50,  1-14. 18. Saravanakumar, R. Introduction of Radio Frequency  
Identification Device (RFID) technology at Sadakathullah  
Appa  College  library,  Tirunelveli.  Innova.  Librar.,  
2013. 
19. Jain, P. & Sharma, P. RFID Technology Implementation:  
A  Case  Study  of  Institute  of  home  Economics,  
University  of  Delhi.  In   Tecnia  SRFLIS  Summit  
2014,  Content  to  Connectivity,  2014. 
20. Khanna,  S.  Impact  of  RFID  technology  on  library  
services: A case study of A.C.Joshi Library, Punjab  
University,  Chandigarh.  Int.  J.  Digit.  Libr.  Serv.,  
2014, 4,  117-26. 
21. Madhusudhan, M. & Gupta, P. use of RFID technology  
by students in Indian Institute of Technology , Delhi  
and  Indian  Law  Institute,  Delhi:  A  survey.  World  
Digi.  Libr.,  2014,  2,  145-56. 
Issues  and  best  practice. Int.  J.  Lib.  Inf.  Sci.,2011, 
3,  34-7. 
7. Surulinathi, M. & Chudamani, K.S. RFID Technology  
Infrastructure  for  Library  Service:  A  Case  Study  
of  its  Implementation  at  JRDTML  at  IISc.,2011,  
pp.214-23. 
8. Mamdapur,  G.M.N.  &  Rajgoli,  I.u.  Implementing  
radio frequency identification technology in libraries:  
Advantages  and  disadvantages.  Int.  J.  Lib.  Inf.  
Sci.,2011, 3,  46-57. 
9. Baidwan, K.; Adarsh, B. & Harvinder, K. Application  
of RFID in Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education  
& Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh: A case study.  
Pearl  J.  Libr.  Inf.  Sci.,  2011, 5,  55-8. 
10. Somvir & Kaushik, S. The new emerging technology  
in  libraries:  RFID  technology.  Int.  J.  Inf.  Disse.  
Technol.,2011 1,  96-100. 
11. Imran, S.M.; Dar, N.A. & Mushtaq, M. Recent Trends  
in  Library  Management  System:  RFID  Technology,  
2011. 
12. Venkatesh,  J.;  Priya,  S.;  Thenmozhi,  S.; Aarthy,  C.  
Frequency Identification) at Indian academic libraries:  
22. Kumar,  R.;  Singh,  J.P.  &  Manglam,  A.K.  RFID :  
A  complete  solution  for  the  library  management  
system. In  National Conference on Emerging Trends  
in Libraries & Information Services, 2014, pp. 181- 
85. 
23.   b aba,  M.A.K.  &  Tripuram,  V.S.R.  Implementation  
RFID technology for library security: A proposal of  
Maulana Azad National Urdu University (MANUU).  
Int.  J.  Innov.  Res.  Dev.,  2014,  3,  151-57. 
24. Sinha, M.K. Exploring RFID technology application  
for  managing  library  and  information  services  in  
University  and  Institutional  libraries  of  North  East  
India:  An  overview.  Int.  J.  Inf.  Sour.  Serv.,  2014,  
1,  72-85. 
25. Muthukrishnan,  K.  &  Sivaraman,  P.  Approach  of  
Information  seeking  behaviour  of  library  users  to  
implement RFID in learning iInstitutions. Indian  J.  
Libr.  Inf.  Sci.,  2014, 8,  355. 
26. Verma,  A.  &  Verma,  M..  RFID:  The  growing  
importance  of  technology  among  the  educators.  in  
National Conference on emerging trends in libraries  
&  information  services,  2014,  186-91. 
& balasubramanie,  P.  RFID:  The  big  player  in  the  27. Anuragi,  M.  RFID  technology  for  libraries :  An  
libraries  of  the  future.  Int.  J.  Adv.  Comput.  Sci.  Appl.,2012 3,  48-53. 
62 
Indian  scenario.   Int.  J.  Res. Appl.  Sci.  Eng.  Techn .  2014, 2,  60-5. 

========5========

GuPTA  & M ADhuSuDhAN: RFID TEChNOLOGy IN  L IbRARIES: A REVIEw OF  L ITERATuRE OF  I NDIAN  P ERSPECTIVE 
28. Singh, R.K. Radio Frequency Identification Technology  
and Libraries. In  National Conference on Emerging  
Trends  in  Libraries  &  Information  Services,  2014,  
pp.  140-41. 
29. Gogoi,  N.  Challenges  to  privacy  and  risk  oriented  
RFID system implementation in libraries. Int. J. Inno.  
Res.  Comput.  Commun.  Eng.,  2014, 2,  6370-377. 30. Nahak, B. & Patra, R.K.C. Implementation of RFID  
in  Indian  libraries  and  information  centers:  Issues  
& challenges. In National  Conference  on  Emerging  
Trends  in  Libraries  &  Information  Services,  2014,  
pp.  63-71. 
31. Nagalakshmi, L.R.A.  & Trivedi, M. Success of RFID  
technology in Indian academic libraries-A study. Int.  
J.  Res.  J.  Sci.  IT  Manag.,  2014,  3 ,  51-8. 
32.   h asan,  N.  Roadmap  for  RFID  implementation  in  
libraries:  Issues  and  challenges.  Int.  J.  Inf.  Libr.  
Soc.,  2014, 3,  65–71. 
33. Addepalli, S.L. & Addepalli, S.G. Library management  
system using RFID technology.   Int.  J.  Compu.  Sci.  
Inf.  Techn.,  2014, 5,  6932-935. 
34. Jain, A.A.K. & Krishna, T.R. Dynamic book search  
using RFID technology. Int. J. Eng. Res. Gen. Sci.,  
2014, 2,  138-42. 
35. Michael Sequeira, A. LibRFID: Automation software  
for library management system using RFID technology.  
Int.  J.  Innov.  Res.  Compu.  Commu.  Eng.,  2014, 2,  
43-7. 
36. Singh,  N.  K.  &  Mahajan,  P.  RFID  and  It’s  use  in  
libraries :  A  literature  review.  Int.  J.  Inf.  Dissem.  
Technol,  2014, 4,  117-23. 
37.  Rabari,  L.  Implementing  RFID  and  EM  hybrid  
technology  at  Gujarat  National  Law  University:  A  
review. Int.  J.  Inf.  Disse.  Tech.,  2015,  5,  200-02. 38. Sevukan, R. & Vijayakumar, M. Is implementing RFID  
technology in academic libraries service beneficial?-  
A  case  study  of  SRM  university  library,  Chenna.  
Libr.  Prog.,  2015, 35,  15-27. 
39. Sahoo,  D.R.  &  Sharma,  D.  RFID  technology  at  
Central  Library,  IIT  Madras  An  overview.  Int.  J.  
Sci.  Eng. Appl.  Sci.,  2015, 1,  156-72. 
40. Warrier,  S.;  Kotian,  R.;  Warrier,  M.  &  Venna,  K.  
Library  management  using  RFID  & bluetooth. Int.  
J.  Eng.  Tech.  Res.,  2015, 3,  493-96. 
41. Makhija,  D.G.  &  Chugan,  P.K.  RFID  based  library  
management  system:  The  benefits  and  challenges.  
In   19 
th  
International  Conference  on  Management  
NICOM  2016,  pp.  219-31. 
42. Thakre,  P.K.  &  Khatarkar,  R.  RFID  technology  in  
Indian libraries.  Indian J. Appl. Res., 2016, 6, 155- 
57. 
43. Kolhe,  P.R., et  al.,  Information  technology  tool  in  
library  barcode  &  Radio  Frequency  Identification  
RFID,.  Int.  J.  Innov.  Sci.  Eng.  Technol.,  2016,  3,  
81-6. 
44. Pawar,  P.;  Shegaonkar,  K.  &  Udane,  A.  Radio  
Frequency  Identification  based  library  management  
system. In  National Conference on Innovative Trends  
in  Enginneing  & Technology,  2016,  pp.  1-6. 45. Sharma,  M.  &  Sharma,  S.K.  A  Review  on  Smart  
Students  Tracking  System  for  Institution  Based  
on  RFID  and  ZigBee  Technology.  In   INROADS  
International  Conference  IAET.,  2016,  pp.93-99. 
Contributors 
Ms Parul Gupta  is  a PhD Research scholar at the Department  of  Library  and  Information  Science,  University  of  Delhi,  India.  She  obtained  her  MLISc  from  Agra  University,  Agra  and  MPhil  from  the  Department  of  Library  and  Information  Science, University of Delhi. Her research interests are in the  area  of  Library  security  systems. 
Dr  M.  Madhusudhan   is  currently  working  as  Associate  Professor in the Department of Library and Information Science,  University of Delhi. He has 17 years of teaching, administration  and  research  experience  at  the  University  level.  Under  his  supervision  17  MPhil,  6  PhD  and  110+  project  reports  have  been  awarded.  He  has  published  one  book,  edited  two  books,  32  International  research  articles  in  peer-reviewed  journals,  20  chapters  in  books,  9  national  articles  and  7  international  conference papers. he is also editorial member of JLIS, IJLIS  and  reviewer  for  five  international  LIS  journals.  His  areas  of  interest  includes:  Designing  and  evaluation  of  websites,  evaluation  of  web-OPACs,  ICT  in  libraries,  social  networking  sites,  e-resources,  mobile-based  library  services,  etc. 
63 

========6========

