DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 4, July 2017, pp. 270-273 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.37.4.10830 
 2017, DESIDOC     
District Central Libraries in Rayalaseema Region of Andhra Pradesh 
Parvathaneni Raghavaiah* and K. Surendra Babu** 
*Department of Library and Information Science, Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu-641 046 
E-mail: p.raghavaiah@gmail.com 
**Sri Venkateswara University, Tirupathi-517 502 
E-mail: surendrasvul@gmail.com                 
AbstRACt  
This paper focuses on the functioning, library resources, services, and problems existing in the District Central  Libraries of Rayalaseema region of  Andhra Pradesh. A survey was conducted using questionnaire tool for collecting  data from the librarians of the District Central Libraries (DCL) regarding collection development, sources of grants,  manpower, library services, physical and ICT infrastructural facilities, etc. The study reveals that majority of the  libraries are possessing the collection in the range of 40,000 to 50,000. Further, it is also found that lack of staff,  ICT facilities, lack of suffcient budget are the main problems faced by these libraries in Rayalaseema region. 
Keywords: Public libraries, library services, library resources, Rayalaseema, Andhra Pradesh   
1. INtRODUCtION  
Public  libraries  are  playing  an  important  role  in  the society for its all-round development. These are run  by  the  government,  volunteer  organisations,  and  other  individuals for the benefits of the public without expecting  profit.  It  is  a  social  institution  for  the  dissemination  of  knowledge,  promotion  of  learning,  and  advancement  of  education  and  research.  It  is  open  to  all  irrespective  of  any  distinction  and  denomination.  A  library  has  to  serve  the  needs  of  a  large  number  of  people  by  a  large  number  of  personnel  for  a  large  number  of  purposes.  It  is  also  called  as  the  ‘People’s  University’. 
There  are  four  district  central  libraries,  272  branch  libraries,  20  village  libraries  in  Rayalaseema  region  of  Andhra  Pradesh  (AP).  Some  of  these  libraries  were  existing  from  the  year  1870  onwards.  This  study  has  been  chosen  to  examine  the  present  status  in  terms  of  book  resources,  services,  financial  resources,  manpower,  ICT  infrastructure  facilities  and  physical  facilities  existing  in  the  DCL  of  Rayalaseema. 
The study will help the authorities of the governments  and  librarians  to  improve  the  sources  and  services  by  providing  sufficient  funds,  staff,  and  infrastructure  facilities.  This  will  facilitate  the  users  to  get  better  services  in  the  public  libraries. 
2.  LIteRAtURe  RevIew 
Sarada1   conducted  an  intensive  study  of  Branch  Library  in  Pendurthi  village  in  Visakhapatnam  district,  AP.  The  study  also  analysed  the  information  needs  of  the  village  community  and  examined  the  nature  of  the  policy of the government towards the public library. The  findings  of  this  study  are:  (a) Telugu  fiction  occupies  a  
Received 26 October 2016, online published 30 June 2017 
large  portion  of  the  collections;  (b)  80%  of  the  loaned  books are novels, short stories and other forms of fiction;  (c)  A  stationary  group  uses  the  library  frequently  for  reading newspapers and magazines; (d) A large percentage  (79.79%)  who  belong  to  the  middle  class  in  term  of  social  and  economic  status  use  the  library;  (e)  The  educational, social, informational and cultural functions  of  the  library  have  been  almost  completely  neglected;  and  (f)  Since  the  library  functions  as  a  government  agency,  it  provides  information  about  citizens  and  the  programmes  of  the  government. 
Islam2  has carried out a research on the current status  and  structure  of  public  library  systems  and  services  in  Great  Britain  and  Bangladesh.  It  evaluates  the  British  public library systems, passage of various Acts, various  library  authorities,  and  total  number  of  public  libraries,  constituent libraries, computerised acquisition, cataloguing,  classification,  literature  search,  and  library  finance.  
Vijayakumar  &  Kumar3   have  made  quantitative  study  on  the  different  aspects  of  rural  libraries  such  as  functions,  staff,  finance,  collections,  services  and  facilities  in  Shimoga  district  of  Karnataka.  Ranjith4 had  conducted  a  study  on  the  rural  libraries  in  Kerala.  Data were collected on books and periodicals collection,  membership,  working  hours,  circulation  of  books,  daily  average attendance of members, grade, yearly grant, other  assistance  received,  and  reading  habits  of  public. 3. ObjeCtIves  
The  objectives  of  the  present  study  are  to: 
(a)  Know  the  sources,  services,  funds,  manpower,  etc.,  
available  in  the  public  libraries  of  Rayalaseema  
region  of Andhra  Pradesh 

========1========

RAGHAVAIAH & BABU: DISTRICT CENTRAL LIBRARIES IN RAYALASEEMA REGION OF ANDHRA PRADESH 
(b) Ascertain the ICT facilities available in the libraries  
under  study 
(c)  Make  suggestions  for  improvement  of  the  sources,  
services  and  other  infrastructure  facilities  in  the  
libraries  under  study. 
4.      M etHODOLOGY 
A  survey  method  was  used  to  collect  the  data  from  the  librarians  of  District  Central  Libraries  in  Andhra  Pradesh. A structured questionnaire was prepared to collect  data  from  four  librarians  of  district  central  libraries  in  Rayalaseema  region  of  Andhra  Pradesh.  Questionnaire  contains various questions pertaining to the membership,  collection development, grants, physical facilities, human  resources,  source  of  funds,  general  satisfaction  survey,  reference  satisfaction  survey.  The  data  was  collected  from  four  DCL  librarians  of  Rayalaseema  region  of  Andhra  Pradesh  during  the  period  of  June  2016  to  October  2016. 
5.    ANALYsIs AND   I NteRPRetAtION Of  
DAtA 
The data collected from librarians of district central  libraries  of  Rayalaseema  is  analysed  and  interpreted  in  the  following  paragraphs. 
5.1.  Membership 
Four libraries were enrolling good number of membership  in  their  libraries.  It  is  clear  that  Chittor  (9135)  and  Kurnool  (8878)  DCLs  have  enrolled  more  number  of  library  membership    compared  to  other  District  Central  libraries. Anathpuram library   enrolls membership (7167)  followed  by  Kadapa  (6473). 
5.2.  t otal  Collection  
5.3. Category-wise  Library  Collection  
Table 2 presents the category-wise book collection of   study  libraries.  Table  2  shows  that    DCL  Anathapuram    has maximum subject books (14000) and Fiction  books,  (22361),  followed  by  Chittor,  Kurnool  and  Kadapa.  Children  books:  DCL    Chittor  (4690)  has  maximum  number of children books  followed by Kurnool (4560),  Kadapa  (4325)  and  Anantapuram  (1096).  In  case  of  Competitive  books  Kadapa  DCL  (9560)  has  maximum  number  collection    followed  by  Chittor  (8934)  Kurnool  (3540) and Anantapuram (2559) books.  Whereas in case  of Reference book collection Kadapa DCL (14407)  has  the maximum followed by Chittor (7653) Anantapur (7500)  and Kurnool (4950). Quick reference collection: Kurnool  DCL (1000) is having more quick reference books, followed  by  Kadapa  (318),  Chittor  (310), Anathapuram  (193). 
     table 2. Category-wise book collection Category of  Chittor Kadapa Kurnool Ananthapuram books  
Subject books  7856 1173 2350 14000 Fiction 21723 19717 19850 22361 Children  4690 4325 4560 1096 
books 
Competitive  8934 9560 3540 2559 
Books 
Reference  7653 14407 4950 7500 
books 
Biographies 187 58 650 134 
Dictionaries 123 260 350 59 
5.4. subscribed  Newspapers,  Magazines  & journals 
All the libraries are subscribing to popular journals,  magazines  and  newspapers.  Table  3  shows  that  Kadapa  
books, children books, etc. In this regard, a question  was  
The  Libraries  were  processing  different  categories  
DCL is subscribing to 94 Journals, Newspapers followed  of  collections  like  textbooks,  reference  books,  subject  
by  Kurnool  with  76,  Anantapuram  with  73  and  Chittor  
with  67. 
posed  with  respondents  to  provide  the  total  collection  
table 3. subscription of Newspapers, Magazines and journals details of their libraries and the data showed  that Chittor  
District 
DCL  is  in  the  first  place  in  holding  the  most  number  of  books  (51116)  compared  to  other  libraries,  followed  by  Kadapa  (49500), Anantapuram  (49000)  and  Kurnool  (36250)  books. 
It  is  clear  from  Table  1  that  in  all  the  libraries  the  human  resources  available  were  below  15  in  numbers. 
table 1. Human resources available in various libraries District Human resources 
Chittor 11 
Kadapa 
10 
Kurnool 
9 
Anantapuram 
12 
Chittor Kadapa Kurnool Anantapuram 
Newspapers 12 14 14 11 
journals/Magazines 55 
80 
62 
62 
5.5. technical  Processing  of books 
All  the  District  Central  Libraries  in  the  study  are  following DDC in classifying the books and AACR2 for  cataloguing  of  books.  
Table  4  shows  that  the  library  automation  was  completed in Kurnool DCL. The automation work is under  progress  in  other  district  central  libraries.  The  Internet  service  is  provided  in  all  the  Libraries.  Printing  facility  is  also  available  in  the  libraries  under  the  study  area.  
271 

========2========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  4,  JULY   2017 
             table 4.  ICt  Infrastructure facilities status Chittor Kadapa Kurnool 
Automation 
In  progress Yes Yes 
In progress Completed 
Internet Printer 
Yes Yes 
Yes Yes 
Anantha puram In  progress Yes Yes 
5.6. source  of  Grants 
The DCLs are getting funds from different sources.  To understand the sources from where these libraries are  getting  funds,  a  question  was  raised  to  the  respondents  in  this  regard.  The  replies  received  by  the  respondents  are  as  shown  in  Table  5.  The  table  shows  that  all  the  four  DCLs  are  supported  by  state  government,  RRRLF  and department of public library, A.P. The donations are  received  by  Chittor  and  Anantapuram  District  Central  Libraries  in  the  form  of  furniture  and  equipment  from  the  donations.    
The  Table  6  shows  that  District  Central  Librarians  are  facing  the  problems  of  in-sufficient  budget,  lack  of  furniture, sanitation, lack of number of computers, skilled  manpower  and  new  editions  of  books 
table 5. source of grants and funds for libraries  source of  Chittor Kadapa Kurnool Anantha funds puram Central Govt Yes State Govt-cess Yes Yes Yes Yes RRLF Yes Yes Yes Yes Dept of  Yes Yes Public Library 
Donations Yes Yes 
table 6. Problems in district central libraries Problem Chittor Kadapa Kurnool Anantha 
puram Lack of funds Yes Yes Yes Yes Lack of skilled  Yes Yes Yes Yes manpower  
Lack of new  Yes Yes Yes Yes editions of books 
Lack of furniture Yes Yes Yes Yes Lack of sanitation Yes Yes Yes Yes Lack of ICT  Yes Yes Yes Yes (computer) 
6. findings  and  Recommendations 
Based  on  the  findings  of  the  study,  the  following  recommendations  are  made  for  providing  better  library  services at district central libraries in Rayalaseema region  of Andhra  Pradesh. 
• All  the  DCLs  should  take  necessary  steps  to  enrol  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Library  week  should  be  celebrated  every  year  to  create  awareness  to  public  about  the  library 
It  is  found  from  the  study  the  total  collection  of  libraries in the study area are not more than 55,000.  As  these  libraries  are  old  and  biggest  libraries  in  the  district  level  to  serve  the  information  needs  of  the public. Hence the authorities of the DCL should  take appropriate measures to develop the collection  in  terms  of  books  as  well  as  e-resources.  It  is  also  recommended  to  encourage  the  philanthropists  to  donate  books  and  other  equipment 
It is also found from the study that all the libraries  are facing the problem of skilled manpower. Hence,  the govt of AP should take necessary steps to appoint  skilled persons with computer knowledge along with  library science background to provide better services  to  user  community 
It  is  clear  that  the  libraries  are  also  lagging  behind  of  ICT  Infrastructure  facilities.  Hence,  the  authorities  of  AP  Grandhalaya  Parishad  to  provide  more number of computers and other peripherals to  access  e-resources 
All  the  libraries  are  facing  the  problem  of  poor  sanitation. Wash rooms for readers should be provided  separately 
Latest editions of the text books, current awareness  books, General knowledge books should be procured  for the benefit of the students those who are preparing  for  competitive  examinations 
7. CONCLUsIONs  
The  government  should  give  priority  to  lift  these  4  libraries and attached branch libraries in order to satisfy  the  user  needs.  Sufficient  budget  should  be  provided  to  purchase  more  books  and  required  furniture  in  all  the  libraries.  Staff  should  be  given  proper  training  using  internet and audio-video materials. Due to lack of training  these libraries are not able to guide their users for using  the  internet  for  academic  and  research  purpose.  The  need  of  the  hour  is  the  growing  domination  of  internet  in  acquiring  the  knowledge.  The  daily  users  for  these  libraries are from the student community and unemployed  youth.  These  two  sections  of  users  use  public  libraries  to  build  their  career  and  get  more  knowledge  on  their  relevant  subjects.  Proper  training  should  be  given  to  these  two  sections  of  users  to  improve  their  knowledge  and  serve  the  nation  in  future.  The  Government  must  think  that  the  expenditure  spent  on  public  library  is  for  the  development  of  the  nation. 
RefeReNCes    
1. 
more number of memberships by creating awareness  
2. 
about  the  sources  and  services  available  in  DCL 
272 
Sarada,  K.  Rural  library  services  in  India.  Ess  Ess  Publications,  New  Delhi,  1986. 
Saiful Islam, K.M. Public library systems and services.  Herald  Lib.  Sci.,  1990,  29(3),  163-71. 

========3========

RAGHAVAIAH & BABU: DISTRICT CENTRAL LIBRARIES IN RAYALASEEMA REGION OF ANDHRA PRADESH 
3. Vijayakumar, M. & Kumar N. Problems and prospects  
of  rural  libraries.  SRELS  J.  Info.  Manag.,   2001,  
38(2),  165-76.  
4.  Ranjith, K.S. Rural libraries of Kerala. CDS Publications,  
Trivandrum,  2004. 
CONtRIbUtORs 
Mr Parvathaneni Raghavaiah  is working as Librarian, VNR  Vignana Jyothi Institute of Engineering and Technology, Hyderabad   He  is  Pursuing  PhD  From  Bharathiar  University,  Coimbatore,  Tamil  Nadu.  He  obtained  Masters  from  Andhra  University,  Visakhapatnam,  Andhra  pradesh.  He  has  published/presented  a  number  of  papers  in  various  journals/conferences/seminars.  His  areas  of  interest  includes:  Digital  libraries,  application  of  
information  technology  in  academic  library  services,  world  wide web resource and their evaluation, search engines, public  libraries  and  promoting  paperless  library.  
Dr K. surendra babu  holds PhD in Library and Information  Science  from  Sri  Venkateswara  University,  Tirupathi  with  specialisation in e-resources. He has established the Dravidian  University  library.  He  joined  Sri  Venkateswara  university  in  2002 where from he superannuated as Librarian I/C in 2015. He  has upgraded and renovated the SV University library. He has  published several papers in different fields of online resources  and  e-learning  in  leading  national  and  international  journals  of  repute.  His  work  mainly  focuses  on  using  e-resources  as  alternative  source  of  learning    in    academic  environment.  He  has passion to promote public libraries among the rural masses.  Presently, he is the advisor to Journal of Research in Librarianship . 
273 

========4========

