DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 2, March 2017, pp. 104-108 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.37.2.10841 
 2017, DESIDOC 
Use of the University of Khartoum Institutional Repository by Graduate Students 
Omer Hassan Abdelrahman 
Department of Library and Information Science, University of Khartoum, Sudan-111 15 
E-mail: omhass@hotmail.com 
AbStRAct 
This paper attempted to investigate the use of the University of Khartoum Institutional Repository (Khartoumspace)  by graduate students and to explore their attitudes towards the repository and its contents. The study adopted a  descriptive survey approach. A questionnaire was used to collect data from 150 students who formed the study  sample from a study population of about 1800 graduate students in the Humanities and Social Sciences disciplines  at the University. Data collected was analysed in simple statistics and presented in tables consisting of frequencies  and percentages. The study revealed that electronic theses and dissertations and eBooks are the most frequently  used items of the repository’s collection. The study also showed that there is low usage rate of the repository by  the respondents but they have positive attitudes towards the repository, and that the majority of the respondents  learnt about the existence of the repository from a colleague rather than from a librarian. The fndings indicated  that, in order to enhance the usage of the repository by graduate students,there is a need for more awareness raising  and advocacy programmes to be carried out by the library about the repository and its benefts to the academic  
community of the university.  
Keywords: Institutional repositories, khartoumspace, open access repositories, university of khartoum 
1.  IntRodUctIon  
Access  to  academic  and  scientific  information  for  faculty  members  and  students,  particularly  graduate  students has always been difficult in Sudanese universities.  This  is  particularly  true  at  the  University  of  Khartoum  which has become the hub for graduate studies in Sudan  during the last two decades of what was called in Sudan  the  ‘Higher  Education  Revolution’.  This  difficulty  in  accessibility  of  much  needed  information  is  mainly  due  to  the  poor  status  of  the  University  Library  in  terms  of  acquisition  of  information  sources  such  as  journals,  textbooks and references. The problem is exacerbated by  the continuous devaluation of the Sudanese Pound in the  face of foreign currencies. Due to these difficulties, the  University  of  Khartoum  library  has  not  been  allocated  an acquisitions budget since the year 19911. The current  proliferation  in  open  access  to  academic  and  scientific  information has played an important role in bridging this  gap.  Open  access  journals  and  institutional  repositories  are the two major routes for open access. The University  of  Khartoum  is  not  an  exception  and  it  has  established  and launched a digital institutional repository in its quest  to  provide  its  community  with  open  access  to  the  much  needed  information. 
2.    o bjectIveS 
This study attempts to explore how graduate students  at the University of Khartoum (UofK) use the institutional  repository  of  the  university,  and  to  understand  their  awareness  of  and  attitudes  towards  the  University  of  Khartoum  Digital  Institutional  Repository. 
Received 29 October 2016, online published 24 March 2017 
3.  Methodolo Gy 
The  study  adopts  the  descriptive  survey  approach.  A questionnaire was distributed to a convenience sample  of  the  University  of  Khartoum  Humanities  and  Social  Sciences  graduate  students.  The  sample  was  composed  of  150  students  out  of  a  total  of  about  1800  graduate  students’  population.  The  number  of  completed  and  returned questionnaires was 93 constituting a 62% response  rate.  Data  was  analysed  by  using  simple  descriptive  statistics,  and  presented  in  tables  showing  frequencies  and  percentages. 
4.    lI teRAtURe  RevIew 
Hertenstein2   noted  that  research  on  institutional  repositories (IRs) has primarily focused on issues related  to  faculty  scholarship  and  that  thus  far,  little  has  been  written  on  issues  related  to  student  scholarship.  It  is  also true that little research has been done on the use of  institutional  repositories  by  students.  Thus,  most  of  the  literature  available  deals  with  the  use  of  IRs  by  faculty  members  and  researchers  as  presented  in  the  following  literature  review. 
The  Confederation  of  Open  Access  Repositories  (COAR)3 defines  an  open  access  repository  as  a  set  of  services that provide open access to research or educational  content created at an institution or by a specific research  community. They may be institutionally-based or subject- based  collections. 
Gosetti4  presents Lynch’s definition who defines an  institutional  repository  in  a  narrower  definition  as:  ‘a  

========1========

ABDELRAHMAN: USE Of THE  U NIVERSITy Of KHARTOUM  I NSTITUTIONAL  R EPOSITORy By GRADUATE  S TUDENTS 
set  of  services  that  a  university  offers  to  the  members  of its community for the management and dissemination  of  digital  materials  created  by  the  institutions  and  its  community members.  It is most essentially an organisational  commitment to the stewardship of these digital materials,  including  long-term  preservation  where  appropriate,  as  well  as  organisation  and  access  or  distribution’. 
Jain5, et al. , stress that an open access repository has  benefits for both the university and the author; Specific  to  the  university,  an  IR  offers  increasing  visibility  and  prestige  and  centralisation  and  storage  of  all  types  of  institutional  output,  including  unpublished  literature.  It  also  offers  support  for  learning  and  teaching  and  the  ability to keep track of and analyse research performance.  According to them, benefits of an IR to authors include  enhancing  dissemination  and  impact  of  scholarship  and  offering storage and access to a wide range of materials  in  addition  to  feedback  and  commentary  from  users. 
Chisenga6 while  commenting  on  the  benefits  of  IRs  to African  researchers  pointed  out  that  institutional  repositories  have  the  potential  to  increase  the  visibility  and accessibility and impact of research in Africa as well  as  globally,  in  addition  to  preserving  and  maintaining  Africa’s  universities  research  output. 
Sadfar & Rehman7  studied users’ perception, awareness,  purpose, problems, and satisfaction with Pakistan Research  Repository (PRR). They found that the majority of their  respondents  knew  about  the  PRR  from  library  staff  and  that  they  mainly  accessed  the  repository  to  retrieve  information  although  some  of  their  respondents  said  that  they  accessed  the  repository  to  deposit  material  as  well. 
yang  &  Li8   studied  the  faculty  at  Texas  A&M  University  (TAMU)  with  a  view  to  understanding  their  awareness of open-access publishing; assess their attitudes  towards, and willingness to contribute to an institutional  repository.  Their  study  revealed  that  the  responding  TAMU  faculty  was  willing  to  consider  publishing  in  OA  publications,  and  almost  half  of  them  believed  OA  journal  publications  are  acceptable  for  consideration  of  tenure and promotion in their departments, but they were  not  so  positive  towards  OA  mandates.  
Bamigbola9  examined the level of awareness, attitude  to use of institutional repositories, and challenges faced  by faculty in Agriculture disciplines in federal University  of  Technology,  Akure,  (fUTA)  Nigeria.  His  findings  revealed that the level of awareness about IRs by faculty  members was increasing; and there was general positive  attitude  to  the  IR,  yet  there  was  low  submission  of  scholarly  works  by  faculty  members. 
Dhanavandan  &  Tamishchelvan10   investigated  the  awareness  of  institutional  repositories  and  open-access  publishing among faculty members in Annamalai University  in  India.  They  revealed  that  awareness  of  open-access  and  repository  archiving  was  low,  but  there  was  high  level of support for the concept of open-access and that  
perceived  benefits  of  enhanced  exposure  and  potential  for  sharing  outweighed  the  perceived  risks.  They  also  revealed that the majority of respondents were supportive  of  an  existing  mandatory  thesis  submission  policy. 
Stanton  &  Liew11   investigated  doctoral  students'  knowledge of and attitudes toward open-access models of  scholarly communication and institutional repositories in  New Zealand, and examined their willingness to comply  with  a  mandatory  institutional  repository  submission  policy.  They  identified  that  lack  of  awareness,  rather  than  resistance  to  deposit,  as  the  main  barrier  to  IR  depository  participation.  Major  benefits  perceived  for  participating  included  the  public  good  of  knowledge  sharing and increased exposure for one’s work. Concerns  included  copyright  and  plagiarism  issues. 
Dulle & Minishi-Majanja12   explored  the  awareness,  usage  and  perspectives  of  Tanzanian  researchers  on  open-access  as  a  mode  of  scholarly  communication.  Their study revealed that the majority of the researchers  were  aware  of  and  were  positive  towards  open-access  and that the majority of researchers in Tanzanian public  universities  used  open-access  outlets  more  to  access  scholarly content than to disseminate their own research  findings. They concluded that many of these researchers  supported the idea of establishing institutional repositories  at  their  respective  universities  as  a  way  of  improving  the  dissemination  of  local  content.  
Tripathy13   surveyed  the  distance  learners  enrolled  in  Indira  Gandhi  National  Open  University  (IGNOU)  in  India  with  a  view  to  exploring  experiences  about  the  availability and accessibility of educational resources and  concluded that distance learners lose interest and become  indifferent  to  their  studies  when  faced  with  inadequate  library  support  and  information  resources,  and  that  the  availability  of  open  educational  resources  in  open  repositories  can  help  them  to  bridge  this  gap. 
Pickton & Mcknight14  investigated the Loughborough  University research students with a view to exploring their  experiences and opinions of publishing, open-access and  the proposed Loughborough repository. They found that  the students were most interested in accessing complete  theses,  postprints  and  conference  papers. 
5.  
UnIveRSIty  of  Kh ARtoUM RepoSItoRy  USAGe 
5.1   b ackground  Information  on  Khartoumspace 
The  University  of  Khartoum  Digital  Repository  (http://khartoumspace.uofk.edu)  emerged  as  a  result  of  the  development  of  the  first  open-access  repository  in  the Sudan; the Dspace@ScienceUofK. This departmental  institutional  repository  was  set  up  as  a  result  of  the  EIfL-funded  OASCIR  (Open-access  awareness-raising  campaign  among  researchers  at  the faculty  of  Science)  Project,  aimed  to  raise  awareness  about  open-access  at  the faculty  of  Science,  University  of  Khartoum  (UofK)  through a series of training activities for scholars and the  
105 

========2========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  2,  MARCH   2017 
implementation  of  an  OA  IR  for  researchers  to  deposit  their research output. The Dspace@ScienceUofK, which  acted as a seed digital repository for the Sudan, has now  been developed into the Khartoumspace; the University of  Khartoum  open-access  institutional  digital  repository. 5.2   c ontents  of  the  Repository 
The University of Khartoum Digital Repository contains  different types of digital materials. These include articles,  conference  papers,  graduate  theses  and  dissertations,  undergraduate dissertations, books, and the University of  Khartoum  archives  documents.  The  disciplines  covered  include  pure  and  applied  sciences,  medical  and  health  science,  and  humanities  and  social  sciences.  The  full  text  of  all  publications,  except  theses  and  dissertations  submitted  less  than  five  years  ago,  is  available  either  in English or in Arabic. There are now a total of 13352  items  deposited  in  the  repository  and  this  number  is  steadily  increasing.  Table  1  shows  a  breakdown  of  the  different  items  held  by  the  Khartoumspace. 
table 1. 
Items  held  by  the  university  of  khartoum  digital  repository 
Item type 
Graduate theses  Undergraduate dissertations Conference papers Books and book chapters Journal articles 
Administrative documents total 
number 7000 1008 223 373 754 3995 13352 
6. USeR   S URvey And AnAlySIS 
Questionnaires  were  distributed  to  150  graduate  students  in  the  Humanities  and  Social  Sciences,  out  of  which  93  returned  their  completed  questionnaires  representing  62%  of  the  originally  surveyed  sample.  
Questions on the use of Khartoumspace by graduate  students  included  the  following  aspects: 
(a) User  characteristics 
(b) How the students learned about the existence of the  
repository 
(c) How  frequently  respondents  used  the  repository (e) What  was  their  primary  purpose  of  using  the  
repository 
(f) What  was  their  mode  of  accessing  the  repository (g) How  easy  or  difficult  did  they  find  the  repository  
to  use  
(h) How  beneficial  was  the  repository  to  the  
respondents 
(i) Attitudes  of  the  respondents  towards  the  
repository. 
106 
Data collected from the repository users was statistically  analysed  and  presented  in  tables  containing  frequencies  and  percentages. 
6.1  User characteristics  
The respondents were  composed of 45 (48.39%) male  and 48 (51.61%) female graduate students registered for  all graduate degrees offered by the University of Khartoum  in  the  Humanities  and  Social  Sciences  disciplines,  i.e.  Post Graduate Diploma, Masters by courses and research,  Masters  by  research  only,  and  Doctor  of  Philosophy  Degree(PhD).  Table  2  shows  the  details  of  degrees  registered  for  by  respondents. 
table 2. degrees registered for by respondents 
degree no. of   
students PG diploma 25 Masters by courses and research30 Masters by research only 24 Doctor of philosophy (PhD) 14 total 93 
percentage  
26.88 32.26 25.81 15.05 100 
6.2   l earning About  the  IR/ frequency  of  Use 
The majority of respondents (52.69%) indicated that  they  learned  about  the  existence  of  the  Khartoumspace  through  a  colleague,  whereas  (35.48%)  said  that  they  knew  about  it  accidently  while  surfing  the  internet.  Others  said  they  learned  about  the  repository  by  means  of  a  workshop,  seminar  or  a  conference,  or  from  their  teacher  or  a  librarian.  Table  3  shows  how  respondents  learned  about  the  existence  of  the  Khartoumspace.  As  for  the  frequency  of  use  of  the  repository  by  the  respondents, a considerable proportion (48.39%) said that  they  use  it  infrequently,  i.e.,  once  or  less  in  a  month.  whereas  (24.27%)  indicated  that  they  use  it  twice  or  more monthly. The remaining respondents said that they  use the repository either once or more than once a week  as  shown  in Table  3. 
table 3. 
Respondents  learned  about  the  existence  of  the  Khartoumspace 
Means no. of   
students from a colleague 49 While surfng the internet 33 In a workshop or seminar 07 Others from one’s teacher 03 
from a librarian 01 total 93 
percentage  
52.69 35.48 07.53 03.23 01.08 100 
6.3   p urpose  of  using  the  IR/Mode  of Accessing  the  
IR 
A large proportion of respondents (35.48%) stressed  that  their  main  purpose  of  using  the  Khartoumspace  is  

========3========

ABDELRAHMAN: USE Of THE  U NIVERSITy Of KHARTOUM  I NSTITUTIONAL  R EPOSITORy By GRADUATE  S TUDENTS 
to  access  the  electronic  theses  and  dissertations  (ETDs)  available  in  the  repository  A  considerable  proportion  (33.33%) indicated that their primary purpose is to access  the eBooks collection, whereas only 12.9% said that their  primary purpose is to access journal articles. The rest of  the  respondents  said  they  use  the  repository  to  equally  access  all  types of  materials  available  in  the repository.  Table  4  shows  the  different  purposes  of  accessing  the  Khartoumspace by respondents. In answering the question  of how they access the repository, the majority (59.14%)  said they do so through a link from the main University  of Khartoum webpage, whereas 31.18% stated that they  use  google  to  get  access  to  the  repository.  The  rest  of  the  respondents  said  they  paste  the  repository’s  URL  directly  on  the  web  browser  they  use.  
table 4. primary purpose of using the repository 
purpose 
no. of  students 33 31 12 
percentage  
To access ETDs To access ebooks To access  journal articles 
35.48 33.33 12.90 
To access all types of material  17 available in the repository 
18.28 
total 
93 
100 
6.4   e ase  of  Use/benefit  from  the  IR 
The  majority  of  respondents  (65%)  stated  that  the  content  of  the  Khartoumspace  partially  satisfies  their  information needs, while 28% indicated that the content is  very satisfying for their information needs. The remaining  respondents  said  that  the  content  does  not  satisfy  their  information  needs.  Consequently,  some  users  asked  for  the  inclusion  of  more  recent  ETDs  in  the  repository  besides  the  introduction  of  the  University  of  Khartoum  course  materials  in  the  repository. 
As for the question of how easy or difficult is it to  access the repository’s content from the main repository’s  homepage,  most  of  the  respondents  (69.89%)  indicated  that  they  find  it  easy  to  access  the  content  from  the  main  repositorys’  homepage  while  (30.11%)  stated  that  it  is  not  easy  to  do  so. 
6.5  Attitudes towards  IR 
In order to investigate the general users’ views and  attitudes  towards  the  Khartoumspace,  they  were  asked  whether  they  would  recommend  the  repository  to  their  colleagues  and  whether  they  themselves  would  use  the  repository again for their future studies or research. The  majority  of  respondents  (83.87%)  affirmed  that  they  would  recommend  it  to  their  colleagues,  whereas  only  (16.13%)  said  that  they  would  not  do  so.  In  answering  the  latter  question,  the  vast  majority  of  respondents  (91.4%)  stated  that  they  would  use  the  repository  again  for their future studies or research, while only 8.6% said  that  they  would  not  use  it  again.  
7.    c onclUSIonS 
Analysis  of  the  data  collected  by  the  user  survey  reveals  the  following: 
(a) Students registered for the Master’s degree constitute  
the majority of the repository users. This is corollary  
to  the  fact  that  most  graduate  students  at  the  U  of  
K are doing Master’s degree either by courses only,  
by  research  only,  or  by  courses  and  research. (b) ETDs  and  eBooks  are  the  most  frequently  used  
items.  This  is  complemented  by  the  respondents’  
demand  for  the  deposit  of  the  full-text  of  more  
recent ETDs in the repository. However, full text of  
recent  ETDs  cannot  be  deposited  immediately  until  
a  deposit  mandate  policy  is  in  place.  
(c) The  majority  of  the  respondents  learned  about  the  
existence of the repository from a colleague, whereas  
only  very  few  respondents  knew  about  it  from  a  
librarian. This indicates that the library should carry  
out  awareness  raising  and  advocacy  programmes  
about the repository and its benefits to the academic  
community  of  the  U  of  K. 
(d) There  is  low  usage  frequency  of  the  repository  by  
respondents.  This  may  be  partly  attributed  to  the  
relative internet low speed and connection problems  
in  Sudan. 
(e) There  is  a  considerable  proportion  of  respondents  
who  indicated  that  they  find  it  easy  to  access  the  
content from the main repository’s homepage which  
indicates that the material in the repository are well  
organised. 
(f) Results  show  that  the  IR  is  easily  accessible  from  
the University’s webpage and that the content of the  
repository only partially satisfies graduate students’  
information needs. This fact calls for more selective  
policies of what to include in the repository’s collection,  
as  a  large  component  of  the  repository’s  collection  
seems irrelevant to the graduate student’ information  
needs. However, there is a positive attitude towards  
the digital repository and its content. This could be  
attributed to the apparent lack of traditional library  
services  and  information  resources  necessary  to  
satisfy  the  graduate  students’  information  needs. RefeRenceS 
1.  Abdelrahman,  Omer  Hassan.  Towards  an  annual  
budget  for  the  university  of  khartoum  main  library,  
ADAB  J.,  2012,  31(2),  32-59. 
2.  Hertenstein,  E.  Student  scholarship  in  institutional  
repositories. J.  Libra.  Schol. Comm., 2(3), http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.7710/2162-3309.1135. 
3.  Confederation of Open-access Repositories (COAR).  
Promoting Open Knowledge and Open Science Report  
of  the  Current  State  of  Repositories.  https://www. 
coar-repositories.org/files/COAR-State-of-Repositories- 
May-2015-final.pdf.      
107 

========4========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  2,  MARCH   2017 
4.  Gosetti, Pietro. Institutional repositories in scholarly  
communication:  A  literature  review  on  models,  
issues  and  current  trends.  http://dspace-nipr.cineca. 
it/bitstream/1889/1156/1. 
5.  Jain,  P.;  Bentley,  G.  &  Oladiran,  M.T.  The  role  
of  institutional  repository  in  digital  scholarly  
communications.  In  African  Digital  Scholarship  
and  Curation  Conference  2009,  12-14  May,  CSIR  
Conference Centre, Pretoria. http://www.library.up.ac. 
sa/digi/docs/jain_paper.pdf  4 August  2015. 6.  Chisenga,  Justin.  The  development  and  use  of  
digital  libraries,  institutional  digital  repositories  
and  open  access  archives  for  research  and  national  
development in Africa: Opportunities and challenges.    
28 March 2006. http://repository.uneca.org/bitstream/ 
handle/10855/2597/Bib-21318.pdf?sequence=1.  7.  Safdar,  Muhammad  &  Rehman,  Shafiq.  Users’  
uerception  and  satisfaction  with  higher  education  
commission  Pakistan  Research  Repository  (PRR):  
problems and opportunities. Lib. Philo. Prac . (e-journal  
2015).  Paper  1271.  http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/ 
libphilprac/1271.  
8.    y ang,  Sy   &  Li,  y.  University  faculty  awareness  
and  attitudes  towards  open  access  publishing  and  
the  institutional  repository:  A  case  study.  J.  Lib.  
Schol. Comm., 3(1). http://dx.doi.org/10.7710/2162- 
3309.1210  (accessed  on  15 August  2015). 9.  Bamigbola,  Alice  A.  Surveying  atitude  and  use  of  
institutional repositories (IRs) by faculty in agriculture  
disciplines:  A  case  study.  Procedia-Social  Behav.  
Sci., 147(2014),  505-09.  
10.  Dhanavandan  S.  &  Tamishchelvan  M.  A  critical  
study  on  attitudes  and  awareness  of  institutional  
repositories  and  open  access  publishing. J.  infosci.  
108 
Theory Pract., 2013, 1(4), 67-75. http://www.jistap. 
org. 
11.  Stanton,  K.V.  &  Liew,  C.L.  Open  access  theses  
in  institutional  repositories:  An  exploratory  study  
of  the  perceptions  of  doctoral  students.   Info.  Res. ,  
2012, 17(1). http://InformationR.net/ir/17-1/paper507. 
html. 
12.  Dulle, f.W. and Minishi-Majanja, M.K. Researchers'  
perspectives on open access scholarly communication  
in Tansanian public universities. SA J. Info. Manag.,  
2009, 11(4). doi: 10.4102/sajim.v11i4.413. http://www. 
sajim.co.sa/index.php/SAJIM/article/view/413.    13.  Tripathi,  Manorama.  Istitutional  repositories,  open  
educational resources for distanceeducation: A case study  
of India. 2009.  https://www.ou.nl/Docs/Campagnes/ 
ICDE2009/Papers/final_Paper_055Tripathi.pdf. 14. Pickton,  Margaret  and  McKnight,  Cliff.  Research  
students and the Loughborough Institutional repository.  
J.  Lib.  Info.  Sci.,  2006,  38(4),  203-19. 
contributor 
omer  hassan Abdelrahman  is currently working as Associate   Professor  at  the  department  of  LIS  of  the  faculty  of  Arts,  University  of  Khartoum  in  Sudan.  He  holds  a  PhD  degree  in  LIS. He has worked as the Head of the Department of Library  and Information Science between August 2013-September 2014.  He  has  taught  at  the  Eritrea  Institute  of  Technology  (EIT)  in  Asmara,  Eritrea    between  2012-2013.  He  has  worked  as  Chief  University  Librarian  of  the  National  Ribat  University  in  Khartoum,  Sudan  (2002-2006).  Participated  and  presented  papers  in  a  number  of  regional  and  international  conferences.  Published  a  number  of  papers  in  refereed  journals,  in  english  and arabic languages. His teaching expertise is in the areas of  indexing and abstracting and ICT applications in libraries. His  research interests includes: Professional development, curriculum  development,  and  open  access  to  information.  

========5========

