DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, January 2017, pp. 42-50  DOI: 10.14429/djlit.37.1.108643 
 2017, DESIDOC 
LIS Education at University of Botswana: Evolution, Opportunities and Challenges  
Priti Jain* and  B.N. Jorosi** 
Department of Library & Information Studies, University of Botswana, Gaborone, Botswana 
E-mail: *jainp@mopipi.ub.bw; **jorosibn@mopipi.ub.bw 
ABSTRACT 
In Africa,  the  frst  Library  and  Information  Science  (LIS)  education  programs  started  in  South Africa  in  1938 as the “Department of Librarianship” at the University of Pretoria and today LIS education is considered a  sophisticated programme like any other academic programs in all African countries.  This paper discusses the major  changes, opportunities and challenges at the DLIS. LIS education in Botswana boasts an admirable history of roughly  37 years, during which the Department of Library and Information Studies has made a signifcant contribution in  human resource training, research and service. Today, DLIS offers both Bachelors and Masters Degree programmes  in Library and information studies, Information systems, and Archives and Records management and it also offers  M.Phil and PhD programmes. To equip future information professionals with the right skills and competencies for the  current job market and to prepare them for the emerging global society, DLIS keeps reviewing its teaching curricula  to introduce new programmes. Some of the development includes winter programme; Bachelor of Information  Systems (BIS 210) programme for the curricula harmonisation; and forthcoming ‘Bachelor of Information and  Knowledge Management’ (BIKM) programme. This paper is based on in-depth and latest literature review mainly  from developing countries and the authors’ experience as LIS practitioners and educators at DLIS. 
Keywords: LIS education, Botswana, curriculum development, review and development; developing countries,  
challenges, opportunities 
1. InTROdUCTIOn 
LIS curriculum and education is continuously evolving  to keep abreast with the changes in information profession  and  meet  emerging  needs  and  expectations  of  the  job  market.  Today,  the  biggest  challenge  of  LIS  education  and  training  is  how  to  make  and  sustain  LIS  education  relevant  and  effective.  Curriculum  review  and  content  is  core  to  adopt  and  adapt  evolving  changes,  hence,  library schools world-wide including Africa continuously  keep  reviewing  and  are  designing  their  programs.  ‘The  emancipation  of  the  user  is  a  direct  offshoot  of  both   echnology and globalisation. New technologies not only  increasingly  provide  information  to  the  user  whenever  and wherever they are, but also mploy more user-friendly  formats such as sound, video and images (as opposed to  text which has to  be  deciphered’1.  Therefore,  in  most  LIS  schools,  ‘LIS  education  has  been  reconceptualised  and re-positioned to supply graduates with the appropriate  attributes to develop and maintain high quality professional  practice in the rapidly changing 21st century2’. Information  Technology (IT) has conspicuously influenced and changed  LIS  curriculum.  The  impacts  of  IT  on  LIS  education  reflect  on  revising  and  establishment  of  new  curricula,  introduction of new LIS courses in new ways to organise  the  LIS  education,  (e.g.,  iSchools  vs.  L-Schools)3.  New  information  technology  competencies  and  skills  required  for  LIS  professionals  have  critical  impact  on  LIS  education  system  and  hence,  there  is  increase  in  technological  programs,  such  as  database  design,  web  
Received 4 November 2016, online published 28 December 2016 
design,  digital  libraries,  database  development,  system  analysis,  computer  programming,  and  networking  and  server management. Diversity and innovation is the key  to 21st  century LIS education and information profession  at  large.  ‘Tumuhairwe’  has  appropriately  embarked,  diversity  in  LIS  education  that  is  sufficient  to  prepare  LIS students to be ready to design and deliver inclusive  services  to  diverse  populations  in  the  information  age  is  a  very  key  issue  in  LIS  curriculum.  
LIS  education  in  African  library  and  information  science (LIS) schools is part of the global LIS education  system  and  any  changes,  trends  and  challenges  in  the  global  LIS  program  also  influence  LIS  education  in  Africa.  Over  the  past  two  decades,  there  has  been  increased  scholarly  interest  among  LIS  educators  in  African  LIS  schools. 
As  correctly  highlighted  by  an  African  scholar  ‘It  is imperative that the type and quality of LIS education  graduates  should  both  reflect  and  be  a  reflection  of  the  types  of  services  provided  in  libraries  and  other  information  centres1’.  This  paper  discusses  the  status  of  LIS  education  in  Botswana,  at  the  University  of  Botswana.  The  department  is  known  as  Department  of  Library & Information Studies (DLIS) under the Faculty  of  Humanities. 
Like  other  LIS  schools,  DLIS  has  always  reviewed  and revised its LIS courses to fit into the need information  environment and job market. The paper is organised into  main four parts. The first section provides background of  

========1========

JAIn AnD  Joro SI: LIS eDucATIon AT The unIverSITy oF  Bo TSwAnA: evoLuTIon, opporTunITIeS AnD chALLengeS 
DLIS. The second section reviews the salient literature on  LIS education including; a brief history of LIS Education  in  general,  an  overview  of  LIS  Education  in Africa  and  current  global  trends  and  challenges  in  LIS  education.  The  third  section  describes  the  major  curricula  changes  at the DLU over the years and the final section presents  the major opportunities and challenges in delivering LIS  education  at  DLIS. 
2.     ABOUT dEpARTmEnT Of  LIBRARy And  
InfORmATIOn  STUdIES   ( dLIS) 
The  Department  of  Library  and  Information  Studies  (DLIS)  was  set  up  in  1979,  initially  to  train  para  professional  staff  and  bring  them  up  to  diploma  level.    Since  its  inception,  the  Department  has  made  outstanding  contribution  to  the  education  and  training  of  Library  and  Information  personnel  in  Botswana  and  the  Southern,  central,  west  and  east  African  regions.  It  is  an  internationally  recognised  centre  of  excellence  within Africa  for  library  and  information  education  and  training.  It  has  made  a  unique  contribution  through  research,  publication  and  service  to  the  development  of  the  discipline  throughout  the  continent.  A  suite  of  professional  library  and  information  studies  programs  reflecting  the  various  needs  and  demands  of  Africa’s  library and information market has been developed. The  Department  has  recognised  and  continues  to  perceive  information  as  a  key  resource  in  development.  
DLIS  Vision  &  Mission:  The  vision  of  DLIS  is  to  ‘become  a  leading  center  of  academic  excellence  in  Africa  in  the  education  and  training  of  information  and  knowledge  management  professionals’.  The  mission  of  the  department  is  to  ‘provide  quality  education  and  training that is driven by state-of-the-art information and  communications  technology,  research  and  publications’.  To  accomplish  this,  the  Department  is  dedicated  to: (a) The  enhancement  of  its  already  high  standards  in  
promoting  the  ideal  of  access  to  information  as  a  
basic  human  right.  
(e) Maintaining and enhancing the Department’s unique  
and  distinctive  character  as  a  centre  of  excellence  
with a regional constituency, an innovative portfolio  
of  professional  programs,  a  strong  commitment  to  
research,  teaching,  publishing  and  learning,  and  an  
enviable international reputation through the extensive  
professional  outreach  achieved  by  its  high  caliber  
staff4. 
3.  LITERATURE REvIEw 
This  section  reviews  the  relevant  literature  on  LIS  education.  
3.1  History  of  LIS  Education  in  General 
 Initially library education began as technical education  acquired on the job. waseem5   categorised  the  historical  background  of  LIS  education  into  three  periods:  (i)   Alexandrian period  (compilation  of  bibliography  and  the  making  of  library  catalogues  and  encouragement  of  scholars  to  use  the  library  and  to  draw  books  out  of  it); (ii). Medieval and early Modern period (Training of  librarians; cataloguing; repairing; Binding and Loaning):  and,  (iii).  The  early  19th century  (According  to  Mary  Plummer,  Director  of  Pratt  Institute  Library  School  in  germany,  there  were  three  methods  of  learning  library  science  in  1901.  These  were:    a)  evolving  a  system  of  his  own  from  his  inner  consciousness;  b). Two  or  three  weeks training and observation to some large city library  and,  c).  Learning  of  certain  jobs  (e.g.  cataloguing)  of  library  by  tuition.  After  long  struggle  of  Dewey,  the  formal library education was started in America in 1887  as  a  subject  and  gradually  it  started  in  USA,  Europe,  Asia, East Asia, Africa and Australia. Systematic library  training in the United States was started by Melvil Dewey  in 1883, who became chief librarian at Columbia College  
teaching, learning, research, publishing, service and  and he received approval from ALA for a formal training  scholarship in information management and training  program. In 1887, the ‘School of Library economy’ was  and to achieve high level of excellence in the general  established  as  a  3-month  course  with  2-years  actual  disciplines of information management systems and  experience (compulsory) in various kinds of library work  
business. 
(b) The  provision  of  its  expertise  towards  the  current  
and  again  3-months  course  taken  in  review.  
In  1886,  LIS  education  began  in  Europe  with  the  
and future development needs of Botswana while at  university  of  gottingen,  germany  the  first  university  the  same  time  recognising  its  regional  setting  and  in  the  world  that  started  Library  science  course  at  the  reputation and the constituency it has developed and  university  level  followed  by  Italy  and  Sweden  and  the need to extend this constituency throughout the  established library schools around the time Dewey started  
rest  of  the  continent. 
(c)   p roviding  an  innovative  response  to  the  needs  and  
his school at Columbia. In 1919, the London University  stared the first full time diploma course in Librarianship  
by  information  and  the  technology  supporting  it. (d) The  pursuit  of  truth,  in  particular,  defending  and  
demands of the information community and business  
and Archives.  British models were exported to Australia  that it serves by providing a practical and appropriate  
and  New  Zealand  at  the  beginning  of  20th   century.  answer  to  the  challenges  that  are  being  posed  by  
LIS  programs  are  accredited  by  Chartered  Association  globalisation  and  the  increasingly  sophisticated  
of  Library  and  Information  professionals  (cILIp)  and  requirements  of  an  environment  largely  impacted  
‘certificate’  qualification  is  also  introduced.  In  India  
the  first  formal  university  course  was  initiated  in  1995  
by  Asa  Don  Dickinson  (American  librarian)  at  punjab  University,  Lahore.  This  was  the  first  formal  program  
43 

========2========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  1,  JANUARY  2017 
in  Asia  and  the  second  in  the  world  after  Columbia  University.  
The first department of  Library Science was established  at  the  University  of  Delhi  in  1946,  which  offered  a  postgraduate diploma in 1947 and a MLS in 1951. Thus,  the first library education course of Melvil Dewey is the  foundation to modern library education6   and now formal  LIS  programme  are  established  all  over  the  world. 
3.2  Overview  of  LIS  Education  in Africa 
 Librarianship in Africa owes its origin to colonialism,  when  reading  and  writing  were  introduced  among  the  indigenous people. LIS education in Africa started in1938  in South Africa with the establishment of the Department  of Librarianship at the University of Pretoria. UNESCO  played a leading role in the establishment of LIS education  programmes  in  Africa  and  in  particular,  Anglophone  Sub-Saharan  Africa. when  the  pressure  emanated  from  public  libraries,  UNESCO  was  convinced  that  illiteracy  in  sub-Saharan  Africa  could  only  be  eradicated  with  support  of  libraries6.  Since  the  origin  of  LIS  education  in Africa,  the  continent  has  witnessed  a  paradigm  shift  in LIS education from traditional to a fast-paced digital  environment.  
The major changes include the growth of LIS Schools,  review  and  revision  of  curricula,  diversification  of  the  courses  offered  by  LIS  schools  such  as,  courses  on  multimedia,  information  technology,  knowledge  management, information system, rise and fall of student  numbers,  re-orientation  of  LIS  programmes,  expansion  and  closure  of  some  LIS  schools.  New  LIS  schools  are  established  in  Malawi,  Mozambique  &  Zimbabwe  (ocholla & Bothma7 , Okello-Obura & Kigongo-Bukenya 
8 
, winner, otike, Jain & Jorosi). For example, in Kenya,  over  the  past  five  years,  Kenyatta  University  has  seen  student  numbers  triple  from  15,000  to  around  45,000,  Burnett9. In Malawi, the only LIS School was established  in  2003  in  the  Faculty  of  Information  Science  and  communications  at  Mzuzu university  (MZunI)  with  the  first  diploma  and  undergraduate  degree  students’  enrolment in 2003 and 2005 respectively (winner, 2015).  Change of department names has become a norm in LIS  Schools. For example, at Jimma university and haramaya  University in Ethiopia the nomenclature has changed from  Information  Studies  to  become  Information  Science10;  at  the  University  of  Johannesburg,  the  department’s  name  was  changed  to  the  Department  of  Information  and Knowledge Management and, LIS department at the  University of Namibia changed its name the Department  of  Information  and  Communication  Studies.  
Today,  all  African  countries  offer  formal  LIS  programmes  at  both  graduate  and  post-graduate  levels.  For  instance,  LIS  schools  in  South  Africa  offer  three  levels of undergraduate programmes (certificates, diplomas  and  bachelor's  degrees)  and  four  levels  of  postgraduate  programmes  (diploma,  honours  degree,  Masters  degree  and  Doctoral  degree)  (Minishi-Majanja1).  Kenya  has  
44 
perhaps the highest number of LIS schools in the region  including:  i)  Kenya polytechnic university college;  ii)  egerton university;  iii)  Kisii university college;  iv)  Laikipia university college;  vi)  Kenyatta university;  vii)  Moi university  and  among  private  universities,  Kenya  has:  i)  Inorero university;  ii)  Kenya  Methodist  university  and  iii)  Mount  Kenya  university  (otike6).  with this brief overview, it would be now interesting to  appreciate  some  recent  global  trends  in  LIS  education  around  the  world. 
3.3  Current  Global Trends  in  LIS  Education 
Today there is a complete paradigm shift in information  profession.  The  major  impetuses  behind  change  are:  rapid  advancement  in  IT,  evolution  in  education  system  and  ever  changing  user  needs  and  diversity  of  users.   Though, the ever-changing information technologies are the  fundamental drive to all these changes. Due to globalisation  of  education  (‘Borderless’  and  ‘cross-border  education’  and  e-learning  and  digital  hegemony  &  integration  of  ICTs, LIS education is changing world-wide. According  to  Smith11   from  the  iSchool  at  Illinois  University,  21st  century  LIS  education  is  striving  to  increase  diversity  of  students  and  faculty  and  prepare  students  for  new  roles  and  new  institutional  contexts.  The  major  trends  in  contemporary  LIS  education  are: 
(a) LIS  education  is  more  ICT-oriented: Application  of  
new information technologies to produce a librarian5 
is vital and due to ICT, there is substantial evolution  
in 21st  century LIS programme. There are more courses  
on  computers  and  ICTs  and  ICT  has  become  major  
part  of  LIS  programmes.  Libraries  are  demanding  
for  graduates  who  are  IT  compliant  in  line  with  
the  concept  of  libraries  without  walls  (Abubakar12,  
Otike6,  Kumar13, waseem5).  Modern  LIS  education  
requires infrastructure such as; media labs, IT labs,  
and  information  products  experimental  Labs.  LIS  
education  can  no  more  be  run  by  chalk  and  talk  
method. In smart class rooms having interactive board  
and connectivity with the intranet, faculty can select  
electronic content to help the students in just-in-time  
learning  (Singh  &  Malhan14).  Many  of  the  non-IT  
courses  also  have  IT-related  content.  For  instance,  
traditional  librarianship  courses  such  as  library  
management,  cataloging,  or  reference3.  This  brings  
another  challenge  of  balancing  between  traditional  
and  contemporary  LIS  education  as  new  changes  
take  time  to  integrate  in  the  system.  Nevertheless,  
the  ongoing  advances  in  ICTs  and  emergence  of  
new  state-of-the-art  knowledge  management  tools  
pose challenges not only to library and information  
professionals and LIS educators, but also to the LIS  
profession as a whole (Singh & Malhan14). Thus, it is  
now a common practice to find LIS Schools aspiring  
to  infuse  ICT  related  courses  in  their  curriculum  
which is expected to give them new lease of life in  
the  training  of  their  students  in  the  21st   century 
12. 

========3========

JAIn AnD  Joro SI: LIS eDucATIon AT The unIverSITy oF  Bo TSwAnA: evoLuTIon, opporTunITIeS AnD chALLengeS 
(b) LIS  education  focuses  on  the  demands  of  the  job  
market5.        
(c) Most traditional names of library schools have been  
changed5   and  others  are  in  the  process  of  change.  (d) There is profession shifting from multi-disciplinary  
to  inter-disciplinary.15 
(e) Introduction of new and revised courses:  new topics  
within  existing  courses    are  being  introduced  (e.g.,  
mentors, supervisors (for research projects, practicum  and  internship),  guest  lecture,  teaching  a  course,  contribute  to  the  LIS  literature  through  research  and  publications,  and  collaborates  on  research  with  colleagues  and  student.11 
3.4  Challenges  in  LIS  Education 
  Basically  due  to  the  advancement  of  technologies,  paradigm shift in the library and information world and  
virtual  reference  in  reference,  RDA  in  cataloging,  
changing education systems, contemporary LIS education/ 
e-resources in collection development); Data curation  
programme  world-wide  is  confronted  with  numerous  
specialisation;  Digital preservation; Museum informatics;  
challenges. LIS educators and information professionals  Special collections certificate; Community engagement;  
have  to  persistently  learn,  incessantly  upgrade  their  Community  informatics  certificate;  Media  literacy  
competencies  and  skills  to  quickly  step  into  new  roles  
and  youth; Youth  services  certificate.11,15 
(f)   u se of computer cataloguing, database and information  
technology  in  Syllabus: with  the  use  of  computers  
created  by  the  service  gaps  in  the  growing  knowledge  intensive society.14  Literature reveals the major challenges  as  follows:  
and  technology  new  courses  such  as  cataloguing  (a)   r elationship  between  theory  and  practice.15,5 
and  classification  are  thought  in  new  ways.13 
(g) There  is  increased  introduction  of  formal  research  
in  LIS  education.13 
(h)   c hange in Management Science studies with library  
(b) Match  to  the  labour  market  and  societal  needs.15 
(c)   r apid  advancement  of  IcTs’.15,5. 
(d)   n ew  types  collaboration  and  partnerships  between  
various  academic  institutions.15 
the use of laws and knowledge regarding the storage  
of information and its application. Hence, librarians  
are  taught  new  techniques  of  library  information  
security such as, magnetic security systems, CCTV  
and  rFID.13 
(i) There  is  increased  trend  of  distance  education  to  
provide training and education opportunities to more  
librarians.6,13  Online education no longer limits degree  
seekers  to  site-based  programs.11 
(j) There  is  continuous  education  and  training  through  
seminars and conferences to make librarians acquainted  
with new trends in the profession, library associations  
and  universities  organise  conferences  and  seminars  
for  LIS  professionals.13 
(k) Increased emphasis on multi-media: The print media  
is  no  longer  a  centre  of  attraction.6 
(l) Knowledge  management:  Knowledge  management  
has  become  the  core  course  in  most  LIS  schools.6 (m) Increased  accreditation  of  LIS  programs  and  
iSchools.11,16 
(n)   n ew methods of teaching and learning: LIS schools are  
security: Recent trends in management studies include  
(e) Lack of independence, outdated curricula: financial  
independence  and  permission  to  develop  or  modify  
curriculums.5,17-19 
(f) Lack of professional accreditation body 
15,5 
 and lack  
of  accreditation  system: Accreditation  is  important,  
which is a mechanism for quality control. A qualified  
department  is  more  likely  to  absorb  (talented)  
students.  Currently,  LIS  education  often  puts  mere  
emphasis  on  education  and  not  able  to  conduct  
proper  research.8,5,  18. 
(g) Lack  of  appreciation  of  continued  LIS  education,  
hence locating LIS departments in Faculties of Fine  
Arts  and  Humanities.18,5 
(h) Inadequate  number  of  Faculty  Members. 
8,19,5 
(i) Lack  of  diversity  in  LIS  programs  and  degrees  and  
not  keeping  abreast  of  the  rapidly  changing  digital  
environment.18,9,5 
(j)   o utdated Syllabi and not taking advantage of advanced  
technologies.12,18,5 
(k) Inadequate information resources for learning; for example,  
lack  of  text  books  in  national  languages.17,18,5. 
using learning management systems like Blackboard  (l) Lack of appreciation of the role libraries in country  
or  Moodle  allow  instructors  to  plan  asynchronous  
activities  (e.g.,  discussion  forums)  even  in  face- 
to-face  courses.  Collaborative  teaching:students  
group projects; Service learning; research projects;  
collaborative  teaching;  students  exchange;  web- 
based  Information  Science  Education  consortium  
(wISe).11 
(o)   n ew  roles  of  LIS  professionals  in  LIS  education:  
Today LIS professionals assume new roles as students’  
development  by  policy  makers/government.12,8. 
(m) Inadequate  infrastructure  and  facilities:  poor  
human,  financial,  building  and  technological  
infrastructure.12,  8,17,18,19,5  
(n) Lack  of  standardisation  of  LIS  programmes. 
8 
(o)   o ver-enrollment  and  large  classes:  often  library  
schools  in  Africa  are  over  populated  with  students  
that  available  facilities  are  stretched,  which  also  
45 

========4========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  1,  JANUARY  2017 
creates  the  problems  of  classroom  control.17 
(p) Inadequate staff and expertise: Some library schools  
who could fit in the labour market that was increasingly  becoming  technology  driven.    In  1995,  the  department  
do  not  have  the  full  complement  of  teaching  staff,  
introduced  certificate/diploma  in  archives  and  Records  while  others  lack  expertise  among  teaching  staff.  
management and a certificate in School librarianship. A  There  is  a  serious  need  for  technical  support  staff  
PhD  program  was  introduced  in  1999  followed  by  an  with high level expertise in the maintenance aspects  
Information systems degree program in 2002 as well as a  
Masters  degree  in Archives  and  records  management.  
of ICTs. Because of poor maintenance and insufficient  skills to diagnose system problems and swaps parts,  
Thus,  DLIS  as  the  main  provider  of  LIS  education  
there  are  many  out  of  commission  machines  which  
has  undergone  major  change.  Between  1979  and  1985,  
could  easily  be  re-activated  and  used.12,17,18,14     (q)   u nreliable  power  supply:The  strength  of  local  
DLIS offered only three programmes: Certificate in Library  Studies,  Diploma  in  Library  Studies  and  Post-graduate  
infrastructure such as power supply has implication Diploma in Library Studies. However, since the 1990s’, a  total  of  ten  programmes  have  been  offered.  for library and information science education. Most  
LIS courses are ICT oriented and ICTs are electricity 4.1 The  BIS  210 programme 
driven. Irregular public power supply means that ICT  
facilities  cannot  be  used  for  instruction  whenever  
there  is  power  failure.17 
(r)   n on-challant  attitude  of  the  Library Associations 
12 (s)   p oor  governmental  support  to  LIS  schools. 
12 
Thus, the challenge for the LIS schools is ‘to revamp  
resources, dissemination of information and create a often  
DLIS  began  offering  the  Bachelor  of  Information  Systems (Information Management) degree in 2002. This  degree is part of the University’s Bachelor of Information  Systems  (BIS)  degree  which  is  offered  conjointly  with  two  other  departments-the  Department  of  Computer  Science  (BIS-computer  Information  Systems)  and  the  
The role of an information system in an organisation  
themselves’  (Malhan20). however,  the  curriculum  is  the  
face today (virkus15). having discussed the recent trends  and challenges in LIS education, this paper now focuses  on  DLIS  ongoing  changes  and  curriculum  review  and  development  and  introduction  of  new  programmes.  
their  facilities  and  course  curricula  to  transform  into  
Department  of  Accounting  and  Finance  (BIS-Business  institutions that educate and train professionals who are  
Information Systems).  At its outset, the (BIS) was seen  competent enough to create a stir in the market, a demand  
as  a  business  major,  focusing  on  producing  graduates  for  their  skills,  societal  hunt  for  their  talents,  and  who  
who are able to harness information technology to create  can substantially contribute to management of knowledge  
systems that address challenges and opportunities in the  
internal  and  external  business  environment.    
sought  after  brand  name  for  their  service  and  niche  for  
is  to  collect  data,  process  the  data,  and  disseminate  best barometer to reflect the changes and challenges we  
information  to  various  stakeholders  within  and  outside  
the  organisation  in  order  to  allow  a  seamless  flow  
4.   mA jOR CHAnGES AT dLIS And nEw  
pROGRAmmES 
DLIS  introduced  a  bachelor’s  degree,  as  well  as  a  postgraduate  diploma  in  library  and  information  studies  in  1986.  During  1991-1997  (npD7)  the  Department  set  to  diversify  its  programmes  in  response  to  emerging  opportunities  and  new  markets.  
This diversification embraced information technology,  and  management  information  systems  as  driving  forces  in  all  its  training  programmes.  New  programmes  such  as  School  library  studies  and  Archives  and  records  management  were  introduced  representing  niche  growth  areas for the Department at the time.  with the launching  of training programmes in school librarianship, teachers  from  Botswana  colleges  of  education  were  trained  as  teacher librarians graduating with certificate and diploma  qualifications  respectively. 
In 1994 a Master’s degree in library and information  studies was introduced to replace the postgraduate diploma.  The introduction of the Masters’ programme was brought  about  by  the  need  to  produce  information  professionals  
46 
of  information  through  all  the  firm’s  functional  areas  such  as  finance,  accounting,  marketing,  production  and  operations,  and  human  resource  management.    Because  most  companies  use  business  information  systems  in  some  aspect  of  their  business,  and  need  to  continually  update  their  technologies  and  systems  to  keep  pace  with  the  fast  developments  and  advancements  in  the  information  technology  (IT)  sector  periodic  reviews  of  the  programme  are  necessary.  
To  this  end,  in  2009,  a  9-member  BIS  Technical  Task  Team  was  convened  by  the  three  faculties  of  Science,  Business  and  Humanities  on  the  advice  of  APRPC  to  harmonise  the  BIS  programmes  to  ensure  that  any  duplicate  content  is  eliminated  (proposal  for  the  BIS  Degree,  2002).21   The  Committee  produced  a  report  documenting  critical  concerns  regarding  the  BIS  programme in the university of Botswana’s (henceforth,  the university) context and a recommended common core  outlining mandatory courses that all BIS students need to  take. As a result of curricula revision, the Department of  Computer  Science  revised  its  stream  and  presented  the  revised curriculum at the APRPC meeting held on January  12,  2010.  Likewise,  the  Department  of Accounting  and  Finance  followed  suit  and  its programme  was  approved  in  2014,  while  the  BIS  (Information  Management)  for  DLIS  is  awaiting  final  approval  from APRPC. 

========5========

JAIn AnD  Joro SI: LIS eDucATIon AT The unIverSITy oF  Bo TSwAnA: evoLuTIon, opporTunITIeS AnD chALLengeS 
4.2 The winter programme 
The  winter  programme  is  the  Certificate  in  Library  and  Information  Studies  (cLIS)  and  the  certificate  in  Archives and records Management (cArM) was introduced  in 2010 in response to a request by the Botswana National  Library  Services  (BnLS)  to  offer  a  1-year  certificate  Split  Programme  in  Library  &  Information  Studies  (cLIS)  to  its  staff  who  hold  a coSc   qualification  with  several years of working experience. The approval for the  programme  was  swift  because  it  is  a  programme  which  has  been  offered  in  the  past.  The  programme  structure  is  based  on  the  CLIS  curriculum  that  was  shelved  four  years  ago.  The  programme  runs  for  two  semesters  (24  weeks)  during  two  winter  breaks  from  May-August. on  successful completion of the programme, the candidates  are  awarded  a  certificate  in  library  and  information  or  Certificate in Archives and Records Management studies  according  to  the  University  of  Botswana  regulations  (DLIS Annual report,  2010).22 
The  objective  of  the  CLIS  is  to  build  capacity  in  managing  library  and  information  services  especially  in  special, branch, and school libraries; and village reading  rooms  while  that  of  CARM  is  to  confer  upon  graduates  the essential skills to effectively manage records centres/ registries. Although  the winter programme  started  as  a  
Several tracer studies since late 1990s and external  review  of  LIS  programmes  have  revealed  demonstrable  need to revamp and harmonise the academic programmes  to  take  advantage  of  the  expanding  information  and  knowledge  management  job  opportunities  in  all  sectors  of the Botswana economy.  A recent online pilot survey  of the labour market in Botswana has showed significant  support for the BKM programme and the availability of  jobs  for  graduates  of  this  programme.  
Besides, consultation with stakeholders in the Botswana  labour  market,  the  DLIS  advisory  boards  and  cognate  departments in UB have shown clear need for the BIKM  programme. The design of BIKM programme has benefited  from  the  input  of  international  experts  from  leading  universities  in  the  region  and  internationally. 
Moreover,  international  trends  in  LIS  education  &  training  show  deliberate  move  by  library  schools  in  universities  the  world  over  to  offer  information  and  knowledge management curricula as opposed to traditional  library  programmes.  Best  practices  in  this  regard  are  drawn  from  the  SADc   region,  west  Africa, europe,  north  America,  Asia  and  Latin  America.  The world  Bank emphasises leveraging knowledge resources to take  advantage  of  the  evolving  knowledge-based  economy. 
response  to  stake-holder  demand,  the  programme  now  
4.4 programme  Review  at dLIS  
forms  part  of  the  Department’s  strategy  to  address  the  
Library schools world-wide are continuously challenged  University  of  Botswana’s  Strategic  Plan  Priority  Area   
to institute periodic programme reviews. As it has already  whose  objective  is  to  increase  participation  rates;  i.e.,  
been mentioned earlier, this is due in part to rapid: rapid  availing  more  access  opportunities  for  LIS  Education  
technological  changes,  and  crisis  in  higher  education  
(e.g.,  diminishing  budgets,  rapidly  escalating  student  
(DLIS Annual report,  2013). 
4.3 The  BIKm programme 
This  is  a  proposed  4-year  bachelor  of  information  
2017. The BIKM degree single major will be offered in  
populations,  changes  in  pedagogy,  etc).  A  programme  review  can  be  defined  as  a  periodic  evaluation  of  a  programme  to:  determine  the  continuity,  validity  and  
and knowledge management (BIKM) that will be offered  
relevance  of  programmes  and  its  intended  learning  as, a single major (BIKM professional), combined major  
outcomes. guided by the above logic, an external review  (BA,  IKM)  and  major-minor  (BA,  IKM)  from  August  
of  DLIS  was  undertaken  by  two  prominent  professors  
from university  of northumbria  (united  Kingdom)  and  three  streams  namely:  BIKM  (Knowledge  Management)  
university of Kwazulu natal (South Africa) between 18- 
22 August, 2014.  while the report commended staff for  &  Information  Studies).  The  BIKM  single  major  will  
their dedication to the programmes and their commitment  
to  students  the  bulk  of  the  report  is  a  catalogue  of  
BIKM (Archives & records Management) BIKM (Library  
have a common core during the first and second years of  study. However, candidates will be required to specialise  in  any  one  of  the  streams  in  the  third  and  fourth  years  (BIKM report,  2009).23 
The proposed BIKM degree is motivated  by a number  of factors including: labour market needs  in Botswana,  international  trends  in  the  education  and  training  of  information professionals, the shrinking job opportunities  for the traditional library and information professionals,  government of Botswana national priorities (i.e., hrDc Strategy  for  developing  critical  skills  for  the  economy  including  information  and  knowledge  managers  needed  in  transforming    Botswana  into  an  information  society  in  vision  2016),  the university  of  Botswana  strategic  priorities  and  declining  enrolments  in  the  current  LIS  programmes  (Learning  and Teaching policy,  2008).24 
recommendations: 
(a) BIKM  programme  needs  to  be  taken  through  the  
programme approval process and its content reviewed  
to  ensure  its  currency  and  relevance 
(b) A plan for succession and career progression should  
be  developed  and  implemented 
(c) Staff need to have a teaching qualification or receive  
staff  development  in  the  area 
(d) Staff skills in relation to research need to be developed  
through  mentoring  by  senior  staff  members 
(e) A  formal  policy  on  staff  mentoring  to  develop  
teaching  and  research  needs  to  be  developed  and  
implemented 
47 

========6========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  1,  JANUARY  2017 
(f) The  quality  of  students  needs  to  be  improved  by  
reviewing entry requirement/ continuing with certificate  
and  diploma  courses  
(g)   c ap  student  numbers  to  avoid  over  enrolment (h)   r evise  the  Mphil/phD  process  to  speed  up  student  
progress 
(i) Develop  clear  guidelines  for  Masters  and  phD  
supervision 
(j) Improve  Masters  retention  and  throughput  rate  by  
ensuring  completion  of  dissertations  in  a  timely  
manner 
(k) Improve  Masters,  Mphil  and  phD  student  support  
and  feedback 
(l)   r evise  supervision  model  to  one  supervisor  for  
Masters  and  two  for  PhD 
(m)   e stablish a forum for Masters students to assist and  
provide  support  during  the  research  process 
(n)   p rovide  space  and  seminar  programme  for  phD  
students 
(o)   r eview staff availability for students to protect time  
for  research  ,  teaching  and  learning 
(p) Timely  feedback  should  be  provided  for  Masters  
and  PhD  students 
(q) Implement a more efficient and effective registration  
process  by  devolving  signing  off  to  tutors 
(r)   c larify  the  role  and  responsibilities  of  graduate  
school  regarding  PhD  student  training 
(s) Implement  a  transparent  process  for  allocating  
supervisors 
(t) Develop  and  implement  a  transparent  workload  
framework  within  the  department 
(u) Make  necessary  computing  facilities  for  technical  
courses  and  avail  technical  staff 
(v) Implement    a  formal    policy  of  staff  mentoring 
(w)   e xplore  support  from  orD  in  developing  DLIS  
research 
(x) Improve  mentoring  of  students  in  research  skills.  
(external review  of programmes,  2014).25 
As the follow-up to some of the above recommendations,  DLIS is putting its all efforts to expedite the introduction  of  BIKM  programme. 
4.4.  Opportunities  for  dLIS 
DLIS  as  a  department  has  several  opportunities  to  equip  future  information  professionals  with  the  right  skills and competencies for the current job market and to  prepare them for the emerging global society and contribute  to  knowledge  economy  and  national  development.  The  major  opportunities  comprise  of: 
(1)   g ood technology platforms (e.g. Blackboard, ASAS,  
etc.)  and  well  resource  library  facilities 
48 
(2) Facility  to  attend  conferences  thereby  forging  
international  linkages 
(3)   n etworking  during  international  conferences 
(4) Distance BALIS programme provides an opportunity  
for employees to come up with tailor made programme  
structures 
(5) Implementation of the BIKM programme may attract  
more  students  to  DLIS 
(6)   r unning  of  short  courses  tailor-made  to  industry  
needs 
(7)   c onsultancy services as a way of sharing knowledge  
with  the  community 
(8)   o pportunities  to  launch  tailor-made  short  courses  
for  the  industry. 
4.6. dLIS  Challenges  
Despite  the  number  of  opportunities  listed  above,  DLIS  also  faces  various  challenges,  which  thwart  its  efforts  from  to  fully  realise  its  goals  and  mandates.   Among  the  salient  challenges  are:    
(a)   c hanging  tertiary  education  funding    models/ 
patterns 
(b)   c ompetition from new market entrants and existing  
institutions  offering  similar  programmes 
(c) Major  challenges  with  immigration  issues  thereby  
impacting  on  inability  to  attract  foreign  scholars  
and  negatively  impacting  on  existing  staff 
(d) Lack  of  incentives  to  retain  highly  qualified  staff (e)   c ompetition  for  students  from  regional  universities  
especially  from  South Africa 
(f)   h eavy  teaching  loads  and  as  a  results  staff-student  
ratio  is  too  high 
(g) Inadequate  facilities,  such  as  lack  of  specialist  
teaching  resources  (e.g.  software  for  archives);  
inadequate  supply  of  consumables 
(h)   p oor  maintenance  of  teaching  space  (classrooms  
and/or  examination  rooms 
(i) Slow approval of programmes e.g. the planned BIKM  
programme  has  taken  forever  to  get  approval  with  
the APRC 
(j)   u nattractive  name  of  the  department  (not  aligned  
to  the  programmes  offered) 
(k) Slow and tedious admission process by the university  
of  Botswana 
(l)   r esistance  of  staff  to  fully  apply  technology  in  
teaching  and  learning 
(m) Lack of bench-marking or accreditation with international  
programmes 
(n) DLIS  programmes  are  not  accredited  by  national  
library  association  because  the  association  is  itself  
weak  and  a  part-time  body 

========7========

JAIn AnD  Joro SI: LIS eDucATIon AT The unIverSITy oF  Bo TSwAnA: evoLuTIon, opporTunITIeS AnD chALLengeS 
(o)   n on  appreciation  of  the  importance  of  LIS  by  
government and other employers resulting in jobless  
graduates  or  small  domestic  market  for  LIS. 
Thus,  DLIS  is  confronted  with  similar  challenges  as  other  LIS  education  schools.  Regardless  of  several  challenges,  DLIS  has  to  constantly  strive  to  fit  into  the  new  global  LIS  curriculum  and  address  the  job  market  need  in  Botswana.  
Curriculum  reform  drive  occasioned  by  desire  to  incorporate  ICTs  changes  in  the  information  landscape,  e.g.,  global  transformation  of  departments  such  as  the  Department of Information Studies at Sheffield or Department  of  Information  and  Library  Studies  -  Clear  intention  to  show  prominence  on  Information  rather  than  library. 
5.  COnCLUSIO nS 
In  spite  of  the  several  challenges  listed  above,  the  Department  of  Library  and  Information  Studies  (DLIS),  Botswana  has  made  a  significant  progress.  It  started  with  a  certificate/diploma  courses  and  reached  to  PhD  level.  DLIS  curriculum  evolved  to  meet  new  challenges  and  expectations.  Today  DLIS  is  one  of  the  best  known  departments  in  its  field  in  Africa  and  is  also  well-known  outside  the  continent.  It  offers  a  range  of  full-time  and  part-time  programmes  in  the  field  of  Information Studies from certificate level to MPhil/PhD,  which  is  complemented  by  the  research,  publishing  and  community service activities of its staff.  However, DLIS  has  still  a  long  way  to  go  to  fit  into  new  global  LIS  education  system/environment,  such  as  i-Schools  and  web-Based  Information  Science  education.  here,  it  is  worthwhile  to  reiterate  that  the  environment,  in  which  DLIS inhabits, is full of challenges. The Department needs  to  build  on  its  existing  reputation  to  take  it  forward  by  enhancing  quality  teaching  and  ensuring  its  continued  relevance.  To  this  end,  DLIS  should  urgently  consider  the recommendations made in the external review report  with a view to fast-track the introduction of the planned  BIKM  programme  and  strengthen  extant  curricula  to  address  the  requirements  for  digital  society.  Further,  DLIS  vigorously  explore  opportunities  for  international  collaboration  or  cross  country  partners. 
REfEREnCES 
1. Minishi-Majanja, M.K.  which way for LIS education  
and Information Science (LIS)-A united States (uS)  
Perspective.  [Online],  2014.  http://libres-ejournal. 
info/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/NTU-Sharon-Hu- 
paper-for-LIBreS_-Final.pdf (accessed on 4 october  
2016). 
4. DLIS Handbook. Department of Library & Information  
Studies Handbook 2012/2013. University of Botswana,  
Faculty  of humanities,  2012.  
5.   w aseem, h. LIS education: Theoretical foundations  
of  Library  Science.  [Online],  2014.  http://www. 
slideshare.net/Libcorpio/lis-education-world-wide- 
perspective27apr14  (accessed  on  28  September  
2016). 
6. Otike, J. Library and Information Science Education  
in Africa: past, present and Future. [online], 2012.  
https://www.mu.ac.ke/informationscience/images/ 
Publications/otike%20lis%20education%20in%20 
africa.pdf,  (accessed  on  23  September  2016). 7. Ocholla,  D.,  &  Bothma,  T.  Trends,  challenges  and  
opportunities  for  LIS  education  and  training  in  
Eastern  and  Southern  Africa,  New  Library  World .   
2007, 108(1/2),  55-78. 
8. Okello-Obura,  C.  &  Kigongo-Bukenya,  I.M.N.  
Library  and  Information  Science  Education  and  
Training  in  Uganda:  Trends,  Challenges,  and  the  
way  Forward.  [online].  2011.  http://www.hindawi. 
com/journals/edri/2011/705372/  (accessed  on  26  
September  2016).  
9. Burnett,  Peter.  Challenges  and  problems  of  Library  
and  Information  Science  Education  in  Selected  
African Countries, 2013. http://creativecommons.org/ 
licenses/by/3.0/  (accessed  on  26  September  2016). 10. Mathew, M. Information science education in Ethiopia  
-An  overview.  European  Aca.  Res. ,  2014,  1(10),  
3385-393. 
11. University of Botswana. DLIS Annual Report, 2013.  
gaborone: university  of  Botswana. 
12. Abubakar, B.M. Incorporating information technology  
in  library  and  information  science  curriculum  in  
Nigeria: A strategy for survival in the 21st Century.  
Lib.  Philo.  and  Prac.,  2010.  http://www.webpages. 
uidaho.edu/~mbolin/abubakar-hassan.pdf,  (accessed  
on  16 August  2016). 
and Training in South Africa? Some Considerations  
13. Kumar,  N.  Recent  trends  in  LIS  research  in  India.   
2014.  http://www.academia.edu/6655112/Recent_ 
2. 
from  Contact  and  Distance  Learning.  [Online],  2009.  http://www.lis.uzulu.ac.za/2009/UniZulu%20 conference%202009_Minishi-Majanja.pdf. (accessed  on  14 october,  2016). 
Tumuhairwe, g.K. Analysis of Library and Information  Science/Studies (LIS) education Today: The Inclusion  
current_trends_in_lis_research_in_india  (accessed  
on  23  September  2016). 
14. Singh,  J.  &  Malhan,  I.V.  Trends  and  Issues  in  LIS  
Education in India. 2012. http://www.google.co.bw/ 
url  (accessed  on  24  September  2016). 
of  Indigenous  Knowledge  and  Multicultural  Issues  15. Virkus,  S.  Challenges  of  Library  and  Information  
3. 
in  LIS  Curriculum.  [Online],  2013.  http://library. ifla.org/276/.  (accessed  on  15 october  2016).  Hu, S. Technology Impacts on Curriculum of Library  
Science  (LIS)  education.  2012.  http://www.unica- network.eu/sites/default/files/Sirje%20Virkus_0.pdf  (accessed  on  27  September  2016). 
49 

========8========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  1,  JANUARY  2017 
16. iSchools.  2014.  http://www.ischools.org  (accessed  
on  16  September  2016). 
17.   e degbo,  w.I.  curriculum  Development  in  Library  
and  Information  Science  Education  in  Nigerian  
Universities:  Issues  and  Prospects,  2011.  http:// 
digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1 
591&context=libphilprac (accessed on 16 September  
2016). 
18. Alimohammadi, D. & Jamali, H. R. Common problems  
of library and information science education in Asian  
Developing Countries: A review article. Inter.  J.  of  
Inf.  Scie.  and  Manag.,   2011,  2(9),  79-92.  
Management Degree. gaborone: university of Botswana,  
2009. 
24.   u niversity  of  Botswana,  ‘Learning  and  Teaching  
policy,’ gaborone: university  of  Botswana,  2008. 25. External Review of Programmes, Department of Library  
and  Information  Studies,University  of  Botswana,  
August  18-22,  2014.    
Contributors 
prof priti jain is an Associate Professor in the Department of  Library and Information Studies at the university of Botswana.  She holds BA (hons) and LLB degrees from Meerut university,  
19. Amunga, H. and Khayesi, M.K.. Library and Information  
India,  Masters  in  Library  and  Information  Studies  from  the  
university of Botswana, Botswana and D Lit. phil. (Doctor of  
Science Education in Kenya: An Overview of Potential  
Literature  and philosophy) unISA,  South Africa.  She  has  15  
and  Challenges.  Paper  presented  at  SCECSAL  XX  years’ working experience in Library and information work. She   
Conference,  Nairobi,  2012. 
20. Malhan,  I.  V.  Exploring  the  Opportunities  in  the  
Emerging Information Environment for Transformation  
of LIS Education. In Singh, J. & Malhan, I.V. Trends  
and Issues in LIS Education in India, 2012, pp. 57- 
65 
21.   u niversity of Botswana ‘proposal for the introduction  
has written extensively in referred journals and edited books and  has presented several papers in international conferences. She  teaches Knowledge management and Information Science. Her  current areas of research interest are: Information management,  knowledge management, open access, institutional repositories,  and  digital  scholarship.  
dr  B.n.  jorosi   is  Senior  Lecturer  and  Head  of  Department  
gaborone: university of  Botswana,  2002. 22.   u niversity  of  Botswana.  ‘DLIS  Annual  report.  
gaborone: university  of  Botswana,  2010. 23.   u niversity of Botswana  ‘proposal for the introduction  
of the Bachelor of Information Systems BIS Degree’.  
of Library and Information at the University of Botswana. He  
has participated in many library and information initiatives in  
Botswana  and  has  published  several  articles  on  Library  and  Information Studies. Dr. Jorosi has also served as a member of  several  consultancy  teams: the ACHAP  Study,  Sesigo  Project,  Botswana  National  Library  Policy  Study,  and  the  Botswana  
of  the  Bachelor  of  Knowledge  and  Information  
Railway Administrative  History  Project. 
50 

========9========

