DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 1, January 2017, pp. 38-41  DOI: 10.14429/djlit.37.1.10861 
 2017, DESIDOC 
LIS Education in an Interdisciplinary Frame: Integrating Digital Media into  
the Ethics of Digital Personhood 
Valerie Karno* and Adam David Roth** 
*Graduate School of Library and Information  Studies, University of Rhode Island 
E-mail: vkarno@uri.edu 
**Harrington School of Media and Communication, University of Rhode Island 
E-mail: adamroth@uri.edu 
AbStrAct  
This article explores the ways in which the Graduate School of Library and Information Studies at the University  of Rhode Island integrates digital media into its curricula and research as part of its ongoing interdisciplinary  framework. Suggesting it is incumbent on LIS educators to both teach technological skills and examine digital media  tools as objects of intellectual inquiry, this article contends that LIS education must consider core epistemological  questions which inform the feld and address signifcant philosophical and cultural questions regarding our digital  selves. The article considers how we can attend to issues of equity for diverse populations, and work towards  understanding the assumptions inherent in digital spaces and technological tools which are guiding the creation of  
our digital borders.  
Keywords: Education, interdisciplinary, curricula, digital media, library and information studies, personhood, law 
1. LIS  EDucAtIon In trAnSForMAtIon  
Just  as  the  American  Library  Association  (ALA)  President  Sari  Feldman’s  2016  campaign  ‘Libraries  Transform’  suggests,  library  schools  in  the  United  States  are  experiencing  a  major  transformation.  Some  current  or  formerly  ALA-accredited  library  schools  have  transformed  into  I-schools  (information  schools),  notably  the  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  and  the  University of Illinois1, emphasising the technological and  data-driven nature of information science, and distancing  themselves from traditional approaches to library school  education.  And  so,  as  a  potential  rift  emerges  between  those schools driven by ALA standards and those driven  by the International Society for Technology in Education  (ISTE), the chasm between them grows larger. As such,  library  and  information  studies  (LIS)  education  in  the  United  States  is  at  an  interesting  crossroads-serving  the  wide  ranging  community  needs  of  libraries,  which  now  also means producing information technology specialists.  At the University of Rhode Island (URI), we are not so  much mirroring the chasm between these approaches as we  are straddling both sides of the spectrum by converging  library  studies  and  information  science  particularly  in  our  reliance  on  teaching  digital  media.  In  our  Graduate  School of Library and Information Studies (GSLIS), our  classes  and  our  curriculum  integrate  digital  media  as  pedagogical  tools  and  critical  objects  of  inquiry.  
Taking a broad approach to the study of library and  information science, like many schools, we forge strong  alliances  with  programs  in  communication  and  media  studies  and  engage  in  cross-disciplinary  discussions  
Received 4 November 2016, online published 28 December 2016 
and  research  that  benefit  from  external  collaborations.  Specifically, at URI, we are now located in the Harrington  School  of  Communication  and  Media,  which  houses  five other academic units-Communication Studies, Film/ Media,  Journalism,  Public  Relations,  and  Writing  &  Rhetoric-and  allows  us  to  draw  on  the  strengths  and  resources  of  our  affiliated  programs.  As  a  result,  we  highlight  the  interdisciplinary  nature  of  LIS  education,  demonstrating  the  ways  in  which  interdisciplinarity  is  both  an  intellectual  endeavor  and  a  resource-sharing  mechanism.  We  are  not  alone,  however:  many  U.S.  library and information schools are now housed in either  colleges of education (such as SUNY Buffalo, University  of California, Los Angeles, and the University of North  Carolina,  Greensboro),  or  communication  colleges  or  schools  (as  in  the  cases  of  Kent  State,  Rutgers,  the  University  of  South  Carolina,  and  the  University  of  Kentucky). Our placement within the Harrington School  of Communication and Media means our students’ study  of digital media is done amongst access to high-end film  and editing equipment and software, and media law and  writing  for  technology  courses.  Our  students  can  learn  from  scholars  and  students  alike  across  disciplines  in  this venture, noting overlapping yet distinct disciplinary  ways  of  visualising  and  interpreting  texts  and  using  contemporary  technology  and  media.  
The  interdisciplinary  curriculum,  cross-disciplinary  affiliations,  and  digital  media  research  is  exemplified  in  our  current  administration  of  a  US  $500,000  Federal  Institute for Museum and Library Services (IMLS) grant.  Blending our traditional focus on library education with  

========1========

KARNO  AND R OTH: LIS EDUCATION IN AN  I NTERDISCIPLINARY  F RAME: INTEGRATING  D IGITAL  M EDIA INTO 
our  contemporary  approach  to  digital  media  pedagogy,  this  grant  is  funding  us  to  teach  a  cohort  of  school  and  public  librarians  how  to  integrate  digital  media  technologies  into  their  libraries,  thereby  inculcating  patrons  of  these  libraries-both  students  and  members  of  the  public-with  empowering  digital  literacy  skills  to  make  them  critical  consumers  and  able  producers  of  digital media products. The grant is allowing us to host a  variety of workshops on such subjects as Scratch coding  and  Stop  motion  animation,  as  well  as  partner  with  the  Providence  Children’s  Film  Festival  and  the  Office  of  Library  and  Information  Services  (OLIS)  for  the  State  of  Rhode  Island  to  orchestrate  practical  and  theoretical  conversations  about  critical  analyses  and  consumption  of  digital  media.  Through  the  workshops  offered  and  the  conversations  being  engendered,  the  university  is  not  only  teaching  digital  media  skills,  but  we  are  also  encouraging  people  to  reflect  on  what  it  means  to  be  a  digital  citizen  in  this  information  age2.  
Our cross-disciplinary partnerships are both a cause  and effect of our emergence into digital media leadership.  Our borders touch on the work of our colleagues in Film/ Media  and  Communication  Studies  and  spread  beyond  our immediate partners in our school of communication  and  media  to  our  colleagues  in  English,  History,  and  Education.  For  example,  we  currently  offer  an  optional  track  in  school  library  media  through  which  we  have  a  strategic alliance with our School of Education. Similarly,  we offer popular dual-degree programs with the English  and  History  Departments  so  students  can  graduate  with  MA/MLIS degrees in less time than it would take for them  to complete these degrees separately.  Those students who  complete such dual degrees are grounded in the traditions  and trajectories of the Digital Humanities, and are well- prepared for specialty careers in museums, archives, and  humanities  reference/curriculum  materials  jobs  across  a  range  of  libraries  both  public  and  private.  
Sticking to our roots in training library professionals  as  advocates  for  community,  Library  and  Information  Studies  at  URI,  in  its  local,  regional,  national,  and  international  manifestations,  lists  responsiveness  to  our  communities  as  a  central  tenet  of  all  the  work  we  do.  Because  we  are  devoted  to  making  our  communities  thrive, we work closely with the State through the Office  of  Library  and  Information  Services  (OLIS),  Coalition  of  Library  Advocates  (COLA),  Rhode  Island  Library  Association (RILA), and New England Library Association  (NELA). By collaborating with and receiving continuous  feedback  from  state  and  regional  library  officials,  we  provide leadership training to libraries and people across  the  State  and  region,  caring  for  the  well-being  of  our  constituents  by  improving  literacies,  increasing  access  to  information,  and  providing  them  with  resources  that  should never be reserved only for the highly educated or  wealthy. At least since the free public library movement,  libraries have been the great democratising and equalising  force  in  society.  As  times  have  changed  and  the  needs  
and  demographics  of  our  constituents  shifted,  library  educators  and  professionals  have  adapted  to  meet  the  growing  needs  of  our  communities,  particularly  with  regard  to  creating  access  points  for  digital  media  and  internet  technologies. 
2. EPIStEMoLogIcAL   Qu EStIonS   wh Ich  
LIS  EDucAtIon  cALLS Forth For  
ExAMInAtIon  
Although  the  information  sought  by  library  patrons  has  shifted  from  primarily  text  products  to  incorporate  all  forms  of  old  and  new  media,  some  foundational,  epistemological  questions  continue  to  inform  many  of  the  inquiries  animating  contemporary  LIS  teaching  and  research. For example, a central query we explore is how  our  frameworks  of  knowing  are  created  or  impacted  by  the  ways  in  which  we  search  for  information  in  an  age  when that information continues to multiply indefinitely. In  both the physical and virtual realms, we have considered  ‘wayfinding’ to help answer this question in geographical  terms. Professor and theorist Lauren Mandel has stated,  for instance, that ‘{w}ayfinding is a spatial information  process  that  allows  people  to  orient  and  navigate  in  the  built environment.’3  By drawing on design thinking and  considering the reorganisation of contemporary libraries,  Mandel discusses how people literally find their pathways  to  texts  in  physical  libraries.  But  we  can  extend  this  statement  metaphorically  to  capture  the  essence  and  conundrum  of  our  contemporary  moment:  how  do  we  come  to  terms  with  the  labyrinth  of  information  now  available  in  our  virtual  worlds?  How,  more  precisely,  do  we  find  the  information  we  want  and  need  when  we  are  searching  amidst  an  overwhelming  amount  of  information with sometimes little critical skill at sorting,  finding,  and  evaluating  content?  Our  interdisciplinary  courses ask students to think about how to evaluate and  move between pathways of information, creating critical  thinkers  and  close  readers  of  texts.4 
We as library professionals, educators, and researchers  can do a lot to deliver resources and information to our  constituents,  but  we  also  have  an  obligation  to  teach  them  and  the  research  community  about  our  complicity  in  digital  citizenship.  It  has  to  be  asked  what  happens  to  the  boundaries  of  selves,  cultures,  ethnicities,  races,  and  nationalities,  when  we  digitally  perform  ourselves  in  virtual  spaces.  Historically,  scholars  like  Gloria  Anzaldua  asked  American  Studies  thinkers  to  consider  Mestiza Consciousness as occurring at the Borderlands/ La  Frontera.  Anzaldua  states  as  her  formative  preface:  ‘The actual physical borderland that I’m dealing with in  this  book  is  the  Texas-U.S.  Southwest/Mexican  border.  The  psychological  borderlands,  the  sexual  borderlands  and  the  spiritual  borderlands  are  not  particular  to  the  Southwest. . . Living on borders . . . keeping intact one’s  shifting and multiple identity and integrity, is like trying  to  swim  in  a  new  element,  an  alien  element.’5   These  are similar concerns of the contemporary LIS researcher  
39 

========2========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  1,  JANUARY  2017 
and  educator,  and  LIS  helps  articulate  the  ambiguity  and  complexity  of  new  digital  borders,  exploring  what  happens in the “thirdspaces” (in Edward Soja’s term) of  digital  culture.6   LIS  educators  and  professionals  are  at  the  forefront  of  questioning  how  the  nature  of  identity  and its many manifestations gets presented or performed  in  bordered  or  borderless  digital  zones. 
Our  digital  citizenship  and  identities  oftentimes  accentuate matters of discrimination and issues of power  relations in the same way our physical identities do. For  example, Melissa Villa Nicholas is studying the ways in  which a group like The National Association to Promote  Library  and  Information  Services  to  Latinos  and  the  Spanish-Speaking  (REFORMA)  is  impacting  not  only  the  performance  of  the  digital  self  specifically,  but  LIS  education more generally. As Dr. Nicholas writes, ‘In the  late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, REFORMA  members were organising at the juncture of the struggle  for  Latina/o  rights  and  the  digital  age,  anticipating  a  rapidly changing future with new technologies. The status  of  many  Latinas/os  in  the  United  States  with  regard  to  racial  and  gender  discrimination  and  class  disparity  positioned  REFORMA  as  a  librarian  professional  and  activist  organisation  during  the  digital  age.’7   Nicholas  invokes  the  ‘digital  divide,’  pointing  to  the  disparities  brought about and reinforced by the digital era. According  to  her,  {w}ith  the  digital  age  came  a  new  phenomenon,  the  digital  divide.  
The  digital  divide  is  the  phenomenon  of  a  gap  in  access  to  information,  technologies,  and  Internet  that  have  become  crucial  for  basic  access  to  resources  for  a  better  quality  of  life  in  the  United  States  and  around  the  world. This  gap  manifests  among  populations  based  on  race,  gender  and  income,  and  can  greatly  affect  an  individual and group ability to access such resources as  job applications, government documents, housing forms,  online  applications  for  welfare  and  online  classes,  to  name a few. LIS education must necessarily address this   by  teaching  practical  skills,  but  also  embracing  lines  of  inquiry  concerning  where  to  find  technological  contact  zones that can help bridge gaps of power and privilege,  and create a new learning paradigm for equitable access  to  education. 
With the convergence of library studies, information  science, and questions of power, identity, political structures,  and social policies, the contemporary manifestation of our  discipline  remains  relevant  to  the  extent  it  continues  to  serve our communities, engage in foundational questions,  and  tackle  the  disparities  that  come  with  developing  our  digital  lives  in  new  borderless  spaces.  While  we  might  have  always  been  concerned  with  such  issues  as  way  finding,  it  has  never  been  more  difficult  to  ferret  out  and  evaluate  which  paths  to  follow.  We  as  LIS  educators play a critical role in training students, library  professionals, and information leaders to think critically  and  philosophically  about  our  work,  and  to  disseminate  this  knowledge  to  our  many  diverse  communities.  
40 
3. DIgItAL   P ErSonhooD 
The  digital  identities  we  constitute  are  no  less  governed by legal questions than our physical lives, and  LIS education in the United States is profoundly concerned  with  laws  and  the American  legal  systems’  concepts  of  self and textual ownership. The curricula is anchored in  training  people  through  legal  epistemologies-ways  we  know the world through the legal constructs which bind  our  national  borders  and  concepts  of  autonomy  through  invisible  and  visible  architectures.  Legal  theorists  like  David  Delaney  and  Austin  Sarat  have  long  thought  about  where  law  is  ‘found’  throughout  geography  and  culture. As  Sarat,  Douglas,  and  Umphrey  have  written,‘  . . . Law invests place with value or meaning . . . Place  sometimes is used metaphorically, as a way of organising  our  conceptions  of  the  world.’8   Digital  spaces,  created  and  regulated  through  national  and  international  legal  norms, organise our habits of communication in the world,  and  the  new  technological  tools  we  provide  and  teach  create national and global citizens imbricated in written  or  unwritten  legal  codes  about  autonomous  or  shared  identities. Our notions of how we own ourselves and our  texts,  and  how  we  share  with  each  other  through  social  media,  are  based  on  operating  legal  norms  governing  the  digital  realm.  
We  attend  to  this  digital  realm  and  the  permeable  disciplinary  boundaries  in  the  information  economy  to  the  extent  we  look  at  how  real  and  virtual  libraries  and  information spaces and places are being created as legal  spaces,  where  the  population  adheres  to  national  legal  codes.  In  recognising  ourselves  as  virtual  and  shared  networked  selves,  LIS  education  is  concerned  with  the  interplay  between  bodily  experiences  and  technology.  Even as we teach digital media skills across disciplines,  and inculcate in our students an understanding of how to  use these tools in management, development, searching,  displaying,  and  presenting,  advocacy,  and  community  engagement, we must critically investigate the consequences  of  that  teaching  every  day.  LIS  education  is  answering  the  call  of  Katherine  Hayles,  to  re-examine,  ‘how  we  think.’9  Hayles’s exploration of the proposition that ‘we  think  through,  with,  and  alongside  media,’  is  central  to  LIS education, as we choose which digital tools to teach  in  our  syllabi,  which  search  devices  to  value,  which  presentation  formats  we  suggest  students  master.  With  each  pedagogical  decision  we  make,  we  imbue  the  next  generation  of  information  and  technology  professionals  with ways of thinking across space and time. We create  the  next  generation  of  digital  global  citizens,  with  assumptions  and  expectations  for  how  they  may  know  the  world.  
In this way, LIS education is involved in shaping the  contours of networked, digital, people. Our behaviours, our  codes for engaging in the world, our very understanding  of the limits and possibilities of interacting with ourselves  and  each  other  are  formed  in  part  by  our  co-evolution  with  machines.  Scholars  like  Wendy  Hui  kyong  Chun,  

========3========

KARNO  AND R OTH: LIS EDUCATION IN AN  I NTERDISCIPLINARY  F RAME: INTEGRATING  D IGITAL  M EDIA INTO 
writing  about  the  ways  in  which  ‘technology  which  thrives  on  control  has  been  accepted  as  a  mass  medium  of  freedom’10,  invites  LIS  professionals  to  examine  the  ways in which what we are teaching in the name of ‘free’  searching  not  only  models  but  also  molds  the  ways  we  enter  and  are  inculcated  into  controlling  norms.  
As  LIS  educators,  it  is  incumbent  on  us  to  insist  students critically engage with the formative assumptions  underlying  our  technological  strategies.  We  must  teach  not  only  the  tools,  but  the  critical  awareness  of  the  numerous  modalities  involved  in  being  digital  people.  If,  in  today’s  world,  for  instance,  people  are  concerned  with  the  relationship  between  our  perceived  senses  of  autonomy  and  the  risk  of  compiled  information  about  us  (like  digital  dossiers)  being  shared,  we  need  to  seek  to  understand  cultural  assumptions  of  privacy  across  the  globe.11 
LIS educators are still very much answering the call  of information theorists like Mark Poster, who ten years  ago  wanted  to  inquire  into  the  change  in  the  nature  of  information, the way it mediates relationships and creates  bonds  between  humans  and  machines,  as  well  as  the  political implications that ensue.12  GSLIS at URI explores  this  mediation  by  examining  the  oscillating  relationship  between  theories,  practices,  and  applications  of  library  and  information  studies  born  from  interaction  with  and  impact  across  disciplines.  
LIS education is transforming precisely because it is  allowing itself to adapt to a new time, forging alliances  with  companion  disciplines  and  scholars  that  help  it  to  remain committed to improving its communities. Even if  LIS education may be drawn in two different directions,  the foundational questions we attempt to answer and the  axiomatic principles upon which the discipline has been  founded, ultimately remain the same. The digital age has  given  new  meaning  to  LIS  education.  The  curriculum  has  adapted  because    the  community  obligations  have  changed.  Our  research  is  focused  on  digital  media  because  our  students  and  their  future  patrons  are  living  digital lives and as such, there has never been a greater  need for LIS educators, as they are at the front lines of  advocating  for  literacy,  one  of  the  greatest  equalising  forces  in  history.  
rEFErEncES 
1. iSchools Organization Directory. iSchools.org, 2014.  
http://ischools.org/members/directory. 
2. Mediasmartlibraries.org. 
3. Mandel,  L.  ‘Finding  their Way:  How  public  library  
users  wayfind,’  Lib.  &  Info.  Scie.  Resea. ,  2013,  
(35),  264-71.  
4. Marek, Kate. Using literature to teach in LIS education:  
A very good idea,’ J. of Edu. for Lib. & Info. Scie. ,  
2006, 47(2),  144-59. 
5. Anzaldua, Gloria. Borderlands/La Frontera: The New  
Mestiza,  San  Francisco, Aunt  Lute  Books,1987. 6. Soja, Edward. Thirdspace: Journeys to Los Angeles  
and  Other  Real-and-Imagined  Places.  Blackwell  
Publishers,  1996.  
7. Villa Nicholas, Melissa. Latina/o librarian technological  
engagements: REFORMA in the digital age. Latino  
Studies,   2015,  13(4),  542–60. 
8. Where (or What) Is the Place of Law? An Introduction.  
Sarat, A.,  Douglas,  L.,  Umphrey,  M.    In  The  Place  
of  Law,  edited  by   A.  Sarat,  L.  Douglas,  and  M.  
Umphrey, U, Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 2003, pp.  
1-20. 
9. Hayles, Katherine N. How We Think: Digital Media  
and  Contemporary  Technogenesis.  University  of  
Chicago  Press,  Chicago,  2012. 
10. Hui  Kyong  Chun,  Wendy.  Control  and  Freedom:  
Power  and  Paranoia  in  the  Age  of  Fiber  Optics,  
MIT  Press,  Cambridge,  2006. 
11. Solove, Daniel. The Digital Person: Technology and  
Privacy in the Information Age, New York University  
Press,  New York,  2004. 
12. Poster, Mark. Information Please: Culture and Politics  
in  the  Age  of  Digital  Machines,  Duke  University  
Press,  Durham,  2006. 
contributors 
Dr Valerie Karno  is Associate Professor and Director of the Graduate  School of Library and Information Studies at the University of  Rhode Island. She has received her PhD from the University of  Southern California (with a Certificate in Gender Studies), JD from  the University of California Hastings  where she was Editor-in- Chief of the Hastings International  and  Comparative Law Review. She did her BA from the University of California, Berkeley. She  has  also  won  the  University  Teaching  Excellence Award,  and  specialises in the Interdisciplinary Study of Law, Information, and  Culture. She teaches courses in Information Ethics and Policy,  Digital Humanities, Law and Literature, and Media Studies. She is  currently the Principal Investigator on a Federally funded Institute of  Museum and Library Studies (IMLS) Grant, ‘Media Smart Libraries,’  working  on  integrating  digital  media  into  a  range  of  libraries.  
Dr Adam David roth   received his PhD and MA in Communication  from University of Iowa, where he also earned a graduate certificate  in interdisciplinary inquiry. He completed his bachelor’s degree  in Business administration and communication and rhetoric from  the  University  of  Pittsburgh.  He  is  an  award-winning  teacher,  writer, speaker, and administrator with 16 years of excellence  in higher education, including 10 years as the director of three  high-profile academic programs. Currently, he is serving as the  Interim  Director  of  the  Harrington  School  of  Communication  and  Media  at  the  University  of  Rhode  Island,  which  consists  of  undergraduate  and  graduate  programs  in  Communication  studies,  film/media,  journalism,  public  relations,  writing  &  rhetoric,  and  library  and  information  studies.  
41 

========4========

