DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 2, March 2017, pp. 91-97 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.37.2.10958 
 2017, DESIDOC 
Facilitating E-learning through National Knowledge Network 
Geetha P., Wilson K. Cherukulath and R. Sivakumar  Naval Physical and Oceanographic Laboratory (NPOL), DRDO, Kochi-682 021 
E-mail: geethap64@gmail.com 
AbstrAct 
Learning is very important in the current knowledge based society. The economy of a country depends on the  education level attained by the population of that country. Traditional learning cannot satisfy the various demands  of  the  people.  Due  to  the  rapid  growth  in  Information  and  Communication Technology  (ICT)  more  and  more  innovative methods for accessing and sharing knowledge develop as the days pass. Government is keen on the  integration  of technology  in educational programmes which are cost effective as well as time saving. E-learning or  electronic learning is one such idea  which is gaining  momentum at a very fast pace. The new digital technologies  used in e-learning are capable of meeting the user requirements at a high level. For all these a high bandwidth  Internet connection is required. The National Knowledge Network (NKN) established by the government of India  is mainly for sharing knowledge between research institutions. The e-learning facility has been started in Technical  Information Resource centre (TIRC) of Naval Physical and Oceanographic Laboratory (NPOL) in 2014. This paper  presents  the different  e-learning platforms  which have been used through National Knowledge Network (NKN)  to access e-learning programmes in NPOL. It also points out the increasing user demands for e-learning facility  and the importance of  librarians in the e-learning  environment. 
Keywords:  E-learning,  virtual  class,  national  knowledge  network,  knowledge  sharing,  online  classes,  digital  
technologies, VidyoDesktop, A-VIEW, NPTEL 
1. INtrODUctION 
Education  is  a  life  long  process.  The  tools  and  techniques of education also changed in the new scenario.  digital technologies made it a 24x7 programme. Anybody   from anywhere at any time can access his/her e-learning  course  according  to  his/her  convenience.  The  advent  of  social  networks  helped  people  of  same  interest  to  form  groups and share their knowledge. For all these, a strong  internet  backbone  is  necessary.  National  Knowledge  Network  (NKN)  is  a  high  speed  nationwide  network  by  government  of  india,  with  a  high  bandwidth  of  1gbps  which  can  be  extended  up  to  10  gbps  in  near  future.  Its  implementing  agency  is  National  Informatics  Centre  (NIC).  There  is  provision  in  NKN  to  attend  video conferencing and e-learning  classes  from distant  virtual  class  rooms.  People  are  more  interested  to  do  online  certification/course  for  enhancing  their  skills,  since  these  classes  can  be  attended  at  any  time.  There  a  number  of  reputed  institutes  like  Indian  Institute  of  technology (IIT), Indian Institute of Science (IISC), Indian  Institute  of  Science  Education  and  Research  (IISER)  and  foreign  universities  which  offer  e-learning  courses  to users through all possible means of communication1.  The  e-learning  facility  is  started  in  tirc  of  npol  in  2014  through NKN connection. Managing e-learning facility is  a  new  challenge  for  library  professionals.  They  should  know the infrastructure required to access the facility. in  addition to this, they should know the various e-learning  platforms and their software to access these classes. here  mainly three e-learning platforms have been used. Each  having  its  own  method  to  access.  
2. 
LItErAtUrE rEVIEW 
Teddy kidd 
2 
 in his book, a brief history of e-learning  described the the various stages of evolution of e-learning.  ‘The origins of e-learning as currently practiced in higher  education  stem  from  the  insightful  work  of  Bitzer3   and  Suppes4. Both clearly stated the use of technology within  a  broader  educational  agenda.  It  is  important  to  note  that  there  is  no  single  evolutionary  point  of  which  the  e-learning originated nor is there a single agreed definition  of e-learning. Since the 1960s, e-learning has evolved in  different ways affecting Business, Education, the Training  sector,  and  the  Military  in  different  ways5.  E-learning  means different things in different sectors. In the higher  education  sector,  ‘e-leaning’  refers  to  the  use  of  both  software-based and online learning, whereas in Business,  Higher-Education,  the  Military  and  Training  sectors,  it  refers  solely  to  a  range  of  on-line  practices6. 
Stephen  Downes7   described  the  use  of  Web  2.0  technologies  for  teaching  and  learning  as  ‘e-Learning  2.0’.  Emergence  of  cloud  computing  and  availability  of  new  technologies  such  as  collaborative  intelligent  filtering,  increased  and  reliable  data  storage  capacity,  higher  screen  resolutions,  multi  gesture  devices  and  3D  touch user interface is leading us into the next generation  of e-Learning. One of the big things of third generation  of  e-Learning  will  be  the  ubiquitous  access  to  learning  resources  with  the  use  of  mobile  devices  to  virtually  access  anything,  anytime  and  anywhere.  Web  1.0  is  the  read  only  web  and  Web  2.0  is  the  read/write  web,  then  Web 3.0 is the read/write/collaborate web. It is believed  
Received 24 December 2016, revised 2 January 2017, online published 24 March 2017 

========1========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  2, MARCH   2017 
that Web 1.0 is about providing information, Web 2.0 is  about overload of information and the Web 3.0 is about  control  of  information  as  studied  by  Hussain8. 
E-learning initiatives by University Grants Commission  (UGC)  and  Ministry  of  Human  Resource  Development  (MHRD)  have  been  started  after  the  formation  of  the  National  Task  Force  on  Information  Technology  and  Software  Development  in  1998.  Mishra9   suggests  the  establishment of a statutory body for e-learning. He also  recommended to  include the development of a learning  objects  repository,  a  consortia  approach  to  e-learning  programmes,  and  training  of  teachers10. 
3.  ObJEctIVEs 
The  objectives  of  the  study  are  to: 
i. Facilitate  access  to  e-learning  programmes 
ii. Analyse  the  user  demands 
iii. Find  out  the  new  responsibilities  emerged  by  the  
new  service 
4.  MEtHODOLOGY 
(a) Awareness about the latest Information Communication  
Technology (ICT ) trends helped to start the e-learning  
facility  in  TIRC  of  NPOL.  Access  to  e-learning  
programmes  have  been  made  available  as  per  the  
instructions  of  NIC,  QEEE  and  NPTEL  e-learning  
programme  team  
(b) Based on the user data in the login register, demand  
for  e-learning  facility  analysed 
(c) Discussion  with  the  users  help  to  add  more  digital  
collection  to  the  existing  digital  repository. 
5. WHAt   I s   E-LEA rNING 
There  are  different  terminologies  for  e-learning,  such as ‘online learning’, ‘internet learning’, ‘distributed  learning’,  ‘networked  learning’,‘tele-learning’,‘virtual  learning’, ‘computer-assisted learning’,‘web-based learning’,  and  ‘distance  learning’.  In  all  these  cases,  the  teacher  and  the  student  is  sitting  in  separate  places10. 
E-learning  can  occur in  two  ways, such as  real- time  learning  (synchronous)  or  from  recorded  classes  (asynchronous). For all  these a  high bandwidth  connection   is  required for the  streaming  of the videos. Realising  this,  Government of India has set up the National  Knowledge   Network,  connecting  educational  as  well  as  research  institutes  to  enhance  knowledge  sharing10. 
Digital  technology  has  a  great  impact  on  learning  system. Digital technologies are electronic  tools, systems,  devices  and  resources  that  generate,  store  or  process  data.  These  includes  social  media,  online  games  and  applications, multimedia, cloud computing, interoperable  systems  and  mobile  devices11. 
Social  media  such  as  Facebook,  Twitter,  LinkedIn,  YouTube, Google Plus, Blog, RSS, etc., act as a platform  to share knowledge. Online games are useful not only to  
92 
pre-school  children  but  also  to  adults  for  strengthening  their memory. Wide range of multimedia tools helpto make  the  student  participation  more  active.  Cloud  computing   acts  as  a  reservoir  of  information  by  storing  the  files  of  data  and  application  of  e-learning  course  and  offers  24x7  access.  To  integrate  multiple  tools  from  different  vendors,  interoperable  systems  are  required.  Mobile  devices can deliver course content across many platforms.   The emergence of virtual classrooms revolutionised  the  classroom  facilities of e-learning. It offers the real-time  interactive  classroom  facility12.  
A  virtual  classroom  is  an  online  classroom  where  participants  can  attend  the  class  in  real  time.  They  can  view  and  share  their  resources.  Usually  there  will  be  a  username  and  password  for  each  student  to  login  to  the  portal  of  the  service  provider  to  access  the  virtual  class13. 
5.1 Advantages  of  E-Learning 
The  advantages  of  e-learning  are  as  follows: (a) No  geographical  boundary  for  e-learning.  Students   
can  attend  any  course  from  anywhere 
(b) Each student can study according to his/her convenience.  
Hence,  it  is  self-paced 
(c) Classes can be  managed easily since digital technologies  
are  involved  in  e-learning 
(d) Interactive  tools  like  whiteboard  are  available  for  
teaching  which  makes  students  more  active (e) Students  can  ask  questions  in  a  variety  of  
methods 
(f) Synchronous  learning  or  real-time  learning  is  
possible 
(g) Instant  messaging  is  possible  here.  It  helps  to  
communicate  with  others  without  disturbing  the  
class. 
(h) Live  audio-video  support  is  also  available  which   
enhance  the  quality  of  e-learning 
(i) Sharing  of  learning  resources  is  possible  here  due  
to  the  digital  technologies 
(j) Feedback  Mechanism  is  faster  and  teacher    can  
assess  each  student    and  pay  more  attention (k) Technical    skill  can  be  enhanced  by  the  learning  
community 
5.2 Disadvantages  of  E-Learning 
The  disadvantages  of  e-learning  are  as  follows: (a) No  physical  contact.  Hence,  participant  feel  
isolated 
(b) Lack  of  knowledge  of  proper  digital  technology  to  
access  classes 
(c) Bandwidth  is  not  sufficient    to  access  real-time  
classes 

========2========

GEETHA, WILSON  & S IVAKUMAR: FACILITATING E-LEARNING THROUGH  N ATIONAL  K NOWLEDGE  N ETWORK 
(d) Lack  of  self-motivation  causes  the  failure  of  some  
students14. 
6. INFrAstrUctUrE  FOr  A ccEssING  
VIrtUAL cLAss rOOMs  A t   NPOL 
NKN  connection  in  NPOL  was  established  in  2012  and  in  TIRC  it  was  established  in  2013.  Power  Grid  Corporation of India Ltd. (PGCIL) is the service provider  for  NPOL.  Power  Grid  has  been  entrusted  to  use  its  robust  and  widespread  infrastructure  to  provide  high  speed  connectivity  through  fiber  optic  network.  The  Fiber  optic  cable  is  routed  through  outdoor  fiberoptic  terminal  box  and  then  to  the  fiberoptic  ethernet  switch  and  router.  Then  it  is  connected  to  the  firewall  and  from  there  it  is  connected  to  a  switch  and  distributed  to  Transducer  group,  Information  Technology  group,  Ocean Data Centre, Young Scientist Centre and Technical  Information Resource Centre (TIRC). The connection is  again  distributed  within the divisions. Bandwidth usage  policies have been set up in the firewall so as to get the  maximum  utility  of  the  service.  The  NKN  connection  drawn  is  distributed  in  TIRC  through  a  28-port  switch.  The bandwidth available for the connection is 100Mbps.  This  can  be  upgraded  according  to  the  requirements15 (Fig.1). 
6.1 Hardware  and software requirements  For  
Accessing Virtual classes 
For  Desktop  videoconference/virtual  class  rooms,  the  devices  required  are  as  follows:  
(a) PC with Windows XP or above or Linux with video  
conferencing  software 
(b) Webcam 
(c) Microphone 
(d) Speakers 
Some  of  the  Video  conferencing  softwares  are  VidyoDesktop, Aview,  TeamViewer, AnyMeeting, WebEx  Meetings  Basic, Google+  Hangout, Skype Free, Mikogo  Free,  GoToMeeting  Free,  join.me,  MeetingBurner,  etc.  
Figure 1. NKN Infrastructure @ NPOL. 
Accessing  virtual  class  rooms  using  VidyoDesktop  has been started in TIRC in 2014. The main subjects of  NPOL  are  Digital  Signal  Processing,  Signal  processing  Algorithms, Transducers, Oceanography,  Material science, etc.  There are a number  of online e-learning platforms such  as  Moodle  (modular  object-oriented  dynamic  learning  environment),  Claroline,  Udemy,  RCampus,  Learnopia,  P2PU  (Peer  2  Peer  University),  etc. 
National  Informatics  Centre  (NIC)  have  offered  the  videoconferencing  facility  and    virtual  class  room  facility  for  the  researchers.  In  addition  to  this,  TIRC  has  facilitated  the  access  of  Amrita  Virtual  Interactive  e-Learning  World  (A-VIEW)  and  National  Programme  on  Technology  Enhanced  Learning  (NPTEL)  through  national  knowledge  network  (Fig.  2). 
Figure 2. Virtual class room @ tIrc. 
7. VIrtUAL cLAssEs   OFFE rED tHrOUGH  
tHE  DIGItAL  NEtWOrK  OF  NIc 
Virtual Classroom (Fig. 3) is a wonderful  application  of e-learning  using digital network of national informatics  centre, ministry of communication & IT, Govt. of India.  It supports educational institution in better mentoring for  the remote learning. The infrastructure facilitates quality  Education and Research at national level interconnecting  premier  institutions  and  removed  the  barriers  of  state  and district boundaries. The faculty can do an interactive  lecture.  Students  can  attend  live  classes  from  remote  sites1.  
Figure 3. Virtual class time table from NIc. 
93 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  2, MARCH   2017 
The  schedule  of  classes  are  displayed  in  the  NIC  portal (Fig. 4). In addition to this the new announcements  related to seminars, workshops, etc., are also displayed.  Interested  students  can  contact  the  nodal  person  of  the  courses  or  seminars.  With  the  help  of  NIC  person,  
Figure 4. Virtual class from NIc. 
The  interactive  virtual  classes  by  the  IIT  faculty  have  been  established  in  2015  through  NKN  using  AView  software.  Quality  Enhancement  in  Engineering  Education (QEEE): (sponsored by MHRD, Govt. of India  through  IIT  Madras)  is  a    direct    to  student    interactive   program16. 
The topics selected  are  Designing  with  Combinational   modules  & Iterative Circuits, Maxwell’s Equations, Computer  Organisation  &  Architecture,  Digital  Communication  Systems, Stress and Strain Tensors, Diffusion in Materials,  Basic Construction Planning Techniques, Circuit Analysis  Techniques, Convective Heat Transfer, Wireless Medium  Access,  Shear  strength  of  sands  and  clays,  Computer  Networks,  Analysis  by  Slope-Deflection  Method,  MOS  Transistor, Skin Effect in Wires & Cables,  Pure  Substances,   Design  of  Shallow  Foundations,  Frequency  domain   analysis,  Integral  Flow  Analysis,  Fourier  Transforms,   High  performance  communication  networks  and  ARM  Architecture. 
The time-table is displayed in TIRC portal to inform  the  users.  Many  researchers  attended  the  course.  They  could  raise  their  question  by  typing  in  the  chat  box  or  raising their hand. QEEE courses has been accessed  using  Amrita  Virtual  Interactive  e-Learning  World  (A-VIEW)  software. 
Figure  7  shows  the  login  screen  of  A-View  class  room.  When  the  classes  are  going  to  start,  the  Start  button  (Fig.  8)  will  be  highlighted.  We  can  adjust  the  
Figure 5. Vidyodesktop login. 
Figure 7. A-VIEW  login. 
Figure 6. Vidyodesktop. 
students  can  connect  to  the  classes.  Here  in  NPOL,  the  classes have been accessed usingVidyoDesktop Software.  Some  of  the  screenshots  of  VidyoDesktop  are  given  (Fig.  5  &  6). 
8. 
VIrtUAL  cLAssEs     OFFE rED  bY  QUALItY  ENHANcEMENt   IN  ENGINEE rING  EDUcAtION  (QEEE) 
Figure 8. Virtual class from QEEE. 
94 

========4========

GEETHA, WILSON  & S IVAKUMAR: FACILITATING E-LEARNING THROUGH  N ATIONAL  K NOWLEDGE  N ETWORK 
Figure 9. Virtual class from QEEE. 
settings like, video, sound, etc. After login to the class,  our  login  name  will  be  displayed  in  top  right  corner  (Fig. 9). Students have to submit assignments within time.  Most of the classes were meant for B.Tech students. For  accessing the classes, user has to install A-View software.  Prior  permission  is  required  to  access  the  classes.  
A-VIEW  is  an    award    winning  indigenously  built   multi-modal, multimedia e-learning platform  that provides  an  immersive  e-learning  experience  that  is  almost  as  good  as  a  real  classroom  experience  developed  by  Amrita  e-Learning  Research  Lab.  It  is  a  part  of Amrita  Vishwa  Vidhyapeetham,  one  of  the  fastest  growing  institutions  of  higher  learning  in  India.  It  addresses  the  most  pressing  issue  of  higher  education  in  India-the  shortage of highly qualified teachers. A-VIEW is part of  Talk to a Teacher  program  coordinated by IIT Bombay  and  is  funded  by  the  Ministry  of  Human  Resource  Development  (MHRD)  under  the  Indian  Government’s  National  Mission  for  Education  using  Information  and  Communication  Technology  (NME-ICT)  along  with  various  other  projects  in  Virtual  Labs,  Haptics  and  Natural Language Processing. A-VIEW is now deployed  at  several  IITs,  NITs  and  other  leading  educational  institutions  across  the  nation16. 
9. VIrtUAL cLAssEs   OFFE rED  
bY  NAtIONAL  PrOGrAMME  ON  
tEcHNOLOGY  ENHANcED  LEArNING 
‘NPTEL is an acronym  for National Programme on  Technology Enhanced Learning which is an initiative by  seven Indian Institutes of Technology (IIT Bombay, Delhi,  Guwahati, Kanpur, Kharagpur, Madras and Roorkee)  and  Indian  Institute  of  Science  (IISc)  for  creating  course   contents in engineering  and science. NPTEL as a project   originated  from many deliberations between IITs, Indian   Institutes  of  Management  (IIMs)  and  Carnegie  Mellon   University (CMU) during the  years 1999-2003. A proposal   was  jointly  put  forward    by  five  IITs  (Bombay,  Delhi,  Kanpur,  Kharagpur  and  Madras)  and  IISc  for  creating   contents for 100 courses as web based  supplements  and  100 complete video courses, for forty hours of duration   per course in Fig. 10. Web supplements were expected to  cover materials that could be delivered  in approximately   forty hours. Five engineering branches (Civil, Computer  
Science,  Electrical,  Electronics  &  Communication  and  Mechanical)  and  core  science  programmes  that  all  engineering  students  are  required  to  take  in  their  undergraduate  engineering  programme  in  India  were chosen initially. Contents for the above courses were  based  on the model  curriculum suggested  by All  India   Council for Technical Education  (AICTE) and the syllabi  of major affiliating Universities in India’17. NPTEL uses  google account for user authentication (Fig. 11). It uses  
Figure 10. NPTEL online certifcation course-web site. 
Figure 11. NPtEL–User authentication. 
Google  Hangouts  as  communication  platform.  Google  Hangouts  is  developed  by  Google  which  lets  instant  messaging,  video  chat,  SMS  and  VOIP  features.  
9.1 course categories 
Biological  Sciences  and  Bioengineering,  Civil  and  Aerospace Engineering, Computer  Science & Engineering,  Electrical,  Electronics  &  Communications  Engineering,  Humanities  &  Social  Sciences,  Management  Studies,  Mathematics &  Basic Sciences, Mechanical, Chemical &  Metallurgical Engineering, Multidisciplinary  courses. The  courses will  be displayed  in the NPTEL site (Fig. 10) so  that students can join in time.  There  are 10hrs, 20hrs and  30hrs, 40hrs courses. TIRC has displayed NPTEL course  announcement  in  its  Portal  and  researchers  have  started  enrolling  the  course  of  their  interest. Time  schedule  for  classes  have  been  informed  through  e-mail.  Screenshot  of NPTEL class is shown in Fig. 12. There will be time  period  within  which  students  have  to  post  questions  on  classes.  There  is  a  discussion  group  where  student  can   
95 

========5========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  2, MARCH   2017 
Figure 12. Virtual class from NPtEL. 
topic  according  to  their  interest  from  desired  e-learning  platform.  In  the  e-learning  context,  the  users  require  more  digital  resources  and  the  suitable  technology  to  access  these  resources.  The  digital  library  can  play  a  pivotal  role  in  an  e-learning  environment. 
A  library  website  can  function  as  an  information  gateway  to  its  digital  resources.  It  should  include  the  subject  gateway  to  the  topics  of  the  online  courses  materials interested to its users. It can add the purchased  or  subscribed  databases,  e-books,  e-journals  relevant  to  the  course18.  This  will  help  the  learner  to  access  the  documents  of  his/her  topic  very  fast.  At  each  phase   namely  extending NKN connection to TIRC, purchasing  required hardware, software, identifying digital documents,  digital collection development, etc., library professional  should have thorough knowledge on latest technologies.  The  workplace  learning19,  attending  courses,  hands  on  training  helped  very  much  to  keep  in  tune  with  the  rapid changes in ICT and in turn implementing the new  service  in  NPOL  library. 
AcKNOWLEDGEMENts 
The authors express their deep gratitude to Director,  NPOL  for  motivating  to  work  in  this  area  and  for  permission  to  publish  this  paper. 
Figure 13. chart showing the e-learning classes accessed 
              during 2014 to 2016. 
share  his/her  opinions,  doubts,  etc.  Assignment  will   be  there    after  each  lecture.  Assignment  marks  will  be  informed  in  time.  Students  can  choose  nearby  centres  for  online  examination. 
10.  FINDING s 
A  chart  has  been  prepared  based  on  the  user  login  details entered in the register kept for accessing e-learning  classes from 2014 to 2016. The following chart (Fig. 13)  shows the ascending nature of the user demand for e-learning  in  each  year.  The  increase  of  accessing  e-learning  sites  are  due  to  two  major  factors: 
(a) Awareness  of  the  e-learning  facility 
(b)  Availability  of  advanced  tools  and  techniques  to  
access  the  facility  
It  is  observed  that,  in  NPOL,  NPTEL  is  the  most  accessed platform for e-learning. Since the digital classes  offered  by  QEEE  and  NIC  are  available  only  in  a  fixed  time,  employees  in  NPOL  are  unable  to  attend  the  classes  regularly. 
11.   c ONcLUsIONs 
It is found that the demand for e-learning is increasing  in each year. Researchers find e-learning more convenient.  It  saves  time,  money  and  manpower.  They  can  access  the  classes  whenever  they  want.  They  can  choose  the  
rEFErENcEs 
1. http://www.nic.in/services/NKN%20%28National%20 
Knowledge%20Network%29 (accessed on 4 September  
2016). 
2. Kidd, Teddy. A brief history of e-learning. In   Online  
education  and  adult  learning:  New  frontiers  for  
teaching  practices  by  Teddy  Kidd.  Info.  Sci.  Ref. ,  
2010,  46-53. 
3. Blitzer,  D.L.;  Lichtenberger, W.  &  Braunfield,  P.G.  
PLATO  II:  A  multiple-student  computer-controlled  
automatic teaching device. In  Programmed learning and  
computer-based instruction, edited by J.E. Coulson,  
John  Wiley,  New  York,  1962,  205-16.  
4. Suppes  P.  Modern  learning  theory  and  elementary- 
school curriculum. American Edu. Res. J. , 1964, 1,  
79-93.  
5. Fletcher,  J.D.  &  Rockway,  M.R.  Computer-based  
training  in  the  military.  In   Military  contributions  
to  instructional  technology.  edited  by  J.A.  Ellis,   
Praeger,  New York,  1986,  177-222. 
6. Campbell L. What does the “e” stand for?   Department  
of Science and Mathematics Education, The University  
of  Melbourne,  Melbourne, Australia,  2004. 
7.   Downes,  S.  e-learning  2.0.  eLearn  Mag. ,  2005,  
10/17/05.  http://www.elearnmag.org/subpage.cfm?s 
ection=articles&article=29-1.      
8. Hussain, Fehmida. E-LEARNING 3.0 = E-Learning  
2.0 + WEB 3.0? In  IADIS International Conference  
on  Cognition  and  Exploratory  Learning  in  Digital  
Age,  CELDA  2012,  pp  11-18.  
96 

========6========

GEETHA, WILSON  & S IVAKUMAR: FACILITATING E-LEARNING THROUGH  N ATIONAL  K NOWLEDGE  N ETWORK 
9. Mishra, S. E-learning in India. Inter. J. E-Learning ,  
2009, 8(4),  549-60.    
10. Vassilakaki, Evgenia and Moniarou-Papaconstantinou,  
Valentini.  A  systematic  literature  review  informing  
19. Mohammed Irfan P.P.; Mohamed Haneefa K.  & Shyni  
K.G. Workplace learning among library professionals  
of  university  libraries  in  Kerala:   DESIDOC  J.  Lib.  
Info.  Tech.,  2015, 35(5),  376-81. 
New  Lib.  World, 116,  37-66. 
11. Sharifabadi, Saeed Rezaei. How digital libraries can  
support e-learning. Electronic Library, 24(3), 2006,   
389-401. 
12. http://www.education.vic.gov.au/school/teachers/ 
support/Pages/elearningcurriculum.aspx  (accessed  
on  3  October  2016). 
13. https://elearningindustry.com/ (accessed on 3 October  
2016). 
14. Singh, Akash Kumar. Smart classes and libraries in  
E-learning  environment.  Inter.  J.  Lib.  Sci.,  2016,  
14(3),  74-81. 
15. Geetha, P.;  et al. Seamless integration  of knowledge  
through NKN. In  Bilingual international conference  
on  information  technology:  Yesterday,  today  and  
tomorrow,  19-21  February  2015,  DESIDOC,  Delhi,  
pp.190-95. 
16. http://aview.in/  (accessed  on  3  September  2016). 17. http://www.nptel.ac.in  (accessed  on  3  September  
2016). 
18. Tripathi,  Manorama  &  Jeevan,  V.K.J.  E-learning  
library  and  information  science:  A  pragmatic  view  
for India.  DESIDOC J. Lib. Info. Tech. , 2010, 30(5),   
83-90. 
library and information professionals’ emerging roles,   
contributors 
smt  P.  Geetha   received  MSc  (Botany),  B.Ed,  BLISc  from  University of Calicut and MLISc from IGNOU, New Delhi and  PGDLAN from Annamalai University. She did her NPTEL online  Certification  Course  (Introduction  to  Research)  in  2016  using  the virtual class facility provided at TIRC, NPOL. She started  her  career  at  Cochin  University  of  Science  and  Technology  1989  and  then  joined  in  Naval  Physical  and  Oceanographic  Laboratory  (DRDO),  Kochi  in  the  same  year. At  present  she  is working as Scientist `D` at Technical Information Resource  Centre  of  NPOL.  She  is  in-charge  of  National  Knowledge  Network  (NKN)  activities  at  TIRC.  She  is  a  life  member  of  Kerala Library Association (KLA), Indian Association of Special  Libraries  and  Information  Centers  (IASLIC)  and  Society  for  the Advancement of Library & Information Science (SALIS).  
Mr Wilson K.  Cherukulath received MSc in Applied Physics  and BLISc. He obtained MLISc degree in 1997 from IGNOU  and  MBA  from  Mahatma  Gandhi  University  in  2012.  His  professional  career  started  at  Physical  Research  Laboratory,  Ahmedabad in 1990. He also worked at Railway Staff College   and Indian Institute of Geomagnetism, Mumbai before joining  the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO)  at  the  Defence  Institute  of  Advanced  Technology  (Deemed  University), Pune as Scientist. Presently, he is the Head of the  Technical Information Resource Center (TIRC) of NPOL, Kochi.  He is a life member of Luminescence Society of India (LSI),  IASLIC,  SALIS  and  Indian  Library Association  (ILA).  
97 

========7========

