DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 3, May 2017, pp. 205-212 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.37.3.10961 
 2017, DESIDOC 
Evaluation of E-Learning Web-Portals 
Sheikh Mohd Imran* and Basharat Ahmad Malik** *Allama Iqbal Library, University of Kashmir, Hazratbal, Srinagar, J&K-190 006 
E-mail: smimran@kashmiruniversity.ac.in 
**Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, UP, India-202 002 
E-mail: basharatmalik123@gmail.com 
AbstrAct 
Provides a comparative evaluation of the websites/web portals of four universities namely Amity University,  Mumbai  University,  Delhi  University  &  Don  Bosco  University.  In  this  study,  the  researchers  have  drafted  32  evaluation criteria out of the select criteria that have been developed and designed by some top Universities of  the world. It is an amalgamation of various excellent evaluation criteria from the select Universities mentioned in  this research article. The study revealed that private universities are far ahead in providing learning through online  mode than Central Universities as the private universities mainly focus on learning and training of students only  
due to the stiff competition among the peers. 
Keywords: Web portals, e-learning, virtual learning environment, open and distance learning 
1.  IntroductIon 
Portals are the sites that act as an entrance to other  sites  on  the  internet;  it  brings  information  from  various  sources in coherent, united and logical way. Users obtain  information  on  education,  news,  weather  or  stock  by  beginning  their  sessions  on  portals.  Portals  are  some  of  the most visited sites on the internet. They also provide  standard-based means to aggregate information for campus  developers and information providers to offer applications  and  information  to  end  users  via  an  array  of  platforms  including mobile. In order to know more about the users  for  improving  software  design,  service  offerings,  etc.,  portals  generate  repeated  use  of  their  services.  It  is  a  common goal for portals to develop a loyal user base that  visits  the  site  frequently  and  spend  sufficient  time  per  visit1.  Portals  may  be  of  many  types,  depending  on  the  subject area, industry, market or trend2. Here the focus is  on  one  of  the  most  important  and  significant  portals  in  perspective  of  education  and  that  is  e-learning  portal.  
An  e-learning  portal  is  a  website  that  offers  users  and organisations a consolidated access to a wide range  of learning and training resources from multiple sources.  A  learning  portal  more  than  just  a  web  site  containing  links  to  online  courses,  upcoming  classes,  job  aids,  and  links  to  web  sites,  programs,  etc.  It  may  also  include  a  rating system, search functionality, bookmarking ability,  and  more3.  E-learning  portals  provide  access  to  a  wide  range  of  learning  material  from  various  sources.  It  serves  as  a  main  entrance  point  to  avail  an  extensive  range of services offered by an organisation in a specific  field  of  interest.  Learning  portals  offer  services  such  as  search  engine,  e-mail,  links  to  other  related  sites  and  personalised  content,  etc.  With  these  services  they  also  
Received 07 December 2016, online published 09 May 2017 
provide facilities such as members list, free downloads,  chat, etc. Learning portals offer e-learning courses where  one  can  find  information  related  to  the  courses  offered,  mode  of  teaching  and  learning,  duration  of  the  course,  fee structure and certification. Such information remains  specific to the related websites only. E-learning portals list  e-learning courses offered by the providers. Learners can  search, according to their interests, the course they want  to join and the best learning providers available through  the  portal.  E-learning  portals  have  their  own  benefits  and  weaknesses.  Sometimes  the  information  related  to  the  provider  is  much  more  elaborative  and  in  case  of  a  particular  service  provider,  we  may  not  get  information  about  other  providers. Also  the  information  may  not  be  found  in  detail,  but  from  a  wide  range  of  options,  we  can  compare  and  go  for  the  best.  Learning  portals  are  easily  accessible  from  any  part  of  the  world  provided  we  have  an  internet  connection  and  are  flexible  enough  to  be  accessed  at  our  own  schedule  round  the  clock. 
2.    s tAtEmEnt  of  ProbLEm 
There is a lack of full-fledged e-learning web based  portals in Indian Universities. Here is the need to evaluate  some  of  the  select  well  known  e-learning  portals  of  universities, which provides free access to professionals,  teachers  and  students. 
It will also make the student and research community  aware  about  e-learning  portals  in  higher  education  and  what  changes  are  to  be  brought  to  take  such  initiatives  to make valuable sources easily available. This evaluation  helps  to  bring  what  shortcomings  that  are  there  in  the  select  e-learning  portals  and  what  should  be  done  to  overcome  the  same  in  future.  

========1========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  3, MAy  2017 
3.    o bjEctIvEs 
The  aim  of  the  study  undertaken  is  to  look  at  the  already designed e-learning web based portals and services  they  offer,  their  flaws  and  drawbacks,  efficiency  of  the  system,  platform  of  design  and  development  and  the  policies  they  follow.  
The  study  under  purview  is  formulated  and  carried  out  on  the  following  laid  down  objectives: 
(a) Evaluate  the  select  e-learning  web  based  portals  of  
select  universities  so  as  to  ascertain  various  pros  
and  cons  in  their  design  and  development (b) Find out the technological infrastructure used in the  
existing  e-learning  web  based  portals 
(c) Understand the shortcomings in the designed e-learning  
web  based  portals  of  the  select  universities  that  
already  exist  from  various  subject  fields (d) Provide  necessary  suggestions  to  facilitate,  extend  
and  improve  the  quality  of  online  education. 
4.    s coPE And LImItAtIons 
The investigators firstly chose the oldest top ranking  twenty universities in India, having adequate infrastructure  to support e-learning system and substantial faculty, which  are offering education in the field of knowledge; among  those twenty universities the investigators selected eight  universities  which  provide  e-learning  in  various  subject  fields  in  India.  The  universities  have  been  selected  on  the basis of online delivery of learning and these are the  only  universities  that  apply  most  of  the  online  learning  objects and online methods of delivery of education and  learning.  These  are  the  top  universities  which  provide  full fledged e-learning courses in Library and Information  Science  and  Management  fields. 
The  list  is  as  follows:  
(a) Amity  University 
(b) University  of  Delhi 
(c) Don  Bosco  University 
(d) Indira  Gandhi  National  Open  University (e) Kashmir  University 
(f) Mumbai  University 
(g) Symbiosis  International  University 
(h) The  Global  Open  University 
Among  these  only  4  were  choosed  for  study: (a) Amity  University 
(b) Mumbai  University 
(c) University  of  Delhi 
(d) Don  Bosco  University 
5.  LItErAturE   r EvIEW 
In  present  days,  our  societies  are  slowly  becoming  knowledge-centric  and  pushing  people  to  learn  more  
206 
things  in  order  for  their  day-to-day  survival4.  In  line  with  the  societies’  trend,  majority  of  the  organisations  are  completely  becoming  knowledge  driven  and  hence,  knowledge solutions must be crisp, quick and should be  available readily at a handy distance. E-learning portals  play  an  important  role  in  providing  such  solutions.  In  perspective  of  education  e-learning  has  ability  to  allow  the  students  to  control  the  learning  process  by  offering  them  an  immediate,  action  oriented,  practical  learning  experience5. The author feels it for sure that conventional  learning  will  be  replaced  by  e-learning  in  the  forcible  future. With web based learning, communication among  learners  from  remote  places  are  enhanced,  knowledge  being  acquired  and  transferred  among  the  learners,  the  ability  to  conduct  an  open  discussion  is  enhanced  and  students  can  learn  according  to  their  own  schedule. All  these facilities create the creative abilities that cannot be  seen  in  conventional  learning. According  to  author,  the  most important for the learning process, besides the above  said  points,  is  the  flexibility  and  it  can  be  best  seen  in  e-learning6.  E-learning  attempts  to  automate  education,  replace a paid instructor, and develop self-paced learning,  but for this purpose, an efficient management support and  IT  platform  is  needed.  Key  to  success  is  the  ability  to  reduce the cycle time for learning and to adapt ‘content  size  and  style’  of  learning  to  the  respective  user  and  their learning environment. E-learning is ideal for global  corporations  with  people  in  multiple  time  zones;  there  is  no  need  to  coordinate  travel  and  delivery  schedules.  According  to  the  author,  Internet-based  training  can  reduce  costs,  with  housing  and  travel  costs  accounting  for  the  majority  of  the  savings. 
In search of better, more cost effective ways to deliver  instruction  and  training,  universities  and  corporations  have expanded their use of e-learning7. Estimates suggest  that  the  amount  of  money  U.S.  companies  spent  on  the  IT-based  delivery  of  training  grew  from  $3  billion  in  1999  to  $11  billion  in  2003.  In  addition,  the  worldwide  market  for  e-learning  was  projected  to  be  more  than  $18 billion by the end of 2005 with some  organisations  projecting  that  over  half  of  their  training  and  education  will be delivered electronically over the next five years.  This suggests the role and greater potential of e-learning  in  the  promotion  and  enhancement  of  learning. 
Rising costs, shrinking budgets, and an increasing need  for distance education are causing educational institutions  to  re-examine  the  way  that  education  is  delivered.  In  response  to  this  changing  environment,  e-learning  is  being  implemented  more  and  more  frequently  in  higher  education,  creating  new  and  exciting  opportunities  for  both educational institutions and students8. Globally, the  demand  for  post  secondary  education  is  increasing  and  these  reasons  have  favoured  the  growth  of  the  higher  education  e-learning  industry. With  the  limited  capacity  of  existing  classrooms  at  academic  institutions  and  the  prohibitive  cost  of  building  new  facilities,  e-learning  is  an  attractive  alternative. 

========2========

IMRAN & MALIK: EVALUATION OF E-LEARNING WEB-PORTALS 
The  complexion  of  higher  education  sector  has  undergone  a  sea  change  in  the  last  two  decades.  Internationally,  a  majority  of  the  institutions  offering  higher education is making strenuous efforts to revise its  academic orientations and the course delivery strategies  in the light of the interplay of these global changes and  emerging  challenges.  With  the  advent  of  the  Internet  technology,  integration  of  the  Information  technology  (IT)  tools  into  higher  education  stream  has  become  an  easy  task9.  In  this  context,  online  learning  mode  has  emerged  as  a  major  higher  education  option  before  the  global student community and as a consequence, virtual  universities  are  built  directly  on  the  computer  networks  to  offer  online  education. 
Further highlighting the impact of e-learning, Tutunea,  Rus  &  Toader10   says  that  e-learning  has  developed  as  an  alternative  to  traditional  education  because  the  globalisation of the online environmental communication  has influenced all sectors of human activity and education  as  a  personal  and  professional  training  has  undergone  the  same  trends. 
In  2001,  North  Umbria  University  rolled  out  an  institution  wide  adoption  of  the  Blackboard  Virtual  Learning  Environment  (VLE)  and  within  few  years,  there  was  over  90%  take  up  by  academic  staff  with  32000+  students  attached  to  live  sites  and  now  this  e-learning platform (eLP) has became the integral part to  e-learning of virtually all their students11. The university  had recognised that e-learning is not simply making use  of  a VLE  but  covers  a  broader  spectrum  of  information  and  communication  technologies  (ICT). 
The  success  of  the  e-learning  is  better  analysed  by  the stakeholder matrix in which the responsibility for the  success of e-learning is dependent on various stakeholders’  viz.  students,  instructors,  content  providers,  technology  providers,  employers  and  accreditation  bodies12.  Each  stakeholder  group  has  an  important  role  towards  the  common goal of enhancing the overall learning experience.  Students  and  Instructors  should  provide  feedback  to  improve future experiences, and communicate the learning  possibilities  that  e-learning  creates.  Institutions  should  provide the technical infrastructure and support while as  Content  and  Technology  Providers  should  provide  high  quality,  interoperable  solutions  that  consider  learning  principles.  
Education has become a commodity in which people  seek  to  invest  for  their  own  personal  gain,  to  ensure  equality  of  opportunity  and  as  a  route  to  a  better  life.  As  a  result,  providers  of  Higher  Education  are  finding  themselves competing more than ever for students, funding,  research, and recognition within the wider society. During  the  last  decade  and  through  the  development  of  virtual  education  i.e.  distance  methods  of  delivery  and  new  communication  methods,  higher  education  has  become  internationalised; providers are able to export themselves  and  as  a  result  competition  has  been  extended  beyond  national  boundaries.  Following  this  extension,  various  
opines  of  authors  have  been  listed  as  under: 
Institutions  of  higher  education  are  increasingly  embracing  online  education  and  the  number  of  students  enrolled  in  distance  programs  are  on  the  rapid  rise13.  The higher education survey by the author indicated that  there will be enormous growth in  online certification and  recertification programs, associate and master’s degrees,  and  blended  learning.  It  further  revealed  an  interest  in  wireless  technologies,  simulations,  digital  libraries  and  reusable content objects among the students, scholars and  professors. According to author, the explosion in online  learning  will  bring  increased  attention  to  workshops,  courses  and  degree  programs  in  how  to  moderate  or  mentor  within  online  learning.  The  study  provided  a  glimpse  of  the  pedagogical  as  well  as  technological  possibilities. 
Due to the vast cultural and social diversity in India,  it is difficult to change the social background of students,  parents  and  their  economical  conditions.  Government  is  providing  elementary  and  primary  education  at  no  or  negligible  cost.  There  are  enough  schools,  teachers  and  facilities  for  students  and  teachers,  but  still  there  is  a  great  variation  in  the  quality  of  education  due  to  the  social background of students, parents, different standards  of  teaching  and  teachers  training  programs14.  Therefore  in  the  author’s  point  of  view,  the  only  options  left  for  India  is  to  provide  uniform  or  standardise  teaching,  for  high  quality  education  throughout  India  there  must  be  some nationwide network, which provides equal quality  education to all students, including the students from the  rural  areas  and  villages.  The  solution  to  this  is  Web- Based  Learning  resources  or  methods. 
The  number  of  new Virtual  Learning  Environments  (VLEs)  is  increasing  and  they  have  been  advertised  as  being  a  solution  for  remote  and  cross-border  education.  This  is  extremely  important  when  the  tasks  cannot  be  practiced in real life15. The authors found VLEs feasible  for  higher  education.  A  good  feature  of  VLEs  is  that  students  can  themselves  control  the  speed  of  studying.  The  VLE  students  appreciated  this  feature.  However,  authors  suggest  that  VLEs  must  be  used  with  caution.  VLEs  must  add  something  special  to  the  course  or  the  subject.  In  order  to  get  good  learning  results  with  a  VLE,  they  need  to  be  designed  well  and  the  needs  of  the  user  group  must  be  considered  thoroughly. 
6. EvALuAtIon  of vArIous  sELE ct  
E-LEArnIng  PortALs 
The list of the select four universities for investigation  which  provide  e-learning  in  various  subject  fields  in  India  are  as  follows: 
(a) Amity  University 
(b) Mumbai  University 
(c) University  of  Delhi 
(d) Don  Bosco  University 
207 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  3, MAy  2017 
6.1. Amity university online16 
Amity  University  was  established  in  2002  and  it  is  one  of  the  country’s  biggest  education  providers  which  established  its  online  learning  through  Amity  Centre  for  e-learning  to  give  individuals  and  organisations  the  competitive  edge.  It  has  started  its  online  end-term  examination twice in a year and online contact program  through  interactive  live  virtual  classes  from  anywhere  in the world. All the classes are archived for those who  missed  the  live  classes.  All  the  assignments  are  to  be  submitted  online  and  there  are  no  hard  copies  to  be  submitted.  Students  can  interact  with  faculty  and  peers  through  email  and  can  also  change  over  from  regular  distance  learning  program  to  e-learning  and  vice-versa.  Amity  University  is  trying  to  eliminate  the  barriers  of  time and distance creating universal, learning-on-demand  opportunities  for  people,  companies  and  countries.  It  provides faster learning at reduced costs, increased access  to  learning  resources,  and  clear  accountability  for  all  participants  in  the  learning  process  with  its  e-learning  program.  It  does  not  provide  newsletter,  latest  news  and events, user’s count, A/V conferencing and web 2.0  items  in  Fig.  1.  
figure 1. Amity university online. 
6.2. mumbai university dLLE17 
Mumbai  University  started  its  Department  of  Life  Long Learning and Education (DLLE) in 1994 and from  2003;  it  started  its  first  batch  of  e-learning  programme.  In  the  recent  years,  the  University  has  designed  and  introduced  many  new  short  term  and  certificate  courses  in  management,  electronics  and  accounting.  All  the  admission  formalities  are  to  be  completed  online  along  with the payment of fee, submission of application forms  and  a  person  can  have  live  chat  with  the  counselor  in  case  of  any  queries  or  clarifications  regarding  the  course structure and methods of delivery of learning and  teaching.  The  software  used  is  an  open  source  Joomla  with  clear  learning  objects  and  the  portal  is  updated  frequently  with  Interoperability  compliance  standards.  However, no content or study material, newsletter, user’s  count, support and web 2.0 items are provided which is  a  major  short  comings  of  the  portal  in  Fig.  2.  
208 
figure 2. mumbai university dLLE. 
6.3. university  of delhi virtual  Learning  
Environment18 
University of Delhi established its Virtual Learning  Environment in the year 2007. It is providing education  in  various  open  courses  online.  It  also  provides  open  educational resources on various subject fields like sciences,  humanities and social sciences. The University is covered  in  National  Mission  on  Education  through  Information  and Communication Technology (NME-ICT) project. The  university  is  trying  to  incorporate  web  2.0  items  in  the  online learning web-portal like podcasts. The downloadable  content  on  various  subject  fields  in  portable  document  format  is  also  given  along  with  the  video  lectures. 
A  clear,  complete  course  overview  or  details  is  provided  in  Fig.  3.  All  the  sources  of  information  are  scholarly without personal opinions or bias. The website is  updated frequently and follows International interoperability  standards.  Course  architecture  permits  experts  to  add  content,  activities  and  assessments  to  extend  learning  opportunities. Objectives are matched to content requirements  and to the grade and skill levels of the intended audience.  But some items like newsletter, news and events, user’s  count,  support,  content  references  or  A/V  conferencing  are  missing  in  its  web  portal.  However,  podcasts  in  the  web  2.0  items  are  available  for  use. 
figure 3. university of delhi vLE. 
6.4   d on bosco university19 
This university was established on 29th March 2008  in  Assam.  The  University  aims  to  mould  intellectually  competent,  morally  upright  socially  committed  and  

========4========

IMRAN & MALIK: EVALUATION OF E-LEARNING WEB-PORTALS 
spiritually  inspired  persons  at  the  service  of  India  and  the  world  of  today  and  tomorrow,  by  imparting  holistic  and  personalised  education.  It  offers  courses  from  the  fields  of  Library  and  Information  Science,  management  and  engineering. 
It  provides  videos,  discussion  related  opportunities  through  discussion  boards  and  online  counseling  for  students  and  learners.  It  provides  online  content  and  reading  material  like  articles,  news  and  e-books  store.  Using  a  state-of-art  virtual  classroom  platform,  DBU  global students attend classes over the internet, interacting  with  teachers  and  experts  of  the  finest  institutions  of  the  nation  and  fellow  students  placed  across  the  globe.  However,  it  does  not  provide  any  content  or  study  material,  newsletter,  news  and  events,  user’s  count,  additional  references,  graphics,  site  search  and  web  2.0  items  in  Fig.  4. 
figure 4. don bosco university e-learning. 
Investigators developed evaluation criteria to evaluate  web-portals of the select universities by adopting website  evaluation  criteria’s  developed  and  used  by  some  of  the  top  Universities.  This  evaluation  criterion  is  an  amalgamation  of  various  excellent  evaluation  criteria’s  adopted  by: 
(a) The  University  of  the Aegean20 
(b) University  of  Illinois21 
(c) Xavier  University  Library22,  and 
(d) National  Health  Service  Education  for  Scotland23 
The criterion devised is formulated on the following  categories of evaluation listed as followss and show the  Table  1: 
•	 Accuracy 
•	 Objectivity 
•	 Up  to  date  (currency)       
•	 Audience 
•	 Content/study  material       
•	 Study  material 
•	 Newsletter           
•	 News  and  events 
•	 Software         
•	 Accessibility 
•	 Coverage           
•	 Usability 
•	 Functionality         
•	 Reliability 
•	 Effectiveness         
•	 Suitability 
•	 Responsiveness         
•	 Clarity 
•	 User’s  count         
•	 Support 
•	 Standards  compliance       
•	 Stability 
•	 Additional  references       
•	 Graphics 
•	 Multimedia          
•	 Web  2.0  items 
•	 A/V  conferencing         
•	 Style 
•	 Site  search  engine         
•	 Credibility 
•	 Technical  properties       
•	 First  impression 
•	 Quality 
On  the  basis  of  the  evaluation  of  the  websites/web  portals under study, it can be stated that all the e-learning  systems  are  accurate.  The  objectivity  of  all  the  portals  is  to  the  point  and  free  of  bias  with  frequent  updation  of the information. Government universities like Mumbai  University and University of Delhi have audience which  mainly  consists  of  students,  in-service  candidates  and  elderly learners, while as the private universities mainly  focus  on  the  learning  and  training  of  students  only. 
Out of the four university web-portals evaluated, two  universities do not provide study material for download  which  includes  Mumbai  University  and  Don  Bosco  University.  All university e-learning portals have designed  on  the  platform  of  open  source  softwares  like  Joomla,  Drupal  and  PHP  etc.  Learning  objects  of  all  the  portals  are appropriate and well defined for the scope and aims  to  cover. 
None  of  the  government  universities  have  provided  a  clear  and  complete  overview  of  the  courses,  while  as  a  clear  and  complete  course  details  are  provided  by  the  private university e-learning portals. However, the private  universities  do  not  permit  the  tutors  to  add  content,  activities  or  assessments  on  their  own  which  in  turn  hampers  the  extension  of  learning  opportunities. 
Apart from the missing additional references by the  select  universities  Web  2.0  items  are  missing  in  almost  
209 

========5========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  3, MAy  2017 
table 1. Evaluation of various select e-learning web-portals 
Amity university       
Accuracy objectivity 
yes 
To the point and free of bias 
up to date  (currency) Audience 
Updated weekly 
Students 
content/ study  yes material 
newsletter news and  Events 
No yes 
software Accessibility coverage usability 
functionality 
criteria list of universities mumbai university 
university of delhi 
yes 
To the point and free of bias 
yes 
To the point and free of bias 
Updated frequently 
Updated weekly 
In-service and elderly learners 
In-service learners 
No 
yes 
No yes 
No No 
Word Press 
Only to registered members 
Management 
Learning Objects are appropriate  for the scope it aims to cover 
don bosco university   
yes 
To the point and free of bias 
Updated frequently 
Students 
No 
No No 
Drupal 
Only to registered members Lib. & Info. Science Learning Objects are  appropriate for the scope it  aims to cover 
Asp.net 
Only to registered members Management 
Learning Objects are  appropriate for the scope it  aims to cover 
A clear, complete course  overview or details is not  provided 
reliability 
Joomla 
Only to registered members Management 
Learning Objects are  appropriate for the scope it  aims to cover 
A clear, complete course  overview or details is not  provided 
A clear, complete course overview  A clear, complete course  or details is provided 
All the sources of information  All the sources of information  are scholarly without personal  are scholarly without personal  
Effectiveness 
suitability 
responsive- ness clarity 
opinions 
Objectives are matched to  content 
requirements and to the  grade and skill levels of the  intended audience Course architecture permits  tutors 
to add content, activities and assessments to extend  learning 
opportunities 
Good response and normal  web accessibility Content and learning  activities are 
clearly aligned with learning  outcomes 
users count 
No 
support 
yes 
standards  compliance 
The course is constructed in compliance with technical interoperability standards  at a minimum 
stability 
Procedure of acquiring  username and 
Password and access control 
210 
All the sources of information  are scholarly without personal  
opinions 
Objectives are matched to  content 
requirements and to the grade  and skill levels of the intended  audience 
Course architecture does not  permit tutors 
to add content, activities and assessments to extend learning opportunities 
opinions 
Objectives are matched to content requirements and to the grade  and skill levels of the intended  
audience 
Course architecture permits  
experts 
to add content, activities and assessments to extend learning 
opportunities 
Average response and normal  web accessibility 
Learning activities are clearly aligned with learning  outcomes 
Average response and good web  
accessibility 
Content and learning activities are clearly aligned with learning  
outcomes 
No 
No 
No 
No 
The course is constructed in compliance with technical interoperability standards  at a minimum 
The course is constructed in compliance with technical interoperability standards  
at a minimum 
Procedure of acquiring  username and 
Password and access control 
Procedure of acquiring username  
and 
password, correct transaction,  encrypting messages, and access  
control 
overview or details is  provided 
All the sources of information  are scholarly without personal  opinions 
Objectives are matched to  content 
requirements and to the  grade and skill levels of the  intended audience Course architecture does not  permit tutors 
to add content, activities and assessments to extend  learning 
opportunities 
Good response and normal  web accessibility 
Content and learning  activities are not clearly  aligned with learning  outcomes 
No 
yes 
The course is constructed in compliance with technical interoperability standards and SCORM 1.2 or IMS Content  Packaging 
1.1.2 compliant at a minimum 
Procedure of acquiring  username and 
password, correct transaction,  encrypting messages and  access control 

========6========

IMRAN & MALIK: EVALUATION OF E-LEARNING WEB-PORTALS 
criteria list of universities 
Amity university       
mumbai university 
Additional  content/ references 
yes 
yes 
graphics 
yes 
yes 
media (mp4,  mp3, pdf,  txt, gif) Web 2.0 Items 
yes 
yes 
Nil 
Nil 
A/v conferencing style 
No 
yes 
Design is clear, dynamic and provides appropriate  instructions for 
navigation and interaction No 
Design is clear, consistent and 
site search  Engine credibility 
provides appropriate  instructions for navigation and interaction yes 
Free of grammatical, spelling,  Free of grammatical, spelling,  
or typographical errors 
or typographical errors 
technical  Properties 
Information on the website  is available in a format that  require special viewers and  plug-ins 
Information on the website is  
available in a format that does  
not require special viewers and  not require special viewers  
plug-ins 
first  Impression 
Balance between textual and  visual elements 
Aesthetic and well organized 
Quality 
Accepted Expressive  Language and good quality 
Expressive and Interpretable 
Data 
all  the  universities  except  University  of  Delhi.  Audio/ video  conferencing  is  also  missing  in Amity  University  and  University  of  Delhi.  
Information on the websites/web portals is available  in  a  format  that  requires  special  viewers  and  plug-ins  except  in  Mumbai  University,  University  of  Delhi  and  Don  Bosco  University. 
7.    c oncL usIons 
The  future  prospect  of  the  web  portal  involves  contributing  content  and  learning  to  various  academic  institutions using membership options. It will also take into  the consideration that many more academic prospects could  be attached to the web portal that will help the learners  to  find  multiple  learning  options  in  a  single  interface  easily  using  the  web  portal  to  help  them  in  increasing  their  knowledge  about  their  topics  of  interest.      
rEfErEncEs 
1. Telang, R. & Mukhopadhyay, T. Drivers of Web portal  
use. Electronic  Commerce  Res.  Appli. ,  2005,  4 (1),  
49-65.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.elerap.2004.10.004  
(accessed  on  25 August  2016). 
2. Walker, C. Types of portal: A definition, 2006. http:// 
scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&btnG=Search&q= 
intitle:Types+of+portal:+a+definition#0 (accessed on  
26  September  2016). 
university of delhi 
don bosco university   
No 
No 
yes 
No 
yes 
yes 
Podcast 
Nil 
No 
yes 
Design is clear, consistent and provides appropriate instructions  for 
navigation and interaction yes 
Design is clear, consistent and provides appropriate  instructions for 
navigation and interaction No 
Free of grammatical, spelling,  or typographical errors 
Free of grammatical, spelling,  or typographical errors 
Information on the website is  available in a format that does  
and plug-ins 
Information on the website is  available in a format that does  not require special viewers  and plug-ins 
Balance between textual and  visual elements 
Aesthetic and well organized 
Accepted Expressive Language  and good quality 
Accepted Expressive  Language 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
Schone,  B.J.  Building  a  learning  portal/e-learning  weekly.  2009.  https://elearningweekly.wordpress. com/2009/01/17/building-a-learning-portal/ (accessed  on  1  March  2016). 
Joshi, G.K.; Venkata Subramanyam, V.S.C. & Anvekar,  S. The need and importance of on-demand e-learning for  customized management skills enhancement. J. Res. Human.  Social Sci., 2014,  19(1), 31-38. http://iosrjournals.org/ iosr-jhss/papers/Vol19-issue1/Version-10/E0191103138. pdf?id=8815  (accessed  on  15  March  2016). Kamsin, A. Is e-learning the solution and substitute  for conventional learning? Intern. J. Comp., Internet  Manag., 2005, 13(3), 79-89. http://www.ijcim.th.org/ past_editions/2005V13N3/ijcimv13n3_article7.pdf  (accessed  on April  05  2016). 
Alsultanny, y.A. E-learning system overview based on  semantic web. Electronic J. e-Learning, 2006, 4(2),  111-18. www.ejel.org/issue/download.html?idArticle=20  (accessed  on  15 April  2016). 
Smart, K.L. & Cappel, J.J. Students’ perceptions of online  learning: A comparative study. J. Info.Tech. Edu., 2006,  5, 201-19. https://doi.org/10.1080/1358165020270105  (accessed  on  05  March  2016). 
Wagner,  N.;  Hassanein,  K.  &  Head,  M.  Who  is  responsible for e-learning success in higher education?  A  stakeholders  analysis. Edu.  Tech.  Society,  2008,  
211 

========7========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  3, MAy  2017 
11,  26-36.  http://www.ifets.info/journals/11_3/3.pdf  
(accessed  on  12  March  2016). 
9.  Elango,  R.;  Gudep, V.  K.  &  Selvam,  M.  Quality  of  
e-learning: An analysis based on e-learners’ perception  
of e-learning. Electronic J. e-Learning , 2008, 6(1),  
18.  Delhi University. Virtual Learning Environment, n.d.  
http://vle.du.ac.in/  (accessed  on  05  July  2016). 19. Don  Bosco  University.  Don  Bosco  Global/DBU  
Global, n.d. http://www.dbuniversity.ac.in/dbuglobal/ 
en/  (accessed  on  10  July  2016). 
(accessed  on  25  March  2016). 
10.  Tutunea,  M.;  Rus,  R.V.,  &  Toader,  V.  Traditional  
education  vs  e-learning  in  the  vision  of  Romanian  
business students. Int. J. Edu. Info. Tech. , 2009, 3(1).  
http://www.wseas.us/journals/educationinformation/ 
eit-79.pdf  (accessed  on  12  May  2016). 
11.  Bell, M. & Farrier, S. Measuring success in e-learning.  
A multi-dimensional approach. Electronic J. e-Learning ,  
2005,  6(2),  99-110.  www.ejel.org/issue/download. 
html?idIssue=9  (accessed  on  19  May  2016). 12.  Wagner,  N.;  Hassanein,  K.  &  Head,  M.  Who  is  
responsible for e-learning success in higher education?  
A  stakeholders  analysis. Edu.  Tech.  Society ,  2008,  
11,  26-36.  http://www.ifets.info/journals/11_3/3.pdf  
(accessed  on  25  May  2016). 
13.  Bonk,  C.J.;  Kim,  K.  &  Zeng,  T.  Future  directions  
of  blended  learning  in  higher  education  and  
workplace  learning  settings,  2005,  550-68.  http:// 
www.publicationshare.com/c083_bonk_future.pdf  
(accessed  on  10  June  2016). 
14.  Pawar,  B.V.  Web-based  school  education  In  India:  
Problems,  considerations,  approaches  &  important  
features of web-based learning environment intranet  
for  school  and  training  center  firewall  internet  
information provider, n.d., 1-6. http://birbhum.gov.in/ 
DPSC/reference/35.pdf (accessed on 10 June 2016). 15.  Koskela,  M.;  Kiltti,  P.;  Vilpola,  I.  &  Tervonen,  J.  
Suitability  of  a  virtual  learning  environment  for  
higher education. Electronic J. e-Learning , 2005, 3(1),  
21-30. www.ejel.org/issue/download.html?idArticle=345  
(accessed  on  22  June  2016). 
16.  Amity  University.  Best  MBA  School,  Courses/ 
Distance  Learning  Universities  for  MBA-Amity  
University Online, n.d. http://www.amityonline.com/ 
amityelearningweb/WebForms/AmityOnlineNew/Index. 
aspx  (accessed  on  27  June  2016). 
17.  University of Mumbai. Mumbai University-English»  
Idol  e-learning,  n.d.  http://mu.ac.in/portal/distance- 
open-learning/idol-e-learning/ (accessed on 03 July 2016). 
13.  www.ejel.org/issue/download.html?idArticle=58  
20. Sofos,  A.  &  Kostas,  A.  Pedagogically-oriented  
212 
evaluation  criteria  for  educational  web  resources.  
World Wide Web  Internet  and Web  Information 21.  Illinois, U. Evaluating a web site checklist, n.d., 1,  
1-2. http://www.library.illinois.edu/bix/pdf/genguide/ 
WebEval.pdf  (accessed  on  18  May  2016). 22.  Library, X. U. Website evaluation criteria, 2001. http:// 
www.xavier.edu/library/students/documents/website_ 
evaluation.pdf  (accessed  on  23  May  2016). 23.  NHS  Education  for  Scotland.  NHS  shared  learning  
quality  assurance  checklists  for  evaluating  learning  
objects and online courses february 2009. http://www. 
knowledge.scot.nhs.uk/media/4088630/quality_assurance_ 
checklists.pdf  (accessed  on  27  May  2016). 
contrIbutors 
mr  sheikh  mohd  Imran   is  working  as  Assistant  Librarian,  Allama Iqbal Library, University of Kashmir, Hazratbal, Srinagar,  J&K. In 2010 he was one of the members of Automation team  appointed  by  the  Central  Library  of  Islamic  University  of  Science and Technology (IUST), Awantipora Kashmir. He has  completed his PhD from Aligarh Muslim University. He has an  abundant number of research publications to his credit. He has  presented number of research papers and attended a number of  national  and  international  conferences,  seminars,  workshops,  symposia,  debates,  forums,  etc.,  and  has  received  two  best  paper  awards  as  well.  He  has  written  6  book  chapters  and  is  the  editorial  board  member  of  four  international  journals.  He  is  also  Patron  of  Indian  Library Association  (ILA). 
mr basharat Ahmad malik  is a Research Scholar at Department  of Library & Information Science, Aligarh Muslim University,  Aligarh.  Earlier  he  was  one  of  the  members  of  Automation  team appointed by the Central Library of Islamic University of  Science  and Technology  (IUST), Awantipora,  (J&K)  in  2010.  He  has  a  number  of  research  publications  to  his  credit.  He  has also worked as Librarian in Harmukh College of Education  and  Al-Noor  College  of  Education,  Bandipora  (J&K)  during  2011-2012  &  2013-2015  respectively.  In  2016,  he  worked  as  Librarian  in  Govt.  Degree  College  Damal,  Hnajipora  (J&K). 

========8========

