DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 2, March 2017, pp. 84-90 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.37.2.10989 
 2017, DESIDOC 
 Awareness and Use of Library Makerspaces among Library Professionals 
in India: A Study 
  Akhtar Hussain* and Faizul Nisha** 
                                  *King Saud University, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
**Defence Scientifc Information & Documentation Centre, Defence Research & Development Organisation,  
Metcalfe House, New Delhi-110 054 
E-mail: *akhtar.a47@gmail.com, **faizul16k@gmail.com 
ABSTRACT 
The paper examines the awareness and use of library makerspaces. A well-structured questionnaire was used  for collection of data. Around 700 questionnaires were distributed among the Indian library professionals. A total of  500 flled in questionnaires were received, out of which, only 470 questionnaires were selected for analysis of the  
data. The overall response rate was 67.14 %. The result of the study demonstrates that among all users, 70% male  
and 30% female are aware of library’s makerspaces. Majority of users utilising library makerspaces are pursuing  
master’s degree. It has been found that nearly all of the academic libraries employees are using makerspaces facilities.  
Maximum number of respondents’ (68.09%) using makerspaces facilities for academic and research purposes and  
reported them as a tool to educate students for the local and global economy (42.55%). When asked respondents  
about the state-of-the-art tools, technologies or forms for creating makerspaces, 44.68% of respondents claimed that  
their makerspaces have computer workstations. Approximately, 51.06% respondents indicated that their library’s  
makerspaces offer students workshops/seminars/conferences. Furthermore, the study refects that maximum number  
of respondents, i.e., 36% understand the signifcance of library makerspaces and evaluated them as “valuable”. 
Keywords: Makerspaces, maker movement, libraries, hackerspaces, content creation, fabrication, India. 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
Makerspace is ‘a physical location embedded to share  resources and knowledge, work on, network, projects by different  people from different academic background’1. It is a hub to  
the  space  allows  people  to  learn  from  each  other  and  experiment  rather  than  receive  lessons4.  
Makerspaces  are  generally  funded  by  membership  fees  or  through  affiliations  with  external  organisations,  
create, invent, tinker, explore and discover using a variety  
such  as  universities,  for-profit  companies,  non-profit  
of  tools  and  materials  to  develop  certain  skills2.  
It  may  be  pronounced  as  a  community  center  that  provides  technology,  manufacturing  equipment  and  educational opportunities to the public; things accessible  or unaffordable such as 3-D printers, and computer-aided  design  (CAD)  software.  
organisations  and  libraries.  Initially  introduced  in  2005  but  gained  wider  acceptance  after  2011.  
They  are  of  several  types  including  Hackerspaces,  Fablabs, Creative space, Techshops etc having their own  unique  characteristics.  A  hackerspace  is  a  community- operated workspace where people with common interests,  
people. The goal of makerspaces aims at reducing barriers  so that people can learn and start creating their resources  
Makerspaces have been defined differently by different  
usually in computers, mass production, science, technology,  
digital or electronic art, can meet, socialise and collaborate.  
and passion by allowing participants to draw upon multiple  
Hackerspaces have also been compared to other community- 
knowledge,  and  they  tap  new  resources  for  learning.  
and  collections.  According  to  Wong,  Makerspaces  are,  
operated spaces with similar aims and mechanisms such  “places that help cultivate creative interests, imagination,  
as  Fab  Lab,  started  in  2006  by  a  MIT  Professor  Neil  
Gershenfelh,  which  provides  up-to-date  designs  like  intelligences.  They  are  an  effective  means  of  applying  
electronic appliances, laser cutters, routers, etc., appropriate  
for makers allowing them to generate anything. Basically  Makerspaces  embrace  tinkering,  or  playing,  in  various  
it  is  a  platform  for  learning  and  innovation.  They  are  
likely to be smaller, i.e., 1000-2000 sq ft when compared  
forms  of  exploration,  experimentation  and  engagement,  and  foster  peer  interactions  as  well  as  the  interests  of  a  collective  team.3”  They  allow  free  exchange  of  ideas  and  resources  through  exploration,  experimentation,  engagement  and  interactions  of  peer  groups. 
There  are  various  types  of  makerspaces  offered  as  municipalities’,  universities,  educational  school  boards  
with  other  spaces. 
TechShops,  started  in  California  in  2006  are  for- profit and commercial in nature, allow people to access  them after paying a monthly fee and focus on community  building, delivering large spaces and equipment to attain  maximal  alliance,  cooperation  and  interchange  of  ideas  
and  local  communities.  The  community  atmosphere  of  
and  expertise. 
Received 19 December 2016, online published 24 March 2017 

========1========

HuSAIN  &  NISHA:  AWAReNeSS AND uSe oF  L IbRARy MAkeRSPACeS AMoNG  L IbRARy PRoFeSSIoNALS IN  I NDIA 
Creative spaces are not directly related to any specific  tool or set up, sponsored organisation or publication. They  embrace any space that renders innovative learning equally  devoid  of  tools/equipment,  and  allocated  space. 
This study is an effort to understand the concept and  awareness  of  library  makerspaces  among  professionals  
participants  engage  in  the  program  for  six  months  in  the  public  library  creative  zone.  
When  the  overall  creative  thinking  abilities  of  the  participants  were  analysed,  there  was  a  significant  difference  from  the  innovative  thinking  abilities  mean  score.  Finally,  there  was  no  difference  by  gender,  but  
in  Indian  libraries  and  the  way  they  perceive  them.  It  
there  was  a  significant  difference  by  grade  level  for  
further explores the benefits accrued from makerspaces,  
evaluating all creative thinking abilities factors. barniskis9  
strategies developed for managing them, state-of-the-art  
examined the spatial arrangements of two public library  facilities  offered  and  finally  the  satisfaction  level  of  
makerspaces  in uSA.  The  data  reveals  that  exposure  is  
users  regarding  makerspaces.  Response  of  makerspaces  among  Indian  library  professionals  shows  that  bulk  of  respondents using these facilities are from academic libraries.  Makerspaces  help  professionals  to  meet  the  changing  demands  of  users  and  achieve  scholastic  endeavours. 
2.  LITERATURE  REVIEW 
Some  recent  studies  on  makerspaces  around  the  world  have  been  penned  down  chronologically. 
Wong  &  Partridge5   investigated  the  experience  of  
the  most  critical  aspect  of  the  arrangements  in  these  creative spaces. Study also finds that Software solutions,  staffing  initiatives,  and  signage  are  ways  to  convey  the  potential  uses  of  the  space.  
Okpala10  has highlighted the concept of makerspaces  and its apparent benefits in academic libraries in Nigeria.  The  findings  of  the  study  display  that  users  attention  is  drawing  towards  library  for  fostering  creativity  and  invention.  Makerspaces  offer  highly  rewarding  services  
Australian  universities  with  makerspaces  and  found  
to students, faculty members, and staffers and make them  
learn  new  things,  working  with  their  peers,  considering  
that  the  adoption  of  makerspaces  in  higher  education  is  expected  to  increase  in  the  next  two  to  three  years.  
new  ideas,  exploring,  tinkering,  and  inventing. Training  
and workshop opportunities for librarians were proposed  Analysis also unveiled that these makerspaces employ  
to  make  them  well  equipped  with  makerspace  skills. 
specialist  staff,  contain  3D  printers  and  laser  cutters,  and offer facilities to conduct coursework, personal and  collaborative  projects.  
User  studies  by  Coakley  &  Hurt6   at  the  National  
Taylor, Hurley & Connolly11  identified additional roles  that  makerspaces  play:  as  social  spaces,  in  supporting  well  being,  by  serving  the  needs  of  the  communities  
Institutes of Health and the biomedical research community  
they  are  located  in  and  by  reaching  out  to  excluded  
groups.  The  authors  report  on  findings  from  site  visits  
disclosed that Hundreds of files for 3D-printed lab ware- everything from gel combs and pipette holders to motorised  tissue homogenisers and cover slip spinners—can be found  
to  makerspaces  throughout  the uk   and  interviews  with  makerspace organisers.  These roles speak of huge potential  
online.  Desktop  3D  printing  is  expanding  beyond  the  
for makerspaces to benefit communities and individuals.  realm  of  early  adopters  and  hobbyists,  and  mainstream  
While  not  all  of  the  roles  authors  have  observed  are  demand  for  3D  printers  is  growing.  3D  printing  has  the  
present  in  all  makerspaces  this  is  to  be  expected  given  potential  to  play  an  important  role  in  the  laboratory  by  
how responsive many of the spaces are to the particular  
needs of their communities—the desire to be more than  
reducing  costs  and  helping  scientists  develop  and  share  innovative  solutions  to  technical  problems.  
Lamptey7,  et  al.   tried  to  know  how  participants  in  Sub-Saharan  African  universities  make  use  of  the  emerging  technologies  learnt  during  the  Carnegie  CPD  programme and evaluated the effectiveness of the training  programme  on  participant’s  job  performance. The  study  found  that  the  Information  Communication  Technology  (ICT)  skills  of  participants  have  been  evidenced  by  the  application  of  these  skills  on  their  jobs  as  experienced  librarians. However, the demand for ICT and information  literacy  training  by  students  and  faculty  has  increased  due to the exhibit of skills and innovations by CPD. on  campus, the makerspace is being embraced by the arts as  well  as  the  sciences  students  and  enables  peer  learning,  curiosity, experimental play collaboration, inquiry based,  creativity,  knowledge  networks,  trans-literacy,  etc  with  the  use  of  plastics  for  molding  and  a  3D  Printer  for  printing  the  plastic  molds.  
Noh8   evaluated  the  degree  of  improvement  in  the  participants’  creative  thinking  abilities  index  after  
just  a  workshop  is  widespread. 
koh & Abbas12  investigated the competencies required  for the successful performance of professionals in library  and  museum  learning  spaces  in  the  U.S.  The  findings  include  top  competencies  (e.g.,  ability  to  learn,  adapt  to  new  situations,  collaborate,  serve  as  an  advocate,  and  serve  diverse  people)  and  skills  (e.g.,  management,  program  development,  grant  writing,  technology,  and  facilitating  learning)  required  for  professionals,  as  well  as  relevance  of  higher  education  to  prepare  them  for  their  current  positions.  The  study  generated  curricular  design  implications  for  LIS  educators  with  an  emphasis  on  teaching  and  learning  with  technologies. 
Burke13   demonstrated  and  elaborated  the  rise  of  library  makerspaces,  making  activities  and  technologies  in  library  a  makerspaces,  profile  of  academic  library  makerspaces, and how makerspaces connect to learning in  higher education, motivations for creating a makerspace,  some  considerations  when  planning  a  makerspace,  and  justification  for  an  academic  library  makerspace.  All  
85 

========2========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  2, MARCH   2017 
libraries, the six significant categories for library makerspace  creators  were  discussing,  that  is,  supporting  learning,  encouraging  collaboration,  providing  access,  expanding  library  services,  following  the  library’s  mission,  and  providing  opportunities  for  individual  creation. 
Moorefield-Lang 
14 
  analysed  the  user  agreements  of  makerspaces in public and academic libraries. The study  
4.  METHODOLOGY 
The  online  survey  techniques  were  used  for  data  collection.  A  survey  was  projected  to  collect  preferred  information about the level of awareness and use of library  makerspaces, state-of-the art facilities, and comprehensive  support  to  the  users.  Random  sampling  technique  has  
the field of library science at present; the application of  a maker learning space is still new to many libraries. In  this  study  most  user  agreements  were  six  months  to  a  year  old,  and  regularities  found  across  makerspace  user  
been  followed  for  conducting  the  study. overall  700  found  that  the  makerspaces  are  a  very  exciting  topic  in  
well-structured  questionnaires  were  distributed  among  
the library professionals in India. A total of 500 filled- in questionnaires were received, out of which, only 470  questionnaires were selected for analysis of the data and 30  
questionnaires were rejected due to incomplete responses  agreements  include  accountability  waivers,  consents  for  
from the users. The final response rate was 67.14%. The  
minors,  safety,  copyright  and  technology  replacement  costs. 
Dugmore, Lindop & Jacob15  carried out an analysis  of makerspace in Central City library, Auckland Libraries  system  in  New  Zealand.  Study  communicate  that  the  launch  of  the  makerspace  has  been  a  challenging  but  
analysis  of  data  collected  have  been  presented  with  the  help of tables, figures, bar-diagram and graphs by using  simple statistical techniques, etc. In the light of above data,  findings  of  the  study,  conclusion  and  recommendations  have  been  arrived  at.  The  study  was  conducted  during  2-12  November  2016. 
been a growing awareness amongst the community with  respect  to  accessing  maker  activities.  Amongst  library  staff there is a growth of knowledge and enthusiasm for  interacting  with  the  community  in  this  way,  building  
revitalizing  project  for  Auckland  Libraries.  There  has  
5.  
DATA ANALYSIS AND  INTERPRETATIONS 
The  data  collected  through  survey  approaches  were  analysed  and  inferred  and  presented  here  in  tables  and  
maker  culture  into  our  traditional  service  delivery  to  
figures. 
create  value  for  customers. 
Rich16   analysed  the  place  of  makerspaces  in  US  academic  libraries.  Democratisation  of  technology,  the  
5.1  Gender  wise Awareness 
The sample was collected from library professionals  on  gender  basis  to  find  out  their  opinion  regarding  
maintenance  of  the  library’s  perception  as  a  leader  in  
awareness  and  usage  of  makerspaces  in  libraries.  The  technology innovation and the need to support scholarship  
Fig. 1 shows that 70% male and 30% female respondents  
are the most cited reasons for including a makerspace in  an academic library of the libraries surveyed. Respondents  also  indicated  that  makerspaces  were  necessary  to  keep  them  abreast  with  the  changing  needs  of  their  patrons  and to support ongoing scholarship. Slatter & Howard17  conducted  a  study  on  makerspaces  at  Australian  public  libraries.  The  study  reveals  that  higher  community  commitment,  development  of  a  new  form  of  library  as  ‘heart  of  institution’  are  the  essential  benefits  of  these  spaces. Furthermore, the study focused on the budgetary  constraints, and confrontation to change within organisations  for  creating  these  spaces,  and  proving  the  relevance  of  such  spaces  within  a  library  setting. 
3.  
OBJECTIVES 
The  aims  of  the  present  paper  are:  
are  aware  about  the  use  of  makerspaces  in  libraries. 
Figure 1. Gender wise awareness. 
(a) To  highlight  the  concept  of  makerspaces  and  its  
5.2  Educational  Qualification 
perceived  benefits  in  Indian  libraries 
(b) Find out the awareness and purpose of makerspaces  
in  libraries 
(c)   e xplore  the  benefits  and  usefulness  and  type  of  
state-of-the-art  facilities/equipments  available  to  
users  in  library  makerspaces 
(d)   k now the services available through library makerspaces  
and  access  satisfaction  level  of  users  related  to  
makerspaces  in  library  operations. 
86 
The sample of the population shows that most of the  respondents  are  pursuing  master’s  degree,  i.e.,  63.83%,  17.02%  respondents  have  completed  PhD  in  library  and  information  science  whereas  17.02%  respondents  have  certificate  and  diploma,  few  respondents  also  having  equivalent professional degree in library science (ADIS)  from  Indian  Statistical  Institute,  Bangalore  Centre  and  NISCAIR,  New  Delhi.  Furthermore,  small  number  of  respondents i.e., 2.13% have completed bachelor’s degree  

========3========

HuSAIN  &  NISHA:  AWAReNeSS AND uSe oF  L IbRARy MAkeRSPACeS AMoNG  L IbRARy PRoFeSSIoNALS IN  I NDIA 
(bLISc)  (Fig.  2). 
Therefore,  it  is  found  that  majority  of  makerspaces  users  (68.3%)  are  pursuing  master’s  degree.    
5.3  Professionals Working  in  Libraries 
Figure 3 presents that enormous number of respondents  
Similarly 8.51% respondents each said library makerspaces  commenced  during  2010  and  2013,  whereas,  remaining  6.38%  respondents  each  conveyed  that  makerspaces  opened  in  their  libraries  during  the  years  2008  and  2014  (Table  1). 
It is established that a good number of respondents  
(73%)  are  working  in  academic  libraries,  while  19%  of  
(19.15%) affirmed that their library makerspaces opened  
them are working in special libraries including engineering  colleges, medical colleges and R&D institutions. A little  percentage  (4%)  of  respondents  belongs  to  national  library whereas a minor percentage (2%) is from public  and  others  libraries  like  community  libraries.  
So,  it  can  be  noticed  that  bulk  of  respondents,  i.e.,  73%  using  makerspace  facilities  are  from  academic  libraries. 
Figure 2. Educational qualifcation. 5.4  Commencement  of  Makerspaces  in  Libraries 
Makerspaces  tend  to  be  of  recent  origin  to  most  of  the libraries. Response regarding inception of makerspaces  
last  year,  in  2016. 
Table 1. Commencement of makerspaces in libraries 
S. No. 
Year 
Response  (n=470) 30 50 40 80 50 40 30 60 90 470 
Percentage 
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. Total 
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 
6.38% 10.64% 8.51% 17.02% 10.64% 8.51% 6.38% 12.77% 19.15% 100 
5.5  Purpose  of  Makerspaces 
The  Fig.  4  indicates  that  maximum  percentage  of  respondents’  (68.09%)  using  makerspaces  for  academic  and  research  purposes  while  40.43%  respondents  are  making  use  of  them  for  reference  and  information  services.  This  study  further  reveals  that  31.91%  of  the  respondents  use  makerspaces  as  professionals.  Another  
in  libraries  has  been  provided  in  Table  1.  Data  reveals  25.53%  respondents  reasoned  that  library  makerspaces  that  19.15%  respondents  indicated  that  makerspaces  in  are  helpful  for  them  in  acquiring  knowledge,  14.89%  their  library  introduced  in  2016.  17.02%  respondents  visualised  them  for  recreational  purpose  while  8.51%  evidenced that their library makerspaces initiated in 2011.  of  the  respondents  admitted  that  their  objective  of  12.77%  respondents  indicated  their  library  makerspace  using  makerspaces  is  to  get  inspiration.  Only  a  small  launched in 2015, whereas 10.64% respondents opined they  percentage,  i.e.,  2.13%  of  respondents  cited  that  they  
were introduced to makerspaces in 2009 and 2012 each.  
Figure 3. Types of libraries. 
use  makerspaces  for  others  purposes. 
Figure 4. Purpose of makerspaces. 
87 

========4========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  2, MARCH   2017 
5.6  Opinion  about  Makerspaces 
Respondents’ perspective about usefulness of makerspaces  in libraries has been exhibited in Fig. 5. It was explored  that  the  majority  of  respondents  (42.55%)  reported  makerspaces as a tool for educating students for the local  and global economy, while 31.91% respondents remarked  them as serving a growing and diverse population. Further  25.53%  respondents  described  makerspaces  as  a  mode  of  building  and  maintaining  state-of-the-art  technology,  whereas 17.02% respondents appraised them as building  and  maintaining  state-of-the-art  facilities.  only  2.13%  respondents  indicated  that  makerspaces  serve  other  facilities  in  libraries.  
5.7  State-of-the Art  Facilities  in  Makerspaces  
When asked respondents about the tools, technologies  or  forms,  i.e.,  state-of-the  art  facilities  available  in  library’s makerspaces, 44.68% respondents claimed that  their  makerspace  has  a  computer  workstation,  while  42.55% of them indicated computer programming/software  
Figure 5. Opinion about makerspaces. 
Table 2: State-of-the art facilities in makerspaces 
S.  
No. 
Library’s Makerspaces 1. Computer workstations 2. 3D Printer 
3. 3D Scanner 
4. Photo editing 
5. 
Computer programming/ 
software 
6. Arts and crafts 7. 
Crating website or online  
portfolio 
8. Digital music recording 9. 3D Modelling 
10. Laser cutter 
11. Animation 
12. Scanning photos to digital 13. Tinkering 
14. Others 
Response  
(n=470) 
Percentage  210 44.68 20 4.26 60 12.77 80 17.02 
200 
42.55 
40 
8.51 
80 
17.02 
10 10 10 10 130 10 20 
2.13 2.13 2.13 2.13 27.66 2.13 4.26 
88 
(Table  2). Approximately  27.66%  respondents’  admitted  that  their  makerspaces  have  options  of  scanning  photos  to  digital,  while  17.02%  of  respondents  affirm  photo- editing  and  creating  websites  or  online  portfolio  were  found in surveyed makerspaces. Furthermore, 12.77% of  respondents  shown  that  they  have  included  instruction  on  3D  Scanner.  A  small  number  of  people  preferred  instruction  on  arts  and  crafts  (8.51%),  Very  few,  i.e.,  4.26%  each  favoured  3D  printing  and  other  state-of- the-art  facilities,  whereas  3D  modeling,  laser  cutter,  animation,  and  tinkering  technologies  were  embraced  with  a  percentage  of  2.13%  each.    
As  demonstrated  from  the  interpretation,  a  good  percentage  of  respondents,  i.e.,  44.68  %  remarked  that  their makerspaces have computer workstations equipped  with  state-of-the-art  technologies. 
5.8  Services  Offered  Through  Makerspaces  
As far as services offered through makerspaces have  been concerned, 51.06% respondents indicated that their  library’s makerspaces offer students workshops/ seminars/  conferences whereas 46.81% respondents acknowledged  that  makerspaces  provide  book  exhibition  on  the  date  of  birth  of  great  personalities.  Additionally  44.68%  respondents  shared  that  makerspaces  furnish  orientation  programs while 31.91% respondents are of the view that  makerspaces  support  online  tutorials/training.  Another  respondents provided a similar response with 31.91% for   “personal appointments for training.” Regarding the course  for  credit  called  as  “Makerbots  and  Mashup”,  17.02%  respondents  stated  that  they  introduced  all  tools  to  the  students through a series of guided lessons and projects  culminating  in  a  final  project  that  incorporates  several  different  tools.  Moreover,  course  for  no  credit  seems  to be less popular among academic library makerspaces  users  and  accounted  to  10.64%  (Fig.  6). 
Figure 6. Services offered through makerspaces. 
5.9  Satisfaction  Regarding  Library  Makerspaces 
An attempt was made to know the satisfaction level  of  respondents  regarding  library  makerspaces  facilities  available  and  the  response  furnished  is  demonstrated  in  Fig.  7.  Analysis  reports  that  the  largest  number  of  respondents,  i.e.,  36%  considered  library  makerspaces  

========5========

HuSAIN  &  NISHA:  AWAReNeSS AND uSe oF  L IbRARy MAkeRSPACeS AMoNG  L IbRARy PRoFeSSIoNALS IN  I NDIA 
Figure 7. Satisfaction regarding library makerspaces. as  beneficial  for  user  awareness  and  rated  them  as  “valuable”, while 34% of respondents assessed as “highly  valuable”.  Furthermore  21%  of  respondents  analysed  them  as  “Somewhat  helpful”.  The  minimum  number  of  respondents,  i.e.,  7%  adjudged  makerspaces,  as  “not  helpful” while tiny percentage, i.e., only 2% acknowledged  them  as  “waste  of  time”. 
The  statistics  reflects  that  maximum  number  of  
makerspace in the library fosters creativity and invention.  The study found that maximum respondents, i.e., 68.09%  use makerspace for scholastic/instructional purpose. The  study  also  found  that  almost  all  respondents’  appraised  library’s  makerspaces  beneficial.  
Makerspaces are a new concept in Indian Libraries. There  is a dire need to make models of successful makerspaces.  Continuous  training  programs  are  key  component  of  creating successful and inclusive makerspaces. The staff  and users of makerspaces are presumed to work together  for creating a safe and conducive environment. There is  a  pressing  need  of  makerspaces  in  the  Indian  libraries  to  introduce  new  technologies  and  boost  the  library’s  image.  It  requires  a  massive  effort  both  from  librarians  and  users  and  they  are  expected  to  be  vigilant  enough,  have  a  curious  mind  and  should  be  passionate  about  learning and embracing new technologies and ideas. The  maker  movement  is  gaining  momentum  and  has  a  long  way  to  go  but  its  widespread  awareness  and  usage  will  
respondents,  i.e.,  36%  understand  the  significance  of  
make  this  initiative  a  successful  platform. 
library  makerspaces  and  evaluated  them  as  “valuable”. 
6.  FINDING  OF THE  STUDY 
The  major  findings  of  the  study  are  as  under: 
(a) Male users (70%) are more aware than female users  
(30%)  about  usage  of  makerspaces  in  libraries (b) It  is  noticed  that  majority  of  users  (68.3%)  using  
makerspaces  in  libraries  are  pursuing  master’s  
degree    
(c) Most of the academic libraries employees (73%) are  
utilising  makerspaces  facilities  
(d) 90%  of  respondents  indicated  that  their  library  
makerspaces  launched  recently  in  2016 
(e) Maximum percentage (68.09%) of respondents are using  
makerspaces  for  academic  and  research  purpose (f) Majority of respondents’ (42.55%) submitted makerspaces  
as a tool to educate students for the local and global  
economy 
(g) An acceptable percentage of respondents, i.e. 44.68%  
cited that their library makerspaces are equipped with  
computer  workstations  state-of-the-art  technologies (h) Maximum  number  of  users,  i.e.,  51.06%  indicated  
that library’s makerspaces invite student’s workshops/  
seminars/conferences 
(i) The  study  established  that  mostly  respondents,  i.e.,  
36%  evaluated  library’s  makerspaces  valuable. 
7.  CONCLUSIONS AND  RECOMMENDATIONS 
Libraries of today are not just a place to sit quietly  and  consult  books  and  other  pedagogical  materials  but  
REFERENCES 
they have completely transformed into a spot where users  
can interact, create and collaborate. Makerspaces are the  demand of modern libraries and expected to be a growing  trend  in  the  years  to  come.  The  idea  of  establishing  
1. Wong,  A.,  &  Partridge,  H.  Making  as  learning:  
Makerspaces  in  universities. Australian  Acad.  Res.  
Libra.,  2016, 47(3),  143-59. 
2. Phetteplace, e.;  Dixon,  N.  &  Ward,  M.  The  maker  
movement  and  the  Louisville  free  public  library.  
Refer  User  Ser.  Quart.,   2014,  54(1),  17-9. 3. Wong, T. Makerspaces Take libraries by storm. Libra.  
Media  Connect.,  2013,  31(6),  34-5. 
4.   e DuCAuSe  Learning Initiative. 7 things you should  
know about makerspaces. EDUCAUSE. http://www.  
educause. edu/library/resources/7-things-you-should-know- 
aboutmakerspaces  (accessed  on  9 April  2013). 5. Wong,  A.  &  Partridge,  H.  Making  as  learning:  
Makerspaces  in  universities. Australian  Acad.  Res.  
Lib.,  2016, 47(3),  143-59. 
6. Coakley,  M.  &    Hurt,  Darrell e.  3D  printing  in  the  
laboratory: Maximize time and funds with customized  
and  open-source  labware.  J.  Labor.  Autom.,  2016,  
21(4),  489-95. 
7. Lamptey, R.b.; baidoo, D.k.; Hassan, A.A. & Holmner,  
M. In  IFLA WLIC-2016:  enabling Technology Driven  
Library environment in Sub-Saharan African universities:  
A  study  of  the  Carnegie  Continuing  Professional  
Development  Programme  experience  vis-a-vie  the  
participants work enhancement, 13-19 August 2016,  
Columbus,  ohio,  uSA.  2016.  http://library.ifla. 
org/1404/  (accessed  on  5  December  2016). 8. Noh,  y.A.  Study  of  the  effects  of  library  creative  
zone programs on creative thinking abilities. J. Lib.  
Info.  Sci.,  2016,  1-17. 
9.   b arniskis,  S.C.  Access  and  express:  Professional  
perspectives  on  public  library  makerspaces  and  
89 

========6========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  2, MARCH   2017 
intellectual  freedom.   Public  Lib.  Quarter. ,  2016,  
35(2),  103-25. 
10. Okpala,  H.N.  Making  a  makerspace  case  for  
academic  libraries  in  Nigeria.  New  Lib.  World,  
2016, 117(9/10). 
11. Taylor,  N.;  Hurley,  u.  &  Connolly,  P.  Making  
18. Slatter,  D.  &  Howard,  Z.  A  place  to  make,  hack,  
and learn: Makerspaces in Australian public libraries.   
Australian  Lib.  J.,  2013, 62(4),  272-84. 
Contributors 
Dr Akhtar Hussain  has completed PhD in Library and Information  
life.  In   Proceedings  of  the  2016  CHI  Conference  
on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems,  2016,  
pp.  1415-25. 
12.   k oh, k.  & Abbas,  J.  Competencies  for  information  
professionals  in  learning  labs  and  makerspaces.  J.   
Lib.  Info.  Sci.,  2015, 56(2),  114. 
13. Burke,  J.  Making  sense:  Can  makerspaces  work  in  
academic libraries? In  Paper presented at ACRL 2015.  
http://www.ala.org/acrl/acrl/conferences/acrl2015/papers. 14. Moorefield-Lang, H.M. User agreements and makerspaces:  
a content analysis. New Lib. World,  2015,  116(7/8),  
358-68. 
15. Penny, D; Hamish, L & baruk, J. Making the makers:  
An exploration of a makerspace in a city library. In 
LIANZA Conference, 12-15 October, 2014, Auckland,  
New  Zealand.  Pou Whakairo:  Connect  and Thrive. 16. Dugmore, P. Making the makers: An exploration of  
a makerspace in a city library.  LIANZA Conference  
12-15 october, 2014, Pou Whakairo, Auckland, New  
Zealand. 
17. Rich,  S.N.  A  Survey  of  makerspaces  in  academic  
libraries.  A  master’s  paper  for  the  M.S.  in  
Library  Science  degree.  Advisor:  Ronald  e.  
bergquist, April,  2014.,  pp.  26.  
community: the wider role of makerspaces in public Science, DLIS, Aligarh Muslim university, Aligarh, India. He has about 7 years experience at king Saud university, kingdom  
90 
of Saudi Arabia. Earlier he was working as Assistant Librarian  (IbA bangalore) and Teaching Assistant (C.C.S.u., Meerut). He  has written 5 books and published 50 articles  in international  as  well  as  national  journals,  conference  proceedings,  and  books.  He  is  in  the  editorial  board  of    many  national  as  well  as international peer reviewed journals such as, Indian Journal  of  Knowledge  Management,  International  Journal  of  Digital  Library  Services ,  and  e-Library  Science  Research  Journal. 
Dr Faizul Nisha  is working as Technical Officer in DESIDOC,  DRDo, New Delhi. She holds MSc (environmental Sciences),  MLISc  (Gold  Medalist)  and  is  PhD  from  Aligarh  Muslim  university, Aligarh. She is the recipient of Harikrishan Ahluwalia  Gold Medal and  University Medal  for securing highest marks  in MLISc and qualified  uGC-JRF in 2012. She has 36 articles  to  her  credit  including  many  in  Emerald,  Library  Philosophy  &  Practice  and  also  in  various  national  and  international  conferences.So  far,  she  has  authored  2  books.  She  is  in  editorial  board  of  many  national  as  well  as  International  peer  reviewed  journals  including  International  Journal  of  Information  Sources  and  Services.  She  is  also  a  reviewer  for  Electronic  Library  and Information  Processing  Letters,  and  also  a  member  of  major  professional  associations  like Indian  Library  Association  (ILA)  and  Indian  Association  of  Special  Libraries and Information Centres (IASLIC),etc. Her areas of  interest  are:E-journals,  e-resources,  institutional  repository,  digital  library  and  IT  application  in  libraries,  plagarism  and  reference  management. 

========7========

