DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 2, March 2017, pp. 109-118 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.37.2.11116 
 2017, DESIDOC 
Mobile Information Services and Initiatives in University Libraries: A New  
Way of Delivering Information  
Margam Madhusudhan* and Saleeq Ahmad Dar** 
Department of Library and Information Science, University of Delhi, Delhi-110 007 
E-mail: *madhumargam@gmail.com; **omarsaleeq@gmail.com  
AbStrAct  
 Students these days are seen in campuses and other study environments bowing their heads to mobile devices  to seek information. Studies show that students are heavy users of their hardware, spending an average of 19.6  hours per week using an electronic device. The purpose of this paper is to explore the mobile library services  initiated and adopted by some prominent academic libraries for the easy mobilisation of their existing services  and also to assess how such services can be helpful to the user community. Moreover, the study raises awareness  of the important mobile library services, some of them that are already in use in different Academic libraries and  how the other services could help libraries to mobilise their information in fast and time bound manner that too  without the constraints of space and time. The value of the study is to helping academic libraries to identify and  embrace the mobile initiatives. With these mobile initiatives, libraries can provide a wide array of mobile services  
to the interested users.  
Keywords: Mobile technologies, mobile library services, mobile apps, quick response codes, libraries 
1. INtroDUctIoN 
Information Technology  is  playing  a  crucial  role  in  academic  library  because  of  the  great  advances  in  the  ICT  that  eventually  has  helped  libraries  to  be  globally  ubiquitous.  In  academic  libraries  it  is  the  University  library that has to take the lead by becoming knowledge  portals. In the last decade the rapid growth in information  systems  and  modern  miniature  technologies  have  made  libraries  challenging  to  retain  with  increased  demands  using  obsolete  operations  so  there  is  an  urgent  need  to  mobilise library services for smooth flow of information.  The use of mobile devices to access the internet and search  for  information  is  growing  considerably1.  Technology  improvements such as cell phones, low cost connectivity  and faster data transmission are among the most important  factors  which  have  led  to  the  growing  use  of  mobile  devices2. Therefore, it is clear that academic libraries can  expect and understand that the best medium to access their  services is via mobile devices and there is need to adapt  to this reality. According to Yue3  the mobile libraries will  realize the dynamic release of mobile information, mobile  information  queries,  mobile  renewals  and  reservations,  mobile  virtual  reference  service,  electronic  resources  uploading  and  downloading  and  search  permissions  to  access  electronic  literature  database.  
In  the  age  of  “information  on  the  go”  academic  libraries can serve their users by leveraging the growing  capabilities of mobile technology. They can mobilise and  therefore  promote  their  traditional  services  by  offering  
Received 27 January 2017, online published 24 March 2017 
mobile  access  to  their  websites  and  OPAC’s.  With  a  good internet speed, a user can access with ease anytime,  anywhere  his  or  her  library.  Thus,  providing  library  services  via  mobile  phones  expand  the  scope  of  the  library  services  and  a  library  takes  a  giant  step  toward  becoming a round-the-clock service4. With some mobile  initiatives  libraries  can  provide  a  wide  array  of  mobile  services  to  the  interested  users.  Some  main  initiatives  that  are  in  use  in  some  prominent  libraries  across  the  globe  are  discussed  below. 
2. LIterAtUre  revIeW 
The  rapid  increase  of  mobile  environment  and  its  ubiquitous nature has made mobile devices an indispensable  part  of  life.  Educause  which    produces  an  annual  “HorizonReport” to document the “time to adoption” for  various technologies entering main stream use on campuses,  placed  “Mobile  Computing”  in  their  “one  year  or  less”  adoption horizon in 2010 report5. Karim, Darus & Hussin6 found  that  perceptions  on  the  application  of  wireless  hand  services  in  the  context  of  library  and  information  services  were  to  be  very  positive.  A  high  majority  of  the  respondents  indicated  their  willingness  to  become  the  users  of  such  services  if  offered.  In  library  arena  a  variety of mobile web applications have been developed,  including mobile library websites and MOPACs (Mobile  OPACs),  mobile  collections,  mobile  library  instruction,  mobile databases, mobile library tours, mobile learning,  library SMS notifications, mobile library circulation, QR  

========1========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  2,  MARCH  2017 
codes, access to services (such as reserving study rooms  and checking out laptops and e-book readers), and SMS  reference7.  Short  Message  System  or  SMS  reference  is  becoming  increasingly  popular  in  academic  libraries  as  a way to provide reference services to patrons from any  location8. The number of genuine library apps grows, so  does  the  number  of  library  web  sites  that  are  optimized  for mobile users9. The same is true for database-apps and  mobile  interfaces.  Many  huge  database-providers  offer  a  mobile  version  of  their  services4.  Kroski10   finds  that  44%  of  academic  libraries  and  34%  of  public  libraries  currently  offer  mobile  libraries  to  some  extent  to  their  patrons; two out of five libraries surveyed (both academic  and  public).  Further,  Kroski10 also  highlights  the  other  services libraries offer, or plan to offer, on their mobile  web  sites:  mobile  layout  of  website,  Mobile  catalog  interface,  SMS  reference,  text  message  notifications.  An  American  Library  Association  study  in  2010  found  that  66%  of  public  libraries  offered  e-books  to  their  users  (up  from  55%  the  previous  year).  An  estimated  83  percent  of  libraries  offer  online  audio  content  and  about  63  percent  offer  online  video  content4. 
3.   o bjectIveS 
The  objectives  of  the  study  are  to: 
i. Highlight  all  the  mobile  applications  in  library  
arena 
ii. Create  a  benchmark  for  libraries  to  mobiles  their  
resources 
iii. Understand  how  such  services  could  benefit  users  
anytime  and  anywhere 
iv. Identify  libraries  that  have  already  implemented  
mobile  library  services. 
4. 
MobILe  LIbrAry INItIAtIveS 
One  advantage  of  developing  a  mobile  library  website  is that it only needs to be developed once, unlike native  applications that need to be developed for each specific  mobile platform. Another advantage of mobile websites is  that they are easier to maintain than native applications,  the third advantage of developing mobile library website  is that it is more cost effective than developing a native  application. It is important that a library’s mobile website  initiative  develops  applications  that  work  on  both  the  smart  phones  and  web  enabled  phones  equally11. 
The University of Richmond Library offers a catalog  search, real time laptop and PC availability information  and  Ask  a  librarian  services  by  email,  SMS,  or  IM.  Another example comes from the University of Virginia  Libraries' mobile web site, which provides news and events,  information about library exhibitions, directions, library  hours, and a text only version of their entire web site13.  New  York  University  Libraries,  with  the  Arch  mobile  portal,  chose  to  focus  on  their  electronically  available  resources, and allows searching of their electronic resources  by  title,  subject,  or  format,  as  well  as  including  basic  library  information.  On  the  other  hand,  a  specialised  library may make different types of information available.  For example, Boston University Center Medical Library  made mobile versions of their subject guides, and made  their  e-books,  e-journals,  databases,  and  library  site  searchable13. 
Mobile  websites  are  fairly  easy  to  create,  publish,  maintain and easy to use and it forms the foundation of  the app or application. Most common mobile websites are  built simply by using HTML. One distinctive advantage  of  using  mobile  websites  rather  than  creating  an  app  is  that  it  is  easy  forn  posting  updates  or  to  make  design  changes,  there  is  no  intermediary  like  an  app  store  submission  process.  One  more  advantage  is  that  it  is  compatible  with  any  web  enabled  phone  not  just  only  
Mobile library applications opens door for libraries  Smartphone’s.  Moreover,  this  technology  doesn’t  need  for  myriad  opportunities.  There  are  many  initiatives  any  advanced  mobile  browser  therefore;  more  people  that  are  adopted  by  libraries  to  expedite  their  existing  can easily make use of it. Even though old web enabled  
services and to make them mobile friendly. Kroski10  “On  the  Move  with  the  mobile  web:  Libraries  and  mobile  technologies” is one of the in depth study on the adoption  of  mobile  technology  in  libraries.  Similarly,  Murray11  and  Lippincott12 have  also  highlighted  some  initiatives  on incorporating mobile applications in library services.  Some main initiatives that are in use in some prominent  libraries  across  the  globe  are  discussed  below. 
4.1 Mobile  Library  Websites  
A Mobile website is an important component of mobile  library  services.  It  is  basically  a  short  version  of  large  website  that  is  designed  and  optimised  for  viewing  on  mobile  devices. They  may  even  be  hosted  on  their  own  sub domain. The general purpose of a mobile website is  to  make  the  content  or  at  least  a  subset  of  the  content,  available  to  the  users.  Mobile  websites  complement  the  existing  library  websites  to  and  help  extend  resources  and  information  to  users  through  their  mobile  devices.  
110 
phones are being superseded by the new Smartphone’s, it’s  always a good approach not to exclude them completely.  Figure  1  presents  the  screenshot  of  the  mobile  library  website,  the  Chillicothe  &  Rose  County  Library. 
Figure 1.  Snapshot Mobile Library website of chillicothe  
         and  ross   Public Library.  
(Source: http://www.crcpl.org, accessed on 3 January 2017) 

========2========

Madhusudhan and Dar: Mobile Information Services and Initiatives in University Libraries 
4.2 Mobile catalogue  
M-OPAC  is  the  online  public  access  catalog  which  is  accessible  through  mobile.  The  Web-OPAC  of  the  academic library sites includes different types of search  strategy and tactics in a condensed manner which is easily  visible in desktop and provides faster search results while  it  becomes  slow  when  accessed  on  mobile  devices. The  mobile  optimised  online  public  access  catalog  should  provide  simple  search  facility  against  the  author,  title,  and subject. The search result should be informative and  contains  information  about  book  and  its  availability  in  concise  manner.  It  requires  a  dedicated  concise  search  page  for  simple  search.  Whether  it  is  not  possible,  the  link  of Web-OPAC  can  be  given  for  it. 
One of the first services to go online was the library  catalog;  before  the  World  Wide  Web  was  invented,  libraries provided dumb-terminal access to their catalogs.  Similarly  the  library  catalog  is  one  of  the  first  things  that ought to appear in the mobile realm. Certain catalog  features, such as account access, make particular sense for  mobile users. Mobile OPACS or MOPACS provide library  users  with  varying  degrees  of  access  to  the  information  contained  in  traditional  OPACS  and  tend  to  be  either  transcoded websites formatted for handheld devices or a  standalone, downloadable applications11. Many libraries’  mobile catalogs, such as Michigan’s ANN Arbor District  Library,  require  the  use  of  the  phone’s  browser.  Other  public libraries with MOPACS include Nashville Public  Library http://tinyurl.com/nplairpac, the New York Public  Library  (http://m.nypl.org/search/leo). 
In  March  2009,  OCLC  introduced  a  pilot  program  for  Worldcat,  allowing  patrons  to  search  for  and  locate  library resources in libraries via an app from their mobile  device.  Users  can  enter  various  search  terms,  such  as  author,  keyword,  or  title  and  even  find  a  participating  library by typing in a zip code11. By employing a multi- prefix incremental search, WorldCat Mobile will provide  a  list  of  auto-completed  matches  when  the  first  few  letters of a book title, book category, or library location  are  entered  (Fig.  2). 
4.3 Library Apps  
that  enhance  our  mobile  devices  capabilities  and  access  information  in  an  elegant,  consistent  ways,  and  are  the  means for creating new services for our mobile patrons.  Likewise, library apps are software applications developed  and  coded  with  a  specific  operating  system.  Users  have  to download them in prior of use. Through an app, users  are  still  able  to  access  networked  information  that  is  linked  by  the  app14.  Library  mobile  applications  (apps)  can allow users to search, bookmark, annotate, link, and  highlight content from scripture, general conference talks,  lesson manuals, and other curriculum on mobile devices.  Recently,  many  large  public  and  academic  libraries  have  also  developed  their  own  apps.  For  example,  the  UCLA  library  app  provides  a  convenient  way  for  users  to  search  content  of  the  UCLA  library  on  an  Android  phoneUsers  can  also  find  library  hours,  contacts,  and  laptop  availability  at  campus  locations15.  Developed  by  the  UCLA  library,  mobile  applications  include  the  following:  search  
i. Library  catalog  and  filter  (keyword,  title,  author,  
subject) 
ii. See  description,  availability,  and  location  of  items iii. Read  reviews 
iv. Find  library  hours  and  contacts 
v. See  number  of  laptops  available  by  campus  
location. 
Indeed,  university  library  apps  can  provide  users  access  to  the  library  catalogue,  databases,  and  library  guides from the palm of their hand. Users can also look  up library locations, borrower information, library news,  and ways to contact librarians. In addition, the location- based  services  are  available  only  on  a  library  mobile  app,  which  peak  user  interests  in  terms  of  mobility15.  Therefore, libraries and librarians face the critical issue  of  determining  how  to  stimulate  intention  for  use  of  library  apps  and  how  to  meet  user  needs. 
When  people  speak  of  “apps”  they  are  most  likely  referring  to  native  applications,  as  these  applications  were some of the first introduced with native calendaring  and email applications on specific devices. These native  
“apps” or applications are installed and run on a device  
Mobile applications, apps for short, are standalone,  
and offer a rich user interface and an in app experience.  dedicated  pieces  of  software  or  web  applications/sites  
The  mobile  app  could  be  built  to  access  local  hardware  
Figure 2: Snapshot of mobile oPAc  (M oPAc)  
(Source: http://pulse.uta.edu/vwebv/, Accessed on 1 January 2017) 
and  software  functions  like  the  camera,  messaging/  notification  capabilities,  geo-location  tracking  and  so  forth. These features will improve the whole experience,  and  offering  a  good  experience  will  encourage  users  to  return  (Fig.  3). 
4.4 Library  SMS  Notifications  
Text  message  alerts  is  an  entry-level  mobile  web  service  for  a  library  to  offer  its  patrons  speedy  news  announcement,  event  reminders,  and  other  requested  information.  It  also  offers  SMS  notifications  to  inform  students  when  their  items  are  due  back,  remind  them  about  overdue  items  and  advise  them  of  fines  incurred.  
111 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  2,  MARCH  2017 
Figure 3. Snapshot of Mobile Library app 
Some  of  the  SMS  notification  services  highlighted  by  Wang,  Ke  &  Lu16   that  libraries  provide  to  its  users  are: 
i. Due-day reminder service: This service sends reminders  
to  patrons  when  their  borrowed  items  are  coming  
due  
ii. Renewal  request  service:  This  service  accompanies  
the  due-day  reminder  service.  If  a  patron  receives  
a  due-day  reminder  and  wants  to  renew  the  item,  
the  patron  can  click  a  renewal-request  hyperlink  
provided in the text message to extend the due date  
of  a  borrowed  item  
iii. Overdue  notification  service:  This  service  reminds  
patrons  about  overdue  items 
iv. Request arrival notification service: This service reminds  
patrons  about  the  availability  of  reserved  items v. News  and  event  reminder  service:  This  service  
sends  reminders  to  patrons  about  important  news,  
exhibitions,  instructions,  and  so  on 
vi. New  title  notification  service:  This  service  lets  
patrons  get  informed  of  newly  acquired  titles.  This  
service accompanies the preview and reservation of  
new  titles.  All  the  above  SMS  services  are  opt  in,  
which means that patrons can determine by themselves  
whether to use any or all of these services. Patrons  
only need to activate on the library website and fill  
in  their  mobile  phone  numbers  to  avail  of  these  
services.  Currently,  patrons  can  use  these  services  
free  of  charge. 
4.5 SMS  reference  Service 
In  traditional  libraries  reference  services  are  the  functions  performed  by  a  trained  reference  librarian  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  patrons,  instructing  users  in  finding  the  relevant  information  of  their  need,  referring  patrons in locating appropriate information in time bound  manner.  But  present  day  reference  services  at  libraries  are  becoming  increasingly  virtual  as  more  and  more  researchers  are  working  remotely. Technologies  such  as  instant messaging, e-mail, and now SMS text messaging  are making it easy for libraries to maintain relevance as  information hubs by offering convenient services to busy  users.  New  ask-a-librarian  services  are  offering  mobile  patrons  the  ability  to  text  in  their  research  questions  
112 
 Figure 4.  Mobile SMS Notifcations.  
(https://libraryh3lp.com/sms-reference-service) from  afar10   (Fig.  4). 
Texting has become a popular form of communication,  especially among the younger generation. SMS reference  can allow libraries the opportunity to access students via  a familiar accessible service. For many libraries texting is  used to complement the various other reference services  currently  being  used  by  institutions,  such  as  in-person,  phone,  e-mail,  and  chat.  However,  it  is  important  that  individual  libraries  evaluate  the  appropriateness  of  this  technology  for  their  patrons:  Does  it  meet  one's  clients'  needs instantly? Is SMS a relevant form of communication  for  one's  patrons?  and  finally,  can  SMS  technology  be  easily  provided7. 
Libraries using AltaRama’s Reference by SMS Service  receives  a  unique  mobile  phone  number  that  can  be  advertised  as  the  text  number  for  that  library.  Rather  than going to a mobile phone, texts can be automatically  sent  to  an  email  address  specified  by  the  library.  To  respond, the librarian simply hits the usual “Reply” link  in that email; responses are then automatically delivered  to  the  patron’s  mobile  phone  as  a  text  message.  This  service  will  appeal  to  those  librarians  unaccustomed  to  texting  and  to  those  whose  typing  skills  may  be  faster  than  their  texting  abilities11. 
SMS  reference  can  allow  libraries  the  opportunity  to  access  students  via  a  familiar  accessible  service.  For  many  libraries  texting  is  used  to  complement  the  various  other  reference  services  currently  being  used  by  institutions,  such  as  in-person,  phone,  e-mail,  and  chat.  However,  it  is  important  that  individual  libraries  evaluate the appropriateness of this technology for their  patrons:  Does  it  meet  one’s  clients’  needs  instantly?  Is  SMS  a  relevant  form  of  communication  for  one’s  patrons?  And  finally,  can  SMS  technology  be  easily  provided7   (Fig.  5). 
Figure 5. Snapshot of SMS reference services.  (Source: https://libraryh3lp.com/sms-reference-service) 

========4========

Madhusudhan and Dar: Mobile Information Services and Initiatives in University Libraries 
4.6 Qr codes 
QR code is the trademark term for Quick Response  Code and it’s also known as two dimensional barcodes17.  The QR code is a two-dimensional code they can contain  hundred  times  more  data  OR  information  than  simple  barcode.  Quick  Response  Codes  are  generated  by  the  QR Code generator and reading by the QR code readers  by  scanning  using  smart  phones,  tablets  and  computer.  QR  Code  is  capable  to  be  store  information  (numbers,  texts,  hyperlinks,  contact  details,  calendar  information,  e-mail  addresses,  phone  numbers,  SMS,  maps,  social  network information etc. in any direction i.e., horizontally  and  vertically.  QR  code  store  maximum  information  up  to  7089  characters  numeric  only,  4296  characters  of   alphanumeric  and  binary  (8  bit)  2953  bytes  in  single  barcode and single code can be divided in to 16 portion  of a code at maximum. A QR code is capable to reading  with  high-speed  in  360°  (Omni-directional). 
Libraries are increasingly looking to mobile technologies,  including quick response codes to better serve the patrons.  As  mobile  devices  become  more  popular  among  library  users, the interest of using QR codes in academic libraries  has  also  grown  in  recent  years.  A  number  of  libraries  have  begun  experimenting  with  the  technology18.  Some  of  the  popular  uses  of  QR  codes  in  libraries  follow: i. Library  audio  tour 
ii. Group  study  room  scheduler 
iii. Marketing/promotional  materials  
iv. Linking  from  print  to  electronic  journal  holdings v. Providing  an  electronic  alternative  to  physical  
books  
vi. Promoting  online  audio  visual  materials 
vii. Embedding  video  help  
viii.  Bringing  external  resources  into  the  library  ix. Finding  appropriate  help  
x. Taking  the  catalogue  record  with  you 
xi. Linking  from  course  syllabi.  
There is an urgent need of implementing QR codes  in  libraries  as  it  will  not  only  save  the  time  but  it  will  also make the services aesthetically appealing. The other  important  aspect  that  libraries  need  to  evolve  is  the  marketing  of  QR  codes  to  highlight  their  importance  so  that  more  and  more  services  will  come  under  the  ambit of QR code. Some more examples of QR code in  libraries  as  highlighted  by  Garrett19   include: 
i. Linking  from  subject  areas  in  the  stacks  to  related  
electronic resources, Running brief instructional videos,  
Connecting to useful Web-sites for further information,  
Offering  contact  details  for  library  staff 
ii. Linking to a Web page that allowed patrons to locate  
books nominated for a teen literature prize, vote for  
their  favorite,  leave  comments,  and  so  forth 
iii. Enhancing  exhibits  with  a  QR  code  link  to  songs,  
videos,  Web  sites,  surveys,  contests,  etc.  or  other  
information  that  augments  the  exhibits 
iv. Placing  codes  in  the  library  stacks/end  caps  or  
magazine/journal areas that point to online electronic  
holdings of print materials or related subject guides,  
linking  to  library  audio  tours  for  orientations v.  Offering  patrons  basic  information  about  an  item,  
including  the  location  and  call  number  in  catalog  
records.  Users  can  scan  the  code  and  head  to  the  
stacks  rather  than  writing  or  printing,  taping  to  
video/DVD  cases,  linking  to  mobile  friendly  video  
trailers 
vi. Placing  code  on  staff  directory  pages  and  research  
guides  that  go  to  mobile  friendly  sites  for  later  
reference 
vii. Adding  code  onto  audio  book  cases  for  author  
interviews or books for reviews, displaying code on  
study  room  doors  connecting  to  room  reservation  
forms 
viii. Offering library video tutorials –linking a QR code  
to  a YouTube  selective  list  of      videos,  which  will  
create  an App  for  easy  access  to  those  videos ix. Embedding  QR  codes  on  event  posters.  The  code  
can  link  to  a  URL  with  more  information,  audio  or  
video,  a  directory,  downloadable  material  or  other  
information 
x. Putting  QR  codes  on  your  print  magazines  and  
journals  that  link  to  their  online  counterparts  xi. Encoding  RSS  feeds  for  quick  delivery  of  current  
information,  Sending  SMS  text  messages,  Sharing  
contact  information 
xii. Linking  online  study  room  reservation  calendars  to  
the physical room by placing a QR code on the door.  
Patrons  can  reserve  the  room  or  view  the  schedule  
to  see  when  the  room  will  become  available  by  
scanning  the  code  (Fig.  6  and  7). 
Figure 6. Qr  code.  (Source: https://helpx.adobe.com/indesign/using/ 
       generate-qr-code.html, Accessed on 1 January 2017) 
Figure 7. Qr  code in a library.  (Source:http://www.slideshare.net/ 
         ravindrachaudhary3110/qrcode-presentation-slide) 
113 

========5========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  2,  MARCH  2017 
4.7 Mobile collections  
As  with  traditional  collections,  mobile  collections  span a wide range of content and an equally wide range  of  delivery  methods.  “This  spectrum  runs  from  mobile  access  to  reference  sources  to  audio  book  collections  and  databases11.  Kroski10   describes  audio  book,  eBook,  music and video files as typical collections available on  mobile  devices.  Whether  these  collections  are  directly  accessible  from  the  users’  devices,  or  are  loaded  by  library  personnel  on  equipment  available  for  checkout  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  collection. 
i. Audio 
Mobile  devices  have  the  property  to  store  audio  lectures  that  can  be  listened  anytime.  For  example,  the  Crouch  Fine  Arts  Library  at  Baylor  University  offers  Audio  reserves  2Go,  so  that  all  listening  assignments  are in the palm of the user’s hand. They loan preloaded  iPods  with  listening  assignments  and  organize  them  by  course  and  teacher.  These  iPods  are  available  for  a  12-hour’s  checkout  and  can  leave  the  library. ii. References 
Fox20 lists a number of publishers who have worked  with  mobile  service  providers  such  as  Mobifusion  to  adapt  popular  reference  materials  to  a  mobile-friendly  design. These works include World Almanac, World Book,  and  standard  dictionaries  and  thesauri”.  According  to  Lippincott12   clinical  professionals  and  other  researchers  working in the field may find ready access to directories,  handbooks,  and  the  like  to  be  of  great  utility  in  the  field. For most effective access, Lippincott12  advises that  these  resources  should  be  organised  via  subject  guides  that  are  formatted  for  mobile  retrieval. 
iii. Google  Books 
A  mobile  version  of  Google’s  Book  Search  is  also  available to those with an iPhone or an Android, providing  access  to  more  than  1.5  million  mobile  public  domain  books in the United States and over 500,000 outside the  United States. Libraries can choose to link their OPACS  to  Google  Books,  allowing  handheld  devices  to  access  these  versions,  which  are  enhanced  for  small  screen  reading11. For example, the University Libraries at Murray  State University have linked their Voyager OPAC (http:// racertrac.murraystate.edu/vwebv/searchAdvanced) to Google  Books,  offering  patrons  the  choice  to  read  a  book  full  text  online,  see  a  Limited  Preview,  or  just  glimpse  an  “About  This  Book”  abstract.  It  is  not  inconceivable  to  imagine  a  link  in  an  OPAC  to  Google  Books  launching  the  Google  app  on  the  iPhone  or Android11. 
iv. OverDrive 
Murray11   discusses  the  OverDrive  Media  Console  for  Windows  Mobile.  Rather  than  using  a  Mac  or  PC  desktop as a go-between for content, patrons can employ  their  smart  phones  equipped  with  the  Windows  Mobile  computer operating system and the OverDrive subscriber  card. Although eBooks are not yet available via OverDrive,  their audio books, music, and video can all be wirelessly  
114 
downloaded  onto  these  phones.Patrons  can  even  use  OverDrive’s  Download  Library  Search  to  locate  local  library resources to checkout. According to OverDrive’s  director of marketing, the company is currently developing  similar OverDrive Media Console software for Androids,  Blackberrys,  and  iPhones. 
4.8 Mobile  Library  circulation 
Not all new mobile tools for libraries involve direct  patron interaction. Some can be used behind the scenes to  offer improved library services. The SirsiDynix Company  has developed a handheld circulation tool called PocketCirc  that  enables  librarians  to  access  the  Unicorn  Library  Management  System  on  a  PDA.  This  wireless  solution  enables  staff  to  assist  patrons  in  the  stacks,  check  out  materials  while  off  site  (for  example,  at  community  or  campus  events),  and  update  inventory  items  while  walking  around  the  library10. 
4.9 Mobile Audio tours 
For  the  busy  library  patrons  libraries  offer Audio/ Video tour services for their mobile devices. Such tours  help to know the university library system and services. In  the past there were some dedicated mp3 players to guide  new  users  through  the  library.  But,  the  mobile  devices  have  made  the  task  very  easy,  a  user  can  simply  scan  a  QR Code to get a video that can eventually guide him to  many services and locations of the library. Mobile audio  tours can be of great help to librarians, especially in areas  of tight scheduling and staffing shortage. Although these  self-discovery  tours  may  be  less  expensive  to  operate  than  traditional  human  tours,  equipment  maintenance  and rental operations may not be cost effective for some  visitors  and  organizations21. 
Duke  University  Libraries  provides  a  10-part  audio  walking tour of its Bostock Library, available for download  as  MP3  files10.  The  Simmons  College  Library  offers  students,  faculty,  and  staff  the  ability  to  check  out  an  iPod  pre-loaded  with  a  guided  audio  tour  of  its  Beatley  Library  and  Information  Commons.  The  University  of  Southern  California  offers  an  8-part  video  tour  of  its  Doheny Memorial Library through its iTunes University  Campus  Life  channel,  giving  remote  mobile  users  a  glimpse  of  the  structure.  Students  and  staff  at  Arizona  State  University  can  download  a  walking  tour  of  the  Hayden  Library  through  the  Library  Channel  on  iTunes  U10.  The  C.V.  Starr  East  Asian  Library  at  Columbia  University provides enhanced audio podcasts of its facilities  in  English,  Chinese,  Korean,  Japanese,  and Tibetan. 
4.10   Mobile Augmented  reality  
Augmented reality has emerged as a new interactive  technology and its unprecedented way of complementing  the physical environment with virtual annotations offers  innovative  modes  for  accessing  commercially-relevant  content22.  It  allows  a  level  of  immersion  that  no  virtual  equipment  can  provide.  Augmented  Reality  has  been  already used in many applications as surgery, inspection  

========6========

Madhusudhan and Dar: Mobile Information Services and Initiatives in University Libraries 
of  hazardous  environments,  engineering.  The  use  of  Augmented  Reality  in  libraries  is  penetrating.  
Augmented  Reality  aims  at  simplifying  the  user’s  life  by  bringing  virtual  information  not  only  to  his  immediate surroundings, but also to any indirect view of  the real-world environment, such as live-video stream23.  AR  enhances  the  user’s  perception  of  and  interaction  with  the  real  world. 
While  Virtual  Reality  (VR)  technology  or  Virtual  Environment as called by Milgram, completely immerses  users in a synthetic world without seeing the real world, AR  technology augments the sense of reality by superimposing  virtual  objects  and  cues  upon  the  real  world  in  real  time  (Fig.  8). 
Figure 8. block diagram of our mobile augmented reality system. 
of  “dictionaries”),  and  then  the  software  will  overlay  a  range  of  digital  content  to  this  physical  presence,  once  the  meaning  and  subject  area  of  the  shelf  are  identified  by  the  software. 
A  mobile  augmented  book  stacks  application  is  quickly accessed from a user's smartphone and does not  require  users  to  enter  a  search  query;  it  allows  them  to  use  their  stacks  location  and  smartphone  as  a  query  point  for  additional  library  information.  No  comparable  digital  collocation  service  yet  exists  in  libraries,  and  no service can overlay access to the range of electronic  resources  to  a  person's  location  in  the  print  collection.  The  service  will  be  available  soon.  
(ii) Library  Navigation:  
This  applied  mobile  augmented  reality  research  is  particularly relevant to the problem of library way-finding.  These  way-finding  problems  include  understanding  call  numbers  or  other  library  specific  numbering  such  as  such  as  the  shelf  ranges  or  even  the  column  number  on  the  ranges  that  are  typically  utilised  for  inventory  control.  Researchers  have  studied  mobile  applications  for  collections  based  way-finding  and  have  found  that  mobile  applications  can  draw  the  users’  attention  to  the  environment  in  ways  that  aid  a  user  in  her  path  to  a  known  item.  Furthermore,  researchers  plan  to  study  augmenting a way-finding app with directional “tunnel”  
The  mobile  app  will  use  modified  OCR  software  
Mobile Augmented Reality (AR) applications represent  
overlays  that  can  draw  student's  attention  to  the  most  a profound opportunity for increased access to print and  
important features of the stacks while they are navigating  digital  library  collections.  AR  applications  can  deliver  
to  a  desired  item  in  the  library. 
an  engaging  and  interactive  information  experience.  
(iii) Optical  Character  Recognition  (OCR): 
Applications  that  overlay  graphical  data  are  well  suited  
for  in-library  engagement  as  well  as  off-site  real  world  
interaction with library content. Most augmented reality apps  
and  check  a  suggestion  database  to  identify  library  in libraries are currently in the research and development  
resources  that  will  support  the  assignment  or  topical  
phase22.  The  current  state  of  mobile  in  libraries  is  such  that  many  libraries  now  create  and  adapt  their  catalogs  for mobile access. Mobile augmented reality applications  offer  much  for  the  integration  of  library  resources  into  user’s information environment. Libraries, through further  research and development efforts, can continue to expand  and extend the library presence in this environment through  augmented reality applications24. The following use cases  user  models  are  advanced  for  possibilities  of  providing  new  and  highly  interactive  library  experiences: (i) Physical  Book  Stacks  Browsing:  
A use case for augmented reality applications includes  the integration of digital library content into the physical  stacks  browsing  experience.  Consider  a  first  time  user  to  a  library.  Orienting  in  the  book  stacks  is  both  a  challenge  and  also  an  incomplete  introduction  to  the  totality  of  available  services  of  the  library.  The  new  student  may  consider  the  physical  book  stacks  to  be  the  only  available  library  resource. The  new  user  is  not  aware  of  the  digital  items  of  the  collections.  With  an  augmented reality service in the library book stacks, the  mobile  app  user  can  use  the  software  to  first  identify  the  stacks  that  he/she  is  in  (i.e.,  identify  a  subject  area  
interest;  checking  against  a  database  of  course  reserves  for  the  class  and  other  relevant  sources  of  data  (course  specific  help  guides);  and  suggesting  library  resources  and research databases that are relevant; this information  package can be viewed on the phone, or students will have  the  option  of  sending  the  information  to  themselves  via  email  or  other  social  networking  platforms;  as  students  value  collaboration  and  social  aspects  of  research. (iv) Facial  Recognition:  
Currently, library staff uses a full workstation computer  to  connect  to  a  scanner  that  scans  the  patron's  barcode.  The  library's  barcode  scanners  for  scanning  a  patron  ID  may  not  be  necessary,  if  a  clerk  can  use  a  library  smart  phone  in  order  to  scan  a  patron's  picture  ID. The  picture  that  is  scanned  will  then  does  feature  detection  and patron recognition in order to charge out the patron's  items.  These  types  of  applications  could  result  in  cost  savings  for  the  library,  as  many  of  the  transactions  that  are  happening  at  the  circulation  desk  do  not  require  the  full  resources  of  a  desktop  computer.  In  fact  these  transactions could be handled with a small tablet computer  loaded  with  library  facial  recognition  software  that  will  replace  the  traditional  desktop  paradigm. 
115 

========7========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  2,  MARCH  2017 
(v) Identify  Building  Services  and  Collections:  
An  augmented  reality  application  that  can  identify  buildings  by  simply  holding  the  phone's  camera  up  to  the  building  could  be  particularly  useful  for  a  large  university  campus  or  institutions  with  multiple  library  sites.  The  user  of  this  augmented  reality  app  can  use  this to identify the name of the library building and the  hours of the library building22.  It  can  tell  users  when  it  will  be  closing  and  overlay  information  such  as  current  computer  availability,  technology  availability  or  even  seating availability in the library. The theoretical mobile  augmented  reality  service  here  is  using  a  software  tool  that  performs  feature  point  recognition  algorithm  in  the  app that identifies the library building and then connects  with  a  database  of  services  offered.  (Fig.  9). 
Figure 9. Augmented reality app for shelf reading. 
4.11Mobile  Instructions  
databases, and e-journals, several types of library catalog  searches,  and  a  virtual  tour  of  the  library.  The  Faculty  Workshop Series at the Arizona State University Libraries  is a video podcast series which can be found by accessing  the  ASU  Library  Channel  within  iTunes.  The  three  to  five  minute  videos  concerning  finding  articles,  getting  started doing library research, and finding books can be  viewed  on  portable  devices  such  as  a  video  iPod  at  the  learner's  convenience.  (Fig.  10). 
Figure 10. Snapshot of mobile printing.  
4.12   Mobile  Printing 
  Mobile  printing  allows  users  to  print  documents  from their mobile devices by wirelessly connecting to a  printer. However, the implementation of this technology  is hindered because of its dependence on the capabilities  of  mobile  devices25.  The  operating  systems  of  many  mobile devices do not include print capabilities and the  
Library users’ who don't have the time or inclination  
user  must  download  software  to  enable  this  function.  to  attend  an  on-site  workshop,  can  still  get  the  most  
Additionally, the memory and processing power of mobile  out  of  the  library  resources  by  accessing  classes  and  
devices  may  also  affect  the  appearance  of  documents  tutorials  on  their  mobile  devices.  Libraries  have  begun  
and  increase  their  print  time.  Further  problems  may  distributing  their  knowledge  and  expertise  with  library  
arise  when  devices  fail  to  communicate  properly  with  systems  and  materials  via  MP3  and  video  files  which  
the networked printers25. The working group determined  
that  these  issues,  combined  with  the  cost  and  difficulty  
patrons  can  take  with  them. 
The  Washington  State  University  Libraries  offer  patrons  how-to  help  with  library  tools  and  resources  through brief MP3 audio recordings which can be uploaded  to  iPods  and  other  mobile  devices.  The  WSU  Libraries  present a 3-minute guide to the map collection, 2-minute  tutorials on how to select search terms and use Boolean  operators,  as  well  as  instructional  audio  casts  on  using  their online databases to find journal articles. The Sheridan  Libraries  at  Johns  Hopkins  University  offers  lengthy  podcasts instructing listeners how to create maps, conduct  citation searches, and ask-a-librarian. The Alden Library  at  Ohio  University  has  created  a  series  of  short  audio  files  describing  intercampus  requests,  reserving  group  study  rooms,  obtaining  reference  assistance,  and  library  workshops. 
University  has  hundreds  of  educational  podcasts  which  can  by  uploaded  to  patrons'  MP3  and  portable  media players and taken to-go, many of which are from  college and university libraries. The Texas A&M Libraries  has their own channel on iTunes featuring down loadable  video casts covering topics such as finding books, articles,  
116 
of  finding  software  which  accommodated  most  mobile  devices,  made  the  option  of  mobile  printing  unfeasible  at  this  point  in  time10. 
4.13 Mobile  Databases 
 It's not only libraries that have seen the writing on  the  wall  with  regard  to  the  mobile  Web,  but  academic  software  and  database  providers  have  started  taking  portability to heart10. The scholarly citation management  application, Endnote has rolled out mobile functionality  for Pocket PC owners with their X1.0.1 release. Factiva's  news  database  has  a  search  interface  for  mobile  Web  users,  as  does  the  Westlaw  legal  research  database.  Library patrons can access detailed company information  while  on  the  road  through  Hoover's  Mobile,  and  the  National  Library  of  Medicine  makes  it  possible  for  medical  students  to  research  remotely  through  PubMed  for  handhelds10.  Database  publishers  have  started  to  evolve  mobile  friendly  applications  or  formatting  the  old  versions  of  their  databases  that  fits  well  in  the  mobile  environment.  Murray11 lists  several  databases  in  his blog, including Music Online and the Social Science  

========8========

Madhusudhan and Dar: Mobile Information Services and Initiatives in University Libraries 
Research  Network  (SSRN),  which  have  developed  apps  for mobile devices. Alexander Street’s Music Online app  allows subscribers to cross-search hundreds of thousands  of  audio  recordings,  scores,  videos,  and  full-text  music  reference  materials  as  well  as  update  playlists.  
On  19  November  2009  Social  Science  Research  Network announced that the availability of a downloadable  app granting mobile access to their e-library, an Abstract  Database containing over 260,300 abstracts to scholarly  working papers and an Electronic Paper Collection, which  has over 213,700 downloadable full text pdf documents.  Database  providers  such  as  Factiva,  LexisNexis,  Ovid,  PubMed,  and  Westlaw  have  also  developed  mobile  interfaces, with emphasis in the medical and legal fields21. EBSCO too has announced EBSCOhost Mobile, providing  a  mobile  interface  for  EBSCO  products  (Fig.  11). 
Figure 11. Snapshot of ebScohost mobile database. 
4.14  Mobile  Services  for visual  and  Hearing  
  Impairments 
Another  important  use  of  the  mobile  technology  is  for  special  libraries  to  use  the  devices  to  assist  the  persons  with  special  abilities  like  visual  or  hearing.  Many  such  people  are  often  unable  to  access  because  there  is  no  special  interface  for  them.  Mobile  devices  such as smartphones which have screen readers that can  help  the  disabled  to  access  information.  
Visual or vibrating alerts, relay services and hearing  aid compatibility devices make mobile phones accessible  for  the  deaf  and  hard  of  hearing,  while  features  such  as  voice  recognition  and  auto  text  are  needed  by  those  with physical disabilities26. The use of augmented reality  refers to the “addition of a computer-assisted contextual  layer  of  information  over  the  real  world,  creating  a  reality  that  is  enhanced  or  augmented  using  either  text  to  speech”  or  vice  versa. 
5.    c oNcLUSIoNS 
to  provide  them  notifications  regarding  the  library.  But  now the mobile computing has revolutionised libraries by  enabling the users hassle free admittance to “information  on the go” service. With the ubiquity and relative success  that  mobile  users  have  with  Google  and  other  search  engines,  libraries  need  to  be  competitive  in  order  to  remain  relevant27.  The  role  of  mobile  technologies  and  mobile  library  initiatives  for  information  access  in  academic  libraries  can’t  be  underestimated.  In  this  paper,  different  mobile  initiatives  like  mobile  library  website,  MOPAC’s,  mobile  SMS  reference  services,  mobile library notifications, QR codes, augmented reality  etc.  are  highlighted  with  examples  of  Universities  that  have  already  made  inroads  in  mobile  library  services.  Moreover, how these mobile library services would help  to facilitate access to information in ubiquitous and time  bound  manner  has  also  been  discussed  in  detail.  For  libraries,  especially  academic  libraries  to  stay  relevant  in  the  mobile  era  there  is  a  need  to  implement  mobile  library  technologies  for  the  maximum  access  of  their  resources and for the satisfaction of their users and how  they  facilitate  access  to  information  are  discussed  to  understand  how  libraries  can  leverage  them  for  making  their  services  fast  and  smart.  In  order  for  libraries  to  stay  relevant,  libraries  must  implement  mobile  library  technologies  for  the  maximum  access  of  their  resources  and  promotion  of  their  services.  
reFereNceS 
1.    Vassilakaki, E. Mobile information services in libraries:  
A review of current trends in delivering information.  
Inter.  Lending  Docu.  Suppl.,  2014,   42 (4),  176-86. 2. Yue, H. Research and development of the mobile library  
based on WAP technology. In  2 
nd 
 International Conference  
on Industrial Mechatronics and Automation, ICIMA,  
May  2010,  pp.  191–194.  http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ 
document/5538338/ (accessed on 5 December 2016). 3. Villoldo, M.A., et al. How to mobilize your library  
at  low  cost. Lib.  Quart.,  2012, 22(2),  118-45. 4. Vollmer,  T.  There’s  an  App  for  that.  Libraries  and  
mobile technology: An introduction to public policy  
considerations.  USA:  ALA,  Office  for  Information  
Technology  Policy,  2010. 
5.      Johnson,  L., et  al.   The  NMC  horizon  report:  2015  
Museum edition. New media  consortium. 6101 West  
Courtyard  Drive  Building  One  Suite  100,  Austin,  
TX  78730,  2015. 
6.    Shahriza  A.K.;  Nor,  S.H.D.  &  Ramlah,  H.  Mobile  
phone  applications  in  academic  library  services: A  
students'  feedback  survey.  Campus-Wide  Info.  Sys.  
2006, 23(1),  35-51. 
7.    Herman,  S.  SMS  reference:  Keeping  up  with  your  
clients. Electronic  Lib .,  2007, 25(4),  401-08. 
The  application  of  mobile  phone  is  not  new  in  
8.   Paterson, L. & Boon, Low. Student attitudes towards  
academic  libraries.  Many  academic  libraries  across  the  globe  were  already  using  SMS  services  to  their  users  
mobile library services for smartphones. Library Hi  Tech,  2011, 29(3),  412-423. 
117 

========9========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  2,  MARCH  2017 
9.   Pianos, T. EconBiz to go: Mobile search options for  
business and economicsdeveloping a library app for  
researchers. Library  Hi  Tech ,  2012, 30(3),  436-48. 10.  Kroski, E. On the move with the mobile web: Libraries  
and mobile technologies. Lib. Tech. Reports ,  2008,  
44(5),  1-48. 
11.  Murray,  L.  Libraries  like  to  move  it,  move  it.  Ref.  
Ser.  Rev.,  2010,  38(2),  233-49. 
12.  Lippincott, J.K. A mobile future for academic libraries.  
Ref.  Serv.  Review,  2010,  38(2),  205-13. 
13. Griggs,  K.;  Laurie,  M.B.  &  Hannah,  G.R.  Library/  
mobile:  Tips  ondesigning  and  developing  mobile  
web  sites. Code4lib  J.,  2009, 8,  11-23. 
14.  Han Rebekah Wong, S. Which platform do our users  
prefer: website or mobile app? Ref. Serv. Rev., 2012,  
40(1),  103-15. 
15.  Chang,  Chiao-Chen.  Library  mobile  applications  
in  university  libraries.   Lib.  Hi  Tech ,  2013,  31(3),  
478-92. 
16.  Wang,  Chun-Yi;  Hao-Ren  Ke  &  Wen-Chen  Lu.  
Design  and  performance  evaluation  of  mobile  web  
services  in  libraries:  A  case  study  of  the  Oriental  
Institute  of  Technology  Library.  Electronic  Lib. ,  
2012, 30(1),  33-50. 
17.  Shakil,  M.;  et  al.  Quick  response  code  in  oral  
and  maxillofacial  radiology.  J.  Oral  Maxillofacial  
Radiology,  2014, 2(3),  95. 
18.  Lo, Leo; Jason, C. & Danielle, T. Putting QR codes to the  
test. New  Lib.  World,  2013, 114(11/12),  459-77. 19.  Garrett,  T.  QR  codes  and  libraries.  Florida  Lib.,  
2012,   55 (2),  27-29. 
20. Fox, M.K. Information anywhere. Net  Connect  Lib.  
J., 2008, 2-5. http://www.libraryjournal.com/article/ 
CA6599045.html.  (accessed  on  3  January  2017). 21.  Buczynski, J. Libraries begin to engage their menacing  
mobile phone hordes without shhhhh!. Internet Ref.  
Ser.  Quar.,  2008, 13(2/3),  261-9. 
22.    Javornik,  A.  Augmented  reality:  Research  agenda  
for  studying  the  impact  of  its  media  characteristics  
on  consumer  behaviour.  J.  Retail.  Consum.  Serv.,  
2016, 30,   252-61. 
23. Zlatanova,  S.  Augmented  reality  technology.  Delft  
University of Technology, Faculty of Civil Engineering  
and  Geosciences,  Department  of  Geodesy,  Section  
GIS Technology,  2002. 
24.  Hahn, J. Mobile augmented reality applications for  
library  services. New  Lib.  World,   2012,  113(9/10):  
429-38. 
25.  Nowlan, G. Going mobile: creating a mobile presence  
for  your  library.  New  Lib.  World,  2013,  114(3/4),  
142-50. 
118 
26.  Narasimhan,  N.  &  Leblois,  A.  Making  mobile  
phones  and  services  accessible  for    persons  with  
disabilities. A joint report of ITU—The International  
Telecommunication  Union  and  G3ict-the  global  
initiative  for  inclusive  ICTs,  2012. 
27.  Reese Bomhold, C. Educational use of smart phone  
technology:  A  survey  of  mobile  phone  application  
use by undergraduate university students. Program,  
2013, 47(4),  424-36. 
Websites 
1. http://www.crcpl.org. 
2. http://pulse.uta.edu/vwebv/. 
3. http://ualr.edu/library/files/2012/09/UALRmobile. 
jpg. 
4. https://libraryh3lp.com/sms-reference-service  5. https://helpx.adobe.com/indesign/using/generate-qr- 
code.html. 
6. http://www.slideshare.net/ravindrachaudhary3110/ 
qrcode-presentation-slide.  
7. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/221265915_ 
Mobile_augmented_reality_for_books_on_a_shelf. 8. http://www.i-programmer.info/news/105-artificial- 
intelligence/2187-augmented-reality-app-for-shelf- 
reading.html. 
9. http://www.samsung.com/us/mobile-print-app/  10. https://bizlib247.files.wordpress.com/2011/10/ebsco- 
app1.jpg. 
contributors 
Dr  M.  Madhusudhan   is  currently  working  as  Associate  Professor in the Department of Library and Information Science,  University of Delhi. He has 17 years of teaching, administration  and  research  experience  at  the  University  level.  Under  his  supervision 17 MPhils, 6 PhDs and 110+ project reports have  been  awarded.  He  has  published  one  book,  edited  two  books,  45  research  articles  including  32  International,  20  chapters,  and  7  international  conference  papers.  He  is  also  editorial  member  of  JLIS,  IJLIS   and  reviewer  for  five  international  LIS  journals.  His  areas  of  interest  includes:  Designing  and  evaluation  of  websites,  evaluation  of  web-OPACs,  ICT  in  libraries,  social  networking  sites,  e-resources,  mobile-based  library  services,  etc. 
Mr  Saleeq Ahmad  Dar   Senior  Research  Fellow,  is  pursuing  PhD  in  Library  and  Information  Science  from  the  Department  of  Library  and  Information  Science,  University  of  Delhi.  He  has  done  his  MLIS  from  University  of  Kashmir,  J&K  and  MPhil degree from the Department of Library and Information  Science,  University  of  Delhi.  His  research  interests  includes:  Mobile  library  services,  mobile  devices,  social  networking  sites  and  social  media. 

========10========

