DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 38, No. 5, Sept 2018, pp. 369-374, DOI : 10.14429/djlit.38.5.11191 
 2018, DESIDOC 
Perception of Semi-Professionals in using ICT in Manipal Academy of Higher  
Education Libraries 
Ashish Rao K., Mahabaleshwara Rao*, and Shivananda Bhat K.    Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal – 576 104, Karnataka, India 
*E-mail: baikadi@yahoo.com 
AbSTrACT 
Application of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) is one of the best practices observed in  libraries as it enables automation and modernisation of library services. Today’s environment is digitally driven  and library semi-professionals play an important role in providing up-to-date information to the users using modern  technologies. The objective of the present study was to assess the perception of semi-professionals with respect to  the use of ICT in Manipal Academy of Higher Education Libraries by them. 58 Library Assistant working in the  seven constituent institutional libraries of MAHE at Manipal campus were included in the study and data were  collected using questionnaire. The fndings of the study revealed that EasyLib, the library automation software,  and Electronic Public Access Catalogue (EPAC) had most impact on the role of semi-professionals (84.2 %) in  providing ICT enabled services to the users. More than thirty percent (31.5 %) of the semi-professionals were of  the opinion that  ICT has considerably changed their duties and responsibilities. Semi-professionals are also of the  opinion that they are now in a position to provide faster, more accurate and up-to-date information services to the  users in their libraries. The fndings of the present study support a need to implement the appropriate technologies  in the libraries as they support the semi-professionals in their library housekeeping activities as well as in providing  
effective library services to the users. 
Keywords: Semi-professionals; ICT applications; Perception; Implementation of ICT; MAHE libraries 
1. INTrODUCTION 
Libraries became an integral part of an academic institution  so that it fulflls the aims and objectives of an institution for  which  the  library  primarily  exists.  Modern  libraries  have  advanced so much with the implementation of Information and  Communication  Technology (ICT).  Information  technology  has given birth to the digital library concepts. Implementation  of  modern  technologies  like  library  automation  software,  installation  of  RFID  and  development  of  library  portals  have  necessitated  the  library  staff  members  of  all  levels  to  depend on technology to render better services. The shift in  library collection from print to online calls for a team of staff,  particularly semi-professionals in a library who are competent  enough to handle ICT applications and also provide IT-based  services in the library. With the birth and rampant use of the  Internet,  online  catalogs  of  other  libraries  and  bibliographic  databases can also be accessed for reference. They are expected  to learn new methods of providing innovative services with the  help and use of ICT. For this, the technology also must support  them so that it does not become obstacles in rendering their  services. Thus, this paper is aimed to study perception of semi- professionals  caused  by  implementation  of  ICT  in  Manipal  Academy of Higher Education (MAHE) Libraries. 
Received : 28 February 2017, Revised : 25 August 2018  Accepted : 29 August 2018, Online published : 5 September 2018 
2. LITErATUrE rEVIEW 
Dasgupta1   is  of  the  opinion  that  “in  this  increasingly  globalised  economy,  knowledge  and  the  skills  are  key  differentiators of nations as well as individuals. It is globalisation  which determines the university education and research trends  emerging today. Indian librarians of today serve in a society  which is actually in fux, torn by the technological revolution  and  rapid  political  changes.  Librarians  and  information  professionals in India are now experiencing both excitement  and anxiety as a result of the sweeping societal changes.” 
According  to  Webster’s  Dictionary2,  “Library  Semi- Professionals  are  library  personnel  with  features  of  professionalism in their work but with less knowledge, skill  and judgment than full-fedged Library Professionals.” 
ICT implementation and modern technologies help library  semi-professionals in rendering new and improved services so  that the library users can understand the knowledge collection  process. It has been observed that several studies have been  conducted on perception of library professionals in using ICT  in  libraries.    But  only  few  studies  have  been  conducted  on  perception of semi-professionals in using ICT in libraries. 
According  to  Sarojadevi  K.,  Padmamma  S.,  Walmiki  R.H.3, “forthcoming years are only digital platform to libraries,  since more advantages of digital resources are over traditional  collections.” 
The study conducted by Wasim Raja, Zubair Ahmad and  
369 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  38,  NO.  5, SEPT   2018 
Arun  K.  Sinha4   explores  how  information  communication  technology and related automated systems can support semi- professionals  endeavour  towards  improved  management  of  knowledge sharing and dissemination. 
In  this  modern  world,  the  role  of  semi-professionals  is  an ever changing one. He/she has to adapt to the various new  technologies which are forever fooding the market and thus  making  life  easier  for  information  seeker.  Thus  the  role  of  Semi-Professionals  is  diminishing  as  more  and  more  people  are self-dependent on retrieving information on their own5. 
The  study  conducted  by  Mallaiah6  unfolds  major  implications for performance management systems and process  in University libraries. The respondents included professionals  and semi-professionals from various colleges of 15 university.  The key issues addressed in this study are perceived importance  and  perceived  the  performance  of  workplace  attributes,  performance  appraisal,  issues  considered  during  appraisal,  knowledge,  and  competency  of  the  employee  performance,  suggestions to improve respondent’s views about disturbances  which occur at work and overall satisfaction levels. The fnding  of  the  study  on  the  semi-professionals  at  Central  University  reveals that academic libraries need a continuous development  and training program for semi-professionals. 
The  survey  conducted  by  Kumar7   has  been  aimed  to  estimate  the  level  of  knowledge  on  ICT  skills  by  the  semi- professionals.  According  to  him  “changes  in  society  and  demands for information utilisation have forced the information  professionals to look for more effective and effcient methods  for processing, storing, and retrieving information to cope up  with the application of modern information technology.”  
3. NEED FOr  THE STUDY 
Due  to  information  and  communication  revolution,  the  purpose  for  which  the  users  are  coming  to  the  library  has  changed over time. The role of the librarian has become that  with more responsibility. Thus to assist the librarian in rendering  valuable library services, the role of semi-professional staff has  become more supportive and responsible in nature. There is a  need to know the perception of semi-professionals because of  the following reasons.  
• The  semi-professionals  who  are  more  exposed  to  
technology  are  performing  their  roles  with  much  more  
ease than before 
• The  application  of IT has made  the  technical  processing   
jobs  in  a library more  automated 
• The  dynamics  of  acquiring  e-resources  from  publishers   
and  vendors  have  also  changed  over  time and the semi- 
professionals  have  to  more  knowledge  about  the  kind   
of  information  contained  in  the  e-journals, e-databases   
and  e-books.  
Constituent institutions libraries of Manipal Academy of  Higher Education, Manipal have evolved over time and the use  of ICT is very evident from its style of functioning. Manipal  Academy of Higher Education libraries have seen an increase  in  the  number  of  library  staff  required  to  run  the  libraries.  The semi-professionals who are working and rendering their  services  in  institutions  libraries  are  facing  the  challenge  of  using it to their advantage. Due to this digital revolution, there  
370 
has been a change in way semi-professionals provide services  to the library users. There is a need to understand the perception  regarding duties and responsibilities which affect the quality of  services given to the library users. 
4. ObJECTIVES OF THE STUDY 
The purpose of the study is to understand perception of  semi-professionals in using ICT in Manipal Academy of Higher  Education Libraries. Following are the objectives of the study. • To gauge the current level of ICT applications implemented  
and  services  initiated  in  Manipal  Academy  of  Higher  
Education Libraries 
• To understand the impact of ICT implementation on semi- 
professionals’ role at the libraries 
• To know the diffculty if any faced by semi-professionals  
in using ICT application in their libraries 
• To assess the training needs of the semi-professionals in  
using ICT 
5. SCOPE AND LIMITATIONS OF THE  
STUDY  
The  study  primarily  focuses  on  only  the  perception  of  semi-professionals in using ICT, and it is limited to only the 58  Library Assistant working in the following seven constituent  institution library of Manipal Academy of Higher Education at  Manipal campus.  
• Kasturba  Medical  College  (KMC)  Health  Sciences  
library 
• Manipal Institute of Technology (MIT) Central library • School of Communication (SOC) library 
• School of Management (SOM) library 
• Welcome  Group  School  of  Hotel  Administration  
(WGSHA) library 
• Manipal Centre for European Studies (MCES) library • Manipal Centre for Philosophies and Humanities (MCPH)  
library 
6. METHODOLOGY 
The data required to conduct the data analysis was collected  by  using  the  questionnaire  method.  Convenience  sampling  method was used to carry out the study. The total number of  semi-professional library staff (Library Assistants) working at  seven constituent institutional libraries of Manipal Academy  of Higher Education at Manipal campus is 60. Out of 60 semi- professional library staff members, 58 Library Assistants were  included in the study. The structured questionnaires were self- administered  to  58  Library Assistants  and  all  of  them  have  responded by flling the questionnaire distributed to them. The  questionnaire were distributed and data were collected in the  month of April 2016. Out of the 58 duly flled questionnaires,  57  of  them  were  considered  for  data  analysis  percentage  of  responses is 98.28. One questionnaire was omitted due to lack  of relevant response.  
The data collected through questionnaires were coded and  entered for data analysis in the Statistical Package for Social  Sciences (SPSS version 16.0), currently known as Predictive  Analytics Software (PASW).  

========2========

RAO K, et al.: PERCEPTION OF SEMI-PROFESSIONALS IN USING ICT IN  M ANIPAL  A CADEMy OF  H IGHER  E DUCATION LIBRARIES 
7. DATA ANALYSIS 
The  data  collected  back  have  been  analysed  and  made  interpretations about the perception of Semi-Professionals in  using ICT in MAHE Libraries.    
7.1 respondents  by  Gender 
It  is  evident  from  the  Table  1  that  out  of  the  total  respondents  57.89  per  cent  are  male  respondents,  and  42.11  per cent are female respondents. 
Table 1. Gender-wise distribution of respondents  
Gender 
Library Assistants 
Percentage 
Male 
33 
57.89 
Female 
24 
42.11 
Total 
57 
100 
7.2  Library-wise  Distribution  of  Semi-Professionals   
The  Table  2  shows  that  a  maximum  number  of  library  assistants is present in KMC Health Sciences Library and MIT  Central Library. This is due to increase in collection, services,  and users in these two libraries compared to other fve library  of MAHE at Manipal. 
Table 2. Library-wise distribution of semi-professionals 
MAHE Libraries 
Library  Assistants 29 18 3 1 3 1 2 57 
Percentage 
KMC Health Sciences Library MIT Central Library WGSHA Library 
SOM Library 
MCES Library 
MCPH Library 
SOC Library 
Total 
50.9 31.6 5.3 1.8 5.3 1.8 3.5 100 
7.3  Types  of  ICT Applications  Implemented  and  
Services  Initiated 
The  data  regarding  the  types  of  ICT  applications  implemented and ICT-enabled new services being provided in  MAHE libraries over a period has been collected in this study.  The  purpose  of  collecting  this  data  was  to  gauge  the  extent  to  which  ICT  had  changed  roles  of  semi-professionals  and  the extent to which they are trained to use these applications  for  providing  library  services.  Following  are  the  types  of  ICT applications implemented and ICT enabled new services  initiated in MAHE libraries. 
7.3.1  Types  of  ICT Applications  Implemented • Electronic Resource Management and Search Solution  
(ERMSS)  Software 
• Bar-Code 
• EZProxy (Remote Login Access to Library Subscribed  
e-Resources) 
• EasyLib  (Library Automation  Software) 
• • • 
Library  network 
Electronic  Public Access  Catalogue  (EPAC) Library  webpage 
7.3.2  ICT  Enabled  Services  Initiated • Literature  search 
• Current  awareness  service • Document  delivery  service • Automated  circulation 
• Resource  sharing 
• Remote  login  access  to  e-Resources • Online  resources 
• Digital  repository 
• Online  catalogue 
7.4  Impact  of  ICT Applications  on  Day-to-Day  
Activities  of  Semi-Professionals 
Respondents were asked to express their opinion on the  impact of ICT Applications in their day to day roles/activities.  EasyLib,  the  library  automation  software,  EPAC  (online  catalogue),  Library  web  page,  ERMSS  and  Bar-Coding  had  impacted on their activities the most (84.2 %, 84.2 %, 57.9 %,  56.1 % and 50.9 % respectively) as stated by semi-professionals  in this study.  
7.5  Providing  the  ICT  Enabled  New  Services  by  
Semi-Professionals  
Table  3  clearly  reveals  that  as  per  the  opinion  of  the  majority  of  the  respondents  (50.88  %),  access  to  online  resources  was  the  most  rendered  new  ICT-enabled  library  service in MAHE Libraries. However, 40.35 per cent of Semi- Professionals were of the opinion that EPAC (online catalog)  is the most recent library service.  Digital repository, literature  search and current awareness services (CAS) were perceived  as new services according to 38.60 per cent, 31.58 per cent and  29.82 per cent of respondents respectively.                                                         
Table  3.  ICT  enabled  new  services  provided  by  semi- 
professionals 
ICT enabled new services 
Library  Assistants 
Percentage 
Literature search 18 31.58 Current awareness service 17 29.82 Document delivery service 11 19.30 Automated circulation 22 38.60 Resource sharing 15 16.32 Remote login 11 19.30 Online resources 29 50.88 Digital repository 22 38.60 Online catalog (EPAC) 23 40.35 
           
7.6  Changes  in  the  Semi-Professional’s role 
Query  regarding  the  extent  to  which  the  semi- professionals’  roles  have  changed  by  the  implementation  of  ICT in their libraries indicated that ICT-enabled services have  
371 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  38,  NO.  5, SEPT   2018 
made  it  possible  for  the  semi-professionals  to  give  a  faster  response (52.6 %) to the queries of the users. Quality, accuracy,  timeliness, and user-friendliness have been rated as 31.6 per  cent, 33.3 per cent, 38.6 per cent and 26.3 per cent respectively  by the respondents. Signifcant percentages (43.9 %) of Library  Assistants were of the opinion that they could provide up-to- date information to their library users using ICT. 
7.7  Opinion  on  Up-gradation  of  Skills  of  the  Semi- 
Professionals 
Respondents  were  asked  whether  ICT  implementation  has demanded up-gradation of their skills. It is evident from  the Table 4 that most of the semi-professionals ‘agreed’ that  their skills needed up-gradation. A small percentage of semi- professionals ‘strongly agreed’ that implementation of ICT has  demanded knowledge and skill up gradation amongst the semi- professionals.  
Table 4. Opinion on upgradation of skills of the semi- 
professionals 
Extent 
Library Assistants 
Percentage  
Strongly Agree Agree Disagree  Total 
10 45 2 57 
17.54 78.95 3.51 100 
7.8   r esponsibility  Levels  of  Semi-Professionals  due  
to  ICT  Implementation 
With  the  implementation  of  ICT  to  provide  library  services,  75.44  per  cent  of  library  assistants  felt  that  their  responsibilities  increased,  while  a  small  percentage  felt  that  responsibilities decreased as depicted in the Table 5. 
Table 5.    r esponsibility levels of semi-professionals due to ICT  
implementation 
Extent 
Library Assistants 
Percentage  
Increased  
43 
75.44 
Decreased  
14 
24.56 
Total 
57 
100 
7.9  Impact  of  ICT  on  Duties  and responsibilities  
of  Semi-Professionals 
ICT  implementation  has  an  impact  on  the  duties  and  responsibilities of the Semi-Professionals as depicted in Table  6. Most of the semi-professionals (31.5 %) felt that ICT had  ‘totally’  changed  their  duties  and  responsibilities.  22.8  per  cent of the semi-professionals felt that it changed their duties  to  ‘some  extent.’  Still  others  21.1  per  cent  opined  that  ICT  had ‘signifcantly’ changed their duties and responsibilities. A  small percentage 15.8 per cent felt that it ‘slightly’ changed  their responsibilities. 
7.10   User  Satisfaction  towards  Services  of  Semi- 
  Professionals 
A majority of the respondents (66.67 %) felt that users  were  ‘satisfed’  with  their  services  while  28.07  per  cent  of  
372 
semi-professionals  observed  that  users  were  ‘very  satisfed.’  The rest were uncertain in their opinion as shown in Table 7.  
Table 6.  Impact of ICT on duties and responsibilities of semi- 
professionals 
Extent Signifcantly Totally Some Extent Slightly Not at all Total 
Library Assistants 12 
18 
13 
9 
5 
57 
Percentage 21.1 31.5 22.8 15.8 8.8 100 
Table 7. User satisfaction towards the services of semi- 
professionals 
Extent 
Library Assistants 
Percentage  
Very Satisfed  
16 
28.07 
Satisfed  
38 
66.67 
Uncertain  
3 
5.26 
Total 
57 
100 
7.11 repetitive  Nature  of  Semi-Professional’s  
 Activities 
Table  8  reveals  the  repetitive  nature  of  the  semi- professional’s  activities.  With  the  implementation  of  ICT  majority  of  the  semi-professionals  (49.12  %)  felt  that  their  activities were ‘totally’ repetitive. 22.81 per cent respondents  felt  that  their  activities  were  repetitive  to  ‘some  extent.’  A  small percentage (15.79 %) had responded that repetitiveness  was ‘slightly’ present.  
Table 8. repetitive nature of semi-professional’s activities 
Extent 
Library Assistants 
Percentage 
Signifcantly 
3 
5.26 
Totally 
28 
49.12 
Some Extent  
13 
22.81 
Slightly  
9 
15.79 
Not at all  
4 
7.02 
Total 
57 
100 
7.12   Difficulty  of  using  ICT Applications  and  
Dependence  on  ICT Applications  
Data about the diffculty of using ICT applications and  dependence  on  ICT  applications  were  recorded  in  Table  9.  While making the respondents answer queries on diffculty of  using ICT applications, 22.8 per cent responded that EasyLib  posed some diffculties. 26.3 per cent of Library Assistants had  no role to play in the use of EZProxy, but if given a chance they  would  have  found  it  diffcult.  Library Webpage  and  Library  Networks were perceived to be diffcult to handle by 15.8 per  cent of respondents. 

========4========

RAO K, et al.: PERCEPTION OF SEMI-PROFESSIONALS IN USING ICT IN  M ANIPAL  A CADEMy OF  H IGHER  E DUCATION LIBRARIES 
Table 9. Diffculty of using ICT applications and dependence on ICT applications 
Extent 
ErMSS 
barcode EZProxy 
Diffculty of Using ICT  Applications 
5.3 
1.8 
26.3 
Dependence on ICT applications 
49.10 
38.60 
21.10 
Further,  the  data  collected  during  the  study  shows  that  Library  Assistants  depend  most  on  EPAC  (73.70  %)  and  EasyLib  (70.20  %)  respectively  in  answering  the  user  queries.  The  respondents  also  shared  their  opinion  that  ERMSS (49.10 %), Library Network (43.90 %) and Bar-codes  (38.60 %) were other ICT applications they depended on in  providing the services. EZProxy and Library Webpage were  considered dependable by 21.10 per cent and 24.60 per cent  of respondents. 
7.13  Need  of  Training  in  Using  ICT Applications  
Implementation of ICT in MAHE Libraries has also led  to the semi-professionals responding that they must be trained  as the following table reveals. Most of the semi-professionals  (71.9 %) felt that they needed training in access to e-resources.  The study revealed that less percentage of respondents (12.30  %, 15.80 %, and 17.50 %) is of the opinion that they needed  training in using computers (PCs), accessing the Internet and  using library web page, respectively.   
8. FINDINGS  
Following fndings were drawn which gives an overview  of the perception of Semi-Professionals in using ICT in Manipal  Academy of Higher Education Libraries. 
• It was observed from the study that the use of EasyLib,  
EPAC, and Bar-Code had impacted on their day-to-day  
roles as stated by the majority of the semi-professionals • The study revealed that ICT-enabled services have made  
it  possible  for  the  semi-professionals  to  give  a  faster  
response  to  the  queries  of  the  users  and  provide  more  
accurate and up-to-date information services to the users  
in their libraries 
• Semi-professionals  who  participated  in  the  study  stated  
that  their  responsibility  levels  have  increased  with  the  
implementation of ICT applications in the library • The  study  has  given  evidence  that  31.5  per  cent  of  
respondents  have  experienced  a  ‘total’  change  in  their  
duties and responsibilities whereas 21.1 per cent of semi- 
professionals experienced ‘signifcant’ change as per the  
study 
• It was found from the study that 66.6 per cent of semi- 
professionals  had  noticed  that  users  experienced  
‘Satisfaction’  in  the  way  Library  Assistants  provided  
services. 28.07 per cent of respondents noticed that users  
were ‘Very Satisfed’ with their ICT-enabled services • The  repetitive  nature  of  the  roles  amongst  semi- 
professionals  was  gauged  and  half  of  the  respondents  
have felt that their activities were ‘totally’ repetitive 
ICT applications (percentage) 
EasyLib Library Network Library Webpage EPAC 
22.8 
15.8 
15.8 
7.0 
70.20 
43.90 
24.60 
73.70 
• 
• 
• 
Although  most  ICT  applications  were  not  diffcult  to  handle  or  manage,  26.3  per  cent  of  semi-professionals  faced  diffculties  with  EZProxy  (remote  login  access),  mainly  because  it  didn’t  come  under  their  domain.  Further,  it  was  found  out  from  the  study  that  EasyLib  (Library  automation  software)  and  Library  Webpage  posed occasional diffculties as suggested by 15.8 per cent  respondents 
The study confrmed that dependence on ICT to provide  Library  services  was  inevitable  as  73.70  per  cent,  and  70.20  per  cent  of  respondents  regularly  depended  on  EPAC (online catalog) and EasyLib (automation software)  respectively for providing library services 
Training themselves in the already existing technologies  or acquainting themselves with new ones were considered  to be an important need of the semi-professionals. As per  the study, 71.90 per cent of the respondents felt the need  for training in accessing e-resources whereas training in  the use of library web page was given less priority by the  semi-professionals. 
9. CONCLUSIONS 
From  the  study,  it  can  hereby  be  said  that  technology  has  transformed  the  functioning  of  libraries  as  the  semi- professionals use ICT to provide effective services in Manipal  Academy of Higher Education libraries. Most of the ground  work required for a properly functioning library are performed  by  the  semi-professionals  and  thus  if  their  dependence  on  the  use  of    ICT  applications  result  in  better,  faster,  accurate  and up-to-date service, this, in turn, refects on the image of  the library itself. Properly and effciently functioning library  ultimately  satisfes  the  knowledge  needs  of  the  students,  faculty and researcher who are the end users and they are the  ones who keep a lasting impression of the library as a place  of exploration, supporting and achieving the aims, goals and  objectives of the parent institution, the very purpose for which  it exists. 
rEFErENCES  
1.     Dasgupta, A. Preparing future librarians in India: A vision  
for LIS schools of Indian universities in the 21st  Century.  
2009.  Accessed  on  May  2,  2016  from  https://www. 
scribd.com/document/293487092/5-Preparing-Future- 
Librarians-in-India-a-Vision-for-LIS-Schools-of-Indian- 
Universities-in-the-21st-Century 
2. Webster’s Dictionary.Accessed on May 2, 2016 from http://  
www.dictionary.com/browse/ semip rofessional?s=t 3. Sarojadevi,  K.;  Padmamma,  S.  &  Walmiki,  R.H.  Digital  
373 

========5========

DJLIT,  VOL.  38,  NO.  5, SEPT   2018 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
resource  management  strategies  in  an  ICT  Era:  With  reference to selected telecasts media libraries of Karnataka  State (India). Pearl: J. Libr. Inf. Sci., 2016, 10(1), 30-38. Raja, W.; Ahmad, Z. & Sinha, A.K. Knowledge management  and academic libraries in IT Era: Problems and positions.  2009. Accessed on May 2, 2016 from http://crl.du.ac.in/ ical09/papers/index_fles/ical-124_198_418_2_RV.pdf Kumari, K.S. & Gowda, M.P. Changing role of library. In National Conference on Management of Modern Libraries  (NACML), Allied Publishers, 2014, 1, 10-306.  Mallaiah,  T.y.  Management  of  employee  expectations,  Performance  and  satisfaction  in  University  Library: An  empirical study. Annals Libr. Inf. Stud., 2009, 56(1), 13- 21. 
Kumar,  K.  Knowledge  on  ICT  skills  among  LIS  professionals of engineering institutions of Andhra Pradesh  state: A  Survey. DESIDOC  J.  Libr.  Inf.  Technol., 2013,  33(6), 480-487. 
CONTrIbUTOrS 
Ashish rao K. obtained MSc. Library and Information Science  Student at the Department of Library and Information Science,  Manipal Academy  of  Higher  Education,  Manipal,  offered  his  
374 
BA  (Journalism  and  Communication)  from  Manipal Academy  of  Higher  Education,  Manipal.    Presently  he  is  working  at  College  Libraries.  
Dr.  Mahabaleshwara rao   is  currently  working  as Associate  Professor and Senior Librarian at Dept. of Library & Information  Science  and  Health  Sciences  Library,  Manipal  Academy  of  Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka. He holds MA and MLISc  and has completed his Ph.D. degree in library and information  science from Mangalore University, Mangalore.  Dr. Rao has 25  year professional experience. He has attended many conferences,  seminars,  workshops  and  presented  36  paper  in  National  and  International  Seminars/Conferences.  He  has  19  paper  to  his  credit published in National and International Journals. He has  edited  2  books.  His  areas  of  interest  include  Health  sciences  librarianship,  web  resource  and  information  literacy. 
Dr. Shivananda bhat K. obtained his M.L.I.Sc from Mangalore  University and PhD. from the University of Mysore. Presently  he is working as Chief Librarian in the Health Sciences Library  of  Manipal  Academy  of  Higher  Education,  Manipal  and  as  Co-ordinator  &  Associate  Professor  in  the  Department  of  Library and Information Science, Manipal Academy of Higher  Education, Manipal. He has published several papers in peer- reviewed journals and conference proceedings. His current areas  of interest include information literacy, innovative methods in  search  strategies,  and  scientometrics. 

========6========

