DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 6, November 2017, pp. 417-424, DOI : 10.14429/djlit.37.11336 
 2017, DESIDOC 
research data Management Practices in university libraries: a study 
Manorama Tripathi*, Archana Shukla and Sharad Kumar Sonker 
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India 
Department of Library and Information Science, Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi, India Department of Library and Information Science, Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Lucknow, India 
*E-mail:manoramatripathi2@yahoo.com 
abstract 
Research data is the data which is generated when the researchers undertake or execute any research activity  or project. The data may be textual, quantitative, qualitative, images, recordings, musical compositions, verbal  communication, experimental readings, simulations, codes and so on. It needs to be preserved for future use.In this  context, the paper has studied the research data management (RDM) services implemented by different university  libraries for managing, organising, curating and preserving research data generated at their universities’ departments  and laboratories, for reusing and sharing. It has surveyed the central university libraries and the best 20 university  libraries of the world to highlight how RDM is extended to the researchers. Further, it has suggested a model for  the university libraries in the country to follow for actually deploying RDM services. 
Keywords:Research data; Research data management; Data repositories; Data curation; Data preservation  
1.  IntroductIon  
Research  data  is  the  data  which  is  generated  when  the  researchers  undertake  or  execute  any  research  activity  or  project. The research data is generated across all felds of study,  sciences, social sciences and humanities; but it differs across  all  these  disciplines.  The  data  may  be  textual,  quantitative,  qualitative, images, recordings, musical compositions, verbal  communication, experimental readings, simulations, codes and  so on. 
The  funding  bodies  and  many  international  publishers  have mandated that the researchers must submit their raw data  which they have generated and used to report their research  fndings.  They  advocate  that  research  data  be  deposited  to  open access data repositories for others to access, browse, use  and  validate  the  reported  research.  The  dataset  repositories  use  specialised  metadata  for  describing  research  data  which  facilitates their easy discovery, access, and use. Furthermore,  the  funding  bodies  have  mandated  that  the  grant  applicants  should  clearly  defne  their  data  management  plans  (DMP)  while submitting their proposals for grants. 
Libraries  have  always  played  a  proactive  role,  and  infuenced  and  shaped  the  scholarly  communication.  In  this  context,  the  present  paper  attempts  to  study  the  research  data  management  (RDM)  practices  adopted  by  the  central  universities  in  India.  It  has  also  dwelt  upon  the  practices  followed by the leading universities of the world. 
2.  PolIcIes across the world 
The  National  Science  Foundation  (NSF)  mandates  that  the  applicants  must  submit  an  additional  document  about  
Received : 30 August 2017, Revised : 28 September 2017  Accepted : 06 October 2017, Online published : 07 November 2017 
DMP  while  submitting  their  proposals  for  seeking  grants.  The  website  of  NSF  clearly  mentions  that  the  researchers  are  required  to  share  their  primary  data,  samples,  physical  collections and other supporting materials generated during the  research projects sponsored by NSF11. 
The  data  generated  during  the  research  activities  are  valuable resources which if properly stored may be accessed,  browsed, consulted, used and built upon in future for academic  work,  research  and  scientifc  purposes.  The  sharing  of  data  can  help  researchers  in  reanalysing,  re-evaluating  and  revalidating  the  reported  research  fndings.  The  researchers  can  add  their  viewpoint  which  may  assist  in  the  generation  of new knowledge. Thus they can avoid squandering of time  and efforts, and dissipation of energy on data collection and  reinventing the wheel28. The National Data Service (NDS) is a  US initiative, a consortium of data providers, data aggregators,  academic  libraries,  publishers  and  computing  infrastructure  providers. The NDS portal helps the researchers and scientists  in publishing their datasets, searching, linking and reusing the  already existing datasets27. 
The Australian National Data Services (ANDS) provides  access to research datasets generated in the labs and universities  of Australia. It facilitates and collaborates with the researchers  in  publishing,  sharing,  handling,  de-identifying  using  and  discovering datasets26.  
There are registries of data repositories like FAIR sharing. org, OAD (Open Access Directory of Data Repositories) which  provide links to all Open Access data repositories across all the  disciplines. 
The  Digital  Curation  Centre  (DCC)  is  a  globally  recognised  centre  for  capacity  building  in  RDM  and  digital  curation.  DCC  works  with  research  organisations  to  help,  
417 

========1========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  6,  NOVeMbeR   2017 
design, implement and deploy RDM so that open data gains  and sustains momentum across the world9.  
In India, the government supports open data through open  government data (OGD, data.gov.in). The portal is used by the  government  departments  and  ministries  for  publishing  their  datasets, documents, services and tools for the general public  to access and use. The national data sharing and accessibility  (NDSAP)  has  been  formulated  to  facilitate  sharing  of  non- sensitive  datasets  generated  in  ministries  and  departments  through  the  use  of  public  funds.  The  government  intends  to  encourage  sharing  of  datasets  for  national  planning  and  development. 
The Indian Council of Social Science Research (ICSSR)  has setup a portal called ICSSR Data Service13  for researchers,  institutions  in  social  sciences  to  deposit,  use,  reuse,  and  analyse  data  in  order  to  support,  promote  and  strengthen  research endeavours and analyses of policies formulated and  implemented  across  the  country.  The  ICSSR  Data  Service  holds NSSS and ASI datasets13. 
3.   lI terature revIew 
Research  data  management  entails  all  activities  and  processes which are undertaken or done to ensure that research  data  is  properly  documented,  organised,  stored,  archived  and  curated  so  that  it  is  available  for  access,  use  and  reuse  whenever the need arises after the research has been done and  reported. A RDM system is designed as per the requirements  of the researchers. A research data management system may  be based on three-tier architecture. It may have fle-based data  storage; a database of metadata and a web interface to facilitate  access  and  use  of  data5.  There  are  other  related  concepts  like data curation and data stewardship. Data curation is the  management of data right from the stage of its origin to the  point of time when it slips into obsolescence, is no longer valid  and is ft to be deleted. Data stewardship refers to the efforts  taken to protect the integrity and quality of data so as to ensure  its  usability  by  the  researchers.  It  also  entails  adherence  or  compliance to the standards and protocols of the feld. All the  stakeholders  like  researchers,  library  staff,  IT  professionals,  administrators and other professionals of the data management  teams are responsible for data stewardship8.  
Universities worldwide are focusing on research activities  which have tremendously enhanced the production of research  data. Till now the organisation and storage of those data were  ad-hoc in nature and not focused upon. Now, as the funding  bodies have mandated that the researchers and applicants must  have RDM plans, it has gained importance and caused concern  across the scholarly communication landscape. Libraries have  always adapted to the changes brought by the technologies or  by the information seeking behaviour of the researchers. In this  context too, libraries have stepped in to provide RDM services  to their researchers. 
The  ACRL  research  planning  and  review  committee  publishes  every  other  year  the  top  trends  and  issues  which  impact the academic libraries across the world. Its 2016 report  highlighted  the  importance  of  research  data  services,  data  policies and data management plans among the different issues  which infuence the libraries in higher education2. This topic  
418 
has acquired so much of importance that the last and the frst  issues  of  2016  and  2017  respectively  of IFLA  Journal have  covered the best practices in RDM, followed across the world. 
The  development  of  knowledge  across  different  felds  depends  on  how  data  is  analysed,  interpreted  according  to  different  perspectives.  For  this  easy  availability  of  research  data is very essential. The generation of new knowledge is data  intensive in nature, and it further necessitates the collection,  organisation, preservation of research data for further access  and use22. 
The stakeholders should tap the potential of data curation  and  centres  should  try  to  add  value  by  preserving  data  in  appropriate formats with proper metadata to describe them. 
Research  data  sharing,  access,  and  reuse  benefts  scholarship by facilitating new theories to be developed and  built upon; it also helps in validating science by reproducing  already reported fndings23,28.  
The  concepts  of  “provenance,  selection  and  appraisal,  authenticity, metadata, risk management and trust play a pivotal  role  in  digital  curation;  other  concepts  like  sustainability,  costing, planning and policy, training and education, researcher  practices and raising awareness”23  need to be dwelt upon. 
It has been reported that even in US and Canada academic  research libraries have not commonly implemented the research  data services (RDS) or are in the very initial stage of planning and  are more focused towards the needs of the faculty members than  for the students25. The researchers 7 studied 140 libraries located in Australia, New Zealand, Ireland and the UK. They found that  data management services being provided by the libraries are  very rudimentary in nature. They have emphasised that the data  management practices should be incorporated in professional  education and development programs. It has been observed by  the experts that institutional support for data management is not  uniform in an organisation or subject feld. There is a wide gamut  of services for describing research data and their management  within and across subject areas and organisations21. 
The  qualitative  data  as  generated  in  social  sciences  should also be curated for sharing and reuse. The researchers  are  reluctant  to  share  data  because  of  personal,  confdential  information of the participants, which if shared would amount  to  the  breach  of  privacy.  The  personal  information  can  be  anonymised  before  it  is  put  in  public  domain  for  others  to  access and reuse15. Karcher, Kirilove and Weber (2016) have  described  how  Qualitative  Data  Repository  (QDR)  curates  qualitative  and  granular  data.  They  have  also  highlighted  that  the  researchers  are  not  well  familiar  with  the  concepts  of  copyright,  confdentiality,  ethics  and  fair  use  in  scholarly  communication. 
The  musical  recordings  are  not  considered  as  data;  nevertheless, libraries can store and archive them as per the  principles of data curation used for storing and archiving data  generated  in  other  felds.  The  professional  musicians  share  their musical recordings through social media like YouTube,  Facebook,  and  Vimeo.  but  these  certainly  cannot  serve  for  storing and curating music recordings for long. They also lack  adequate format and metadata support14. 
The  recommendations  from  two  data  curation  summits  held  in  late  2010  have  highlighted  that  the  interoperable  

========2========

TRIPAThI, et al.: ReSeARCh DATA  M ANAGeMeNT  P RACTICeS IN  U NIVeRSITy LIbRARIeS: A STUDy 
metadata for documenting and describing research data should  be adopted. The staff should have clear documentation policies  for  data  privacy  and  ownership;  they  should  have  skills  to  provide  data  curation  support  to  the  researchers33   Librarians  lack skills to provide RDM services; they are yet to become  data  fuent  to  provide  data  curation  services.  They  need  to  reskill themselves to provide RDMS. Libraries have to play an  active role in sensitising the researchers towards the importance  of properly documenting, organising and preserving datasets  for  future.  Generally,  the  researchers  are  not  aware  of  the  importance of preserving research datasets for future24. They  lack the ability to express their data management plans and how  they will preserve and share them in future31. The librarians  are expected to support researchers in their research data plans  and  practices  and  provide  the  technical  infrastructure  and  support for actual data storage24. These services should not be  one size fts all. The research data management practices vary  across the different disciplines17  and the libraries need to plan  and customise the services as per the needs of researchers at  different stages of research endeavours. For instance, the needs  of the doctoral students can be classifed into three categories  of initial, middle and fnal stages of the doctoral programme.  Libraries should deploy RDS keeping in mind all the stages of  research6.The researchers are not very forthcoming with their  datasets, this behaviour or tendency needs to be addressed12. Close  collaboration  among  all  the  stakeholders  is  required  to initiate, promote, foster and strengthen collective learning  and overcome new problems which may come up along the  way  of  research  activities.  Librarians  lack  skills  to  provide  RDM services; they are yet to become data fuent to provide  data  curation  services.  They  need  to  reskill  themselves  to  provide RDMS. The librarians need to be well aware of the  basic  concepts  and  terminologies  used  in  data  curation.  For  instance, the experts have introduced data practices, data, and  curation (DPC) vocabulary of 187 terms which are used for  implementing curation projects across the different disciplines.  The vocabulary can be used for interacting and collaborating  for providing data curation and management services17. There is  need to develop digital curation skills in library professionals as  well as researchers. besides this, the computing infrastructure  for providing RDM need to be strengthened. 
The study conducted by hickson12, et al.  has shown that  the researchers were not very forthcoming with their datasets,  and that behaviour and tendency needs to be addressed. 
Close  collaboration  is  very  much  required.  It  will  initiate, promote, foster and strengthen bilateral learning and  overcome new problems which may come up along the away  as researchers carry on with their research endeavours. 
Data  governance  is  a  pivotal  component  of  research  data  management  services.  Digital  governance  is  defned  as  the  exercise  of  decision-making  and  authority  for  data- related  matters7   includes  interalia  standards,  metadata,  and  formulation of policies, guidelines for all the stakeholders to  follow  for  describing  organising,  preserving,  accessing  and  reusing the research data. The issue of quality of data also needs  special attention. The quality of data implies that it should be  organised and maintained in such a way that it is error free,  trustworthy,  accurate,  complete,  acceptable,  discoverable,  
accessible, intelligible and usable16. The data sets should have  the relevant metadata to succinctly describe them. The qualities  of data like completeness, accessibility, credibility and proper  documentation facilitate and promote data reuse10. 
The  experts20,21   have  recommended  that  data  literacy  modules should be incorporated into the curricula to equip the  students and the researchers with the competencies to organise  and curate their data sets correctly. The information literacy  modules which the libraries have been providing since long1,20;  should also include the data literacy component. Library Science  schools need to incorporate in their syllabi the various topics of  research data management practices and train the students for  future. The immersive model may be used for implementing and  providing RDMS to the researchers18 in which all stakeholders  are integrated, do work in close collaboration and gain from  each  other.  The  MLIS  students,  future  data  management  professionals, need to know research data practices of different  disciplines. Author18  has  described a case study in which the  MLIS students  work in laboratories in close collaboration with   researchers  and faculty members and get frst  hand experience  of how data is generated and recorded. Thus immersive model  is one in which all stakeholders are integrated, work in close  collaboration and gain from each other. 
4.  Method  of the study 
The  study  covers  the  47  Central  Universities  of  India   as per the list of University Grants Commission are listed in  Annexure A. The study of these universities has been done to  fnd if their libraries have initiated any steps to provide RDM  services to their researchers. The study also covers the best 20  universities as per Times higher education 2016-17 rankings,  of the world are listed in Annexure B 
It  has  highlighted  the  practices  prevalent  among  the  university libraries and has focused on the following aspects: • Whether  the  libraries  are  providing  RDM  services  by  
themselves  or  in  collaboration  with  other  units  of  the  
universities. 
• Identifying the main components of RDM services. • Whether the libraries have any written on RDM • Do  the  libraries  have  undertaken  awareness  campaigns  
to  sensitise  the  researchers  towards  the  importance  of  
preserving research data. 
5.    d ata collectIon and  InterPretatIon  
The websites of 47 central universities and their libraries  were visited to fnd out if the libraries have deployed RDM  services to collect, organise and curate data generated at their  departments  and  laboratories.  The  authors  did  not  observe  any mention or link of RDM policies. It is very likely that the  libraries are still in the process of developing policies and plans  for organising and curating research data. 
It is pertinent to mention here that there are 30 government  and  research  institutions  which  maintain  their  own  data  repositories or submit their data to specifc subject repositories.  These 30 institutions are listed in www.re3data.org which is the  registry of data repositories available on the web. The registry  has listed 1500 research data repositories across humanities,  social sciences, and sciences. 
419 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  6,  NOVeMbeR   2017 
6.    fI ndIngs  of the study 
The  libraries  of  the  best  20  universities  have  provided  comprehensive, in-depth information about how to: 
• Develop and write plans for RDM for grant applications.  
The  libraries  have  provided  links  for  case  studies,  
training  material,  guides,  DMP  tools  and  checkpoints  
for  researchers  to  develop  their  research  data  plans.  
There are research data consultation groups which help  
the  researchers  in  maintaining  and  preserving  data  life  
cycles. 
• Publish and deposit data to data repositories as per their  
requirements. 
• Describe  their  data  with  metadata  and  save  data  in  
appropriate  fle  formats  preferably  in  non-proprietary  
formats. 
• Manage and handle personal, sensitive data and adhere to  
the protection requirements. 
• backup data 
• Organise and save qualitative data 
• Reference and cite data 
• License data 
• The university libraries studied have RDM policies. Some  
of the RDM policies were not accessible. It is likely that  
they are available on the Intranet.  
• The  libraries  of  Oxford  University,  Imperial  College  
London,  and  University  College  London  have  clear  
Research Data Management policy. The library of eTh,  
Zurich has spelled its research data management policy  
under  the  guidelines  for  research  integrity.  The  other  
libraries provide guidelines for the researchers to follow  
for writing research data management plans and for saving  
and sharing them. 
• Libraries have provided links to the research data policies  
of  NIh,  NSF,  and  international  publishers.  They  have  
also provided details of general and subject-specifc data  
repositories like Dryad, Figshare, Gen bank, Qualitative  
Data  Repository,  Zenedo;  software  repositories  like  
Github, bitbucket, etc. where the researchers may deposit  
their datasets. 
• Libraries also conduct user education, workshops, face to  
face interaction, and domain-specifc training programmes  
for the researchers. The John hopkins University Library  
provides online training course on guidance, education on  
how to manage research data  
• The majority of the libraries provide RDMS in partnership  
with  the  Research  and  Information  Communication  
Divisions of their universities. This is in harmony with  
what the experts reported earlier21. 
• Libraries  have  created  Institutional  data  repositories  
like  ORA-Data,  Scholarly  Commons  of  Oxford  and  
Pennsylvania  University,  respectively.  While  other  
universities  like  Stanford,  Columbia  University  
have  common  institutional  repositories  for  full-text  
publications and datasets. Libraries encourage and guide  
the  researchers  to  archive  their  datasets  to  Drop box,  
Google  Drive  and  other  devices  with  unlimited  storage  
facility. 
420 
7.    s uggestIons 
It is paramount for all the stakeholders to understand the  relevance of research data, their easy availability and retrieval  for use by others after the research has been conducted and  reported. Especially the administrators have to understand the  importance as they have to give administrative and fnancial  concurrence for the preservation and curation of research data  plans. Libraries may submit robust proposals for deployment  of  RDM  services,  but  the  real,  long-lasting  implementation  may  only  be  realised  if  the  administration  unit  institutes  a  research data policy at the university level and allocates budget  for running RDMS in a sustainable manner. 
Libraries  should  take  the  lead  in  the  curation  of  the  research data generated in universities. besides curating and  preserving research data, libraries can also preserve universities’  historical  data  like  photographs,  annual  reports,  yearbooks,  etc. Collaboration or partnership is the mantra for successfully  undertaking  and  executing  any  curation  project.  Libraries  may  collaborate  with  researchers,  project  investigators  and  computer  divisions  of  the  universities  in  order  to  achieve  the desired results of data curation for access and use. Close  cooperation with the researchers and scientists facilitates easy  acceptance of the RDM system. 
Libraries should develop computing infrastructure in order  to collect, organise and store the datasets. Some of the universities  are  already  having  institutional  repositories.  Implementing  RDS will be extending the services of IRs which they have been  long providing to their researchers. The libraries may develop a  database of profles of researchers and faculty members. The  researchers should be able to log into the database and upload  their research interests, projects in progress etc. 
• Libraries  should  develop  written  policies  for  RDM  in  
their universities. 
• The  researchers  should  be  encouraged  to  get  an  Open  
Researcher  and  Contributor  (ORCID)  or  Researcher  
ID  (Web  of  Science)  which  will  distinguish  them  as  
individual researchers. 
• Library science departments should revise their curricula  
in order to impart Education and Training in the application  
of new tools and technologies. They should try to introduce  
short-term programmes, commonly known as continuing  
education, for mid-level professionals. 
• Efforts  must  be  invested  in  capacity  building  for  
providing effective RDM services. Library staff need to  
continuously update themselves with new technologies,  
tools of data analysis and visualisation. The staff should  
be aware of tools like Open Refne, Regular expressions,  
Web scraping, Dataverse project, Mendeley Data, etc. 
Libraries  need  to  undertake  awareness  campaigns  on  a  grand scale to sensitise the researchers and project investigators  to the importance of data management plans, which need to be  developed before the research project begins. They must impart  training to the researchers in using metadata to describe their  data and how to deposit them in subject-specifc data repositories  to  preserve  them  for  future  use.  They  need  to  outreach  the  project  investigators  and  researchers  of  their  universities  in  order to fnd out their needs of data organization, curation, and  

========4========

TRIPAThI, et al.: ReSeARCh DATA  M ANAGeMeNT  P RACTICeS IN  U NIVeRSITy LIbRARIeS: A STUDy 
preservation. Focus group studies should be conducted to fnd  out how the researcher generate and maintain data and what  services  they  expect  from  the  libraries. They  may  adapt  the  Purdue  University  libraries  data  curation  profles  toolkit  for  conducting interviews with the researchers. 
The present study has attempted to give a model, depicted  in Fig. 1, for the university libraries to follow for administering  RDMS. 
8.    c onclusIons 
The  present  study  has  dwelt  upon  the  importance  of  research  data  and  how  university  libraries  are  providing  RDM services to their researchers. It has been found that the  central  universities  in  India  are  in  the  very  initial  stage  of  implementing RDM services; whereas the top twenty world’s  leading  university’s  libraries  have  deployed  them  and  are  playing  a  pivotal  role  in  supporting  the  research  data  needs  of  their  researchers.  The  provision  of  an  effective  research  data services is the need of the hour so the library staff should  take  a  concerted  approach  to  update  themselves  and  learn  new technical skills to identify, the researchers’ needs design,  implement and deploy the infrastructure and services needed  to  organise,  store  and  preserve  the  research  data  for  access  and reuse. They may need to work in collaboration with other  stakeholders  to  ensure  deployment  of  RDS  and  equitable  access to the research datasets. 
figure 1. Model for research data management service. 
references 
1. Calzada  Prado,  Javier,  and  Miguel  Ángel  Marzal.   
Incorporating data literacy into information literacy  
programs:  Core  competencies  and  contents.  Libri,  
2013, 63(2),  123-134. 
2. Chabot,  L., bivens-Tatum,  W.,  Coates, h.  &  Kern,  
M.  2016  top  trends  in  academic  libraries A  review  
of the trends and issues affecting academic libraries  
in higher education. College Res. Libr. News , 2016,  
77(6),  274-281. 
3. Chao,  Tiffany  C.,  Melissa  h.  Cragin,  and  Carole  
L.  Palmer.  Data  Practices  and  Curation  Vocabulary  
(DPCVocab): An  empirically  derived  framework  of  
scientific data practices and curatorial processes. J.  
Assoc.  Info.  Sci.  Technol., 2015, 66(3),  616-633. 4. Corrall,  Sheila,  Mary  Anne  Kennan,  and  Waseem  
Afzal.  bibliometrics and research data management  
services:  Emerging  trends  in  library  support  for  
research.   Library  Trends,  2013, 61(3),  636-674.  5. Curdt,  Constanze,  and  Dirk  hoffmeister.  Research  
data  management  services  for  a  multidisciplinary,  
collaborative research project: design and implementation  
of the TR32Db  project database.  Program: Electronic  
Lib.  Info.  Syst., 2015, 49(4),  494-512. 
6. Cushing, Amber  L.,  &  Odile  Dumbleton.   We  have  
to  make  an  effort  with  it’  Exploring  the  use  of  
421 

========5========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  6,  NOVeMbeR   2017 
stages  to  help  understand  the  personal  information  
management needs of humanities and social science  
doctoral students managing dissertation information.   
IFLA  Journal, 2017,  43(1),  40-50. 
7. Data  Governance  Resource  Index:  https://www. 
ok.gov/cio/documents/DataGovernanceResources.pdf.  
(Accessed  on  1  November  2017) 
8. Data  Management  -  Data  Stewardship:  Roles  and  
Responsibilities. https://www2.usgs.gov/datamanagement/ 
plan/stewardship.php  (Accessed  on  1  November  
2017) 
9. Digital Curation Centre. http://www.dcc.ac.uk (Accessed  
on  1  November  2017) 
10. Faniel,  Ixchel  M.,  Adam  Kriesberg,  and  elizabeth  
Yakel.    Social  scientists’  satisfaction  with  data  
reuse.    J.  Assoc.  Info.  Sci.  Technol.,  2016,  67(6),  
1404-1416. 
11. Funder Mandates - Data Management Plans (eNG) -  
Research Guides at University of Michigan Library  
http://guides.lib.umich.edu/c.php?g=283277&p=1886863.  
(Accessed  on  1  November  2017) 
12.   h ickson,  Susan, et  al.   Modifying  researchers’  data  
management  practices:  A  behavioural  framework  
for library practitioners. IFLA Journal, 2016, 42(4),  
253-265. 
13. ICSSR Data Service. http://www.icssrdataservice.in/ 
files/ICSSR%20Data%20ServicePolicy%20Guidelines. 
pdf    (Accessed  on  1  November  2017) 
14. Jackson, A. S., Wheeler, J. & Quinn, T. Data Curation  
and the Arts: how Do Musicians Curate Their Data?  
Music  Ref.  Serv.  Q.   2016,  19,  191–207. 
15. Karcher, Sebastian, Dessislava Kirilova, and Nicholas  
Weber. beyond  the  matrix:  Repository  services  for  
qualitative  data.  IFLA  Journal,  2016,  42(4),  292- 
302. 
16. Koltay,  Tibor.    Data  governance,  data  literacy  and  
the management of data quality. IFLA Journal, 2016,  
42(4),  303-312. 
17. Lassi, Monica, Maria Johnsson, and Koraljka Golub.   
Research data services: An exploration of requirements  
at  two  Swedish  universities.  IFLA  Journal,  2016,  
42(4), 266-277.     
18. Lyon,  L.  Librarians  in  the  Lab:  Toward  radically  
re-engineering data curation services at the research  
coalface. New  Rev.  Acad.  Librarianship ,  2016, 22,  
391–409. 
19. Macy,  Katharine  V.,  and  heather  L.  Coates.  Data  
information literacy instruction in business and Public  
health:  Comparative  case  studies.  IFLA  Journal,  
2016, 42(4),   313-327 
20. Maybee, Clarence, and Lisa Zilinski. Data informed  
22. Ou, S. & Zhou, Y. Current Status of Scientific Data  
Curation Research and Practices in Mainland China.  
Libr.  Libr.  Inf.  Sci. 2016,  26(1),  73-88. 
23. Poole, Alex h. how  has  your  science  data  grown?  
Digital  curation  and  the  human  factor:  A  critical  
literature  review.  Archival  Science,  2015,  15(2),   
101-139. 
24. Renwick, Shamin, Marsha Winter, and Michelle Gill.   
Managing  research  data  at  an  academic  library  in  
a  developing  country.  IFLA  Journal,  2017,  43(1),  
51-64.  
25. Tenopir,  Carol,  et  al.   Research  data  management  
services in academic research libraries and perceptions  
of librarians. Lib.  Info. Sci. Res., 2014, 36(2), 84- 
90. 
26. The  Australian  National  Data  Service  (ANDS).  
http://www.ands.org.au/  (Accessed  on  1  November  
2017) 
27. The National Data Service. http://www.nationaldataservice. 
org/.  (Accessed  on  1  November  2017) 
28. Tripathi,  Manorama,  et  al.   A  brief  assessment  of  
researchers’  perceptions  towards  research  data  in  
India. IFLA  Journal, 2017, 43(1),  22-39 29. UK  Data  Service.  https://www.ukdataservice.ac.uk/  
(Accessed  on  1  November  2017) 
30. University  Grants  Commission  List  of  Central  
Universities as on 15.01.2016 http://www.ugc.ac.in/ 
oldpdf/Consolidated%20list%20of%20Central%20 
Universities%20as%20on%2015.01.2016.pdf. (Accessed  
on  1  November  2017) 
31. Van  Loon,  James  E., et  al.  Quality  evaluation  of  
data  management  plans  at  a  research  university.  
IFLA  Journal, 2017,  43(1),  98-104. 
32. Witt, Michael, and Wolfram horstmann. International  
approaches  to  research  data  services  in  libraries.   
IFLA  Journal, 2016,  42(4),  251-252. 
33. Weber,  Nicholas  M.,  Carole  L.  Palmer,  and Tiffany  
C. Chao. Current trends and future directions in data  
curation research and education. J. Web Librarianship,  
2012, 6(4),  305-320 
34. World  University  Rankings  2016-2017  by  subject:  
business and economics. https://www.timeshighereducation. 
com/world-university-rankings/2017. (Accessed on 1  
November  2017) 
contrIbutors 
dr Manorama tripathi  holds a PhD in Library and Information  Science  from  banaras  hindu  University,  Varanasi.  Presently  working as Deputy Librarian at the Central library, Jawaharlal  Nehru  University,  New  Delhi.  She  has  published  50  research  
learning: A  next  phase  data  literacy  framework  for  
papers  in  journals  and  conference.  She  has  done  several  
presentations  and  delivered  talks  at  CeC-UGC,  Refresher  
higher  education.  Proceedings  Assoc.  Info.  Sci.  
Technol, 2015, 52(1), 1-4. 
21. Mayernik, M. S. Research data and metadata curation  
as  institutional  issues. J.  Assoc.  Inf.  Sci.  Technol. ,  
2016,   67 ,  973–993. 
422 
and  Orientation  programmes  of  the  universities  across  the  country.  her  areas  of  research  include  information  seeking  behavior  of  researchers,  innovative  library  services,  and  scientometrics. 

========6========

TRIPAThI, et al.: ReSeARCh DATA  M ANAGeMeNT  P RACTICeS IN  U NIVeRSITy LIbRARIeS: A STUDy 
dr archana shukla obtained her M.A. (english), Master’s and  PhD  in  Library  and  Information  Science  from  bundelkhand  University, Jhansi. Presently working as Reader in the Faculty  of Library & Information Science. her areas of interest includes:   Management  of  library  and  information  centres,  information  consolidation  and  repackaging,  academic  library  system,  classification  and  cataloguing. 
list of central universities in India 
1. Rajiv Gandhi University, Itanagar  
2. Assam University, Silchar 
3. Tezpur University, Tezpur 
4. University of hyderabad, hyderabad,   
5. Maulana Azad National Urdu University hyderabad,  6. english and Foreign Languages University hyderabad,  7. Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi 
8. University of Delhi, Delhi 
9. Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi 
10. Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi 11. South Asian University, New Delhi 
12. The Indira Gandhi National Tribal University, Amarkantak 13. Dr. harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya, Sagar 
14. Mahatma Gandhi Antarrashtriya hindi Vishwavidyalaya,  
Wardha 
15. Mizoram University, Aizwal   
16. North eastern hill University, NehU Campus, Shillong 17. Manipur University, Imphal 
18. Central Agricultural University, Imphal 
19. Nagaland University, Kohima 
20. Pondicherry University, Puducherry 
21. Sikkim University, Gangtok 
22. Tripura University, Agartala 
23. Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, 
dr sharad Kumar sonkar  presently working as Senior Assistant  Professor in the Department of Library and Information Science,  babasaheb  bhimrao  Ambedkar  University,  Lucknow.  he  has  also taken a specialisation course in IT applications to library  and information services from NCSI, IISC, bengaluru. he has  guided  nine  MPhil  and  70  PG  students.  he  has  contributed  more  than  80  papers  in  journals,  books  and  conferences. 
Annexure B 
24. babasaheb bhimrao Ambedkar University, Lucknow 25. banaras hindu University, Varanasi 
26. University of Allahabad, Allahabad 
27. Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University, Raibarali 28. Rani Lakshmi bai Central Agricultural University, Jhansi 29. Visva bharati, Shantiniketan 
30. hemwati Nandan bahuguna Garhwal University, Srinagar 31. Central University of Tamil Nadu, Thiruvarur 32. Indian Maritime University, Chennai 
33. Central University of Rajasthan, Ajmer 
34. Central University of Punjab, bathinda 
35. Central University of Orissa, Koraput 
36. Central University of Kerala, Kasaragod 
37. Central University of Karnataka, Gulbarga 
38. Central University of Jharkhand, Ranchi 
39. Central University of Kashmir, Srinagar 
40. Central University of Jammu, Jammu 
41. Central University of himachal Pradesh, Kangra 42. Central University of haryana, Mahendergarh 43. Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, bilaspur 
44. Central University of bihar, Patna 
45. Nalanda University, Rajgir 
46. Mahatma Gandhi Central University, east Champaran 47. Central University of Gujarat, Gandhinagar 
Annexure A 
research data management at selected university libraries of the world 
universities 
library website 
availability of  rds 
University of  Oxford 
http://www.bodleian.ox.ac. Under digital  uk/bdlss/digital-services/data- services-as data  archiving archiving 
California  Institute of  Technology 
http://libguides.caltech.edu/data-Research  management service  
Stanford  University 
http://library.stanford.edu/ research/data-management- services 
http://www.data.cam.ac.uk/ 
Data  management  services 
University of  Cambridge 
Research data  ESRC data  
management 
Massachusetts  Institute of  Technology 
http://libraries.mit.edu/data- management/services/ 
Research data  MIT repository,  Data management plan/  
management  
data  repository 
Policies  
ORA Data bodleian libraries’ policy  
on the management and  
preservation of research data  
and records 
Policy on the management of  
research data and records Caltech CODA  Links to policies of nih, nsf and other  
subject-specifc  
repositories 
Stanford  Plans and guidelines Digital  
Repository 
Research data management  Repository policy framework 
NERC Data  
Repository 
library alone or  in association with  other divisions Library alone 
Library alone 
Library alone 
Library with the  Research Offce 
Library alone 
hMDC, ICPSR  guidelines  and IASSIST 
423 

========7========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  6,  NOVeMbeR   2017 
harvard  University 
http://guides.library.harvard. edu/dmp 
Data  management  plan 
Princeton  University 
http://library.princeton.edu/ research-data-management 
Research data  management 
Imperial  https://www.imperial.ac.uk/ College London research-and-innovation/ 
support-for-staff/scholarly- 
communication/research-data- 
management/introduction-to- 
research-data-management/ eTh  Zurich- https://sis.id.ethz.ch/ Swiss Federal  researchdatamanagement/ Institute of  
Technology 
University of  http://researchdata.berkeley.edu/ California,  
berkeley 
University of  http://guides.lib.uchicago.edu/ Chicago datamanagement 
Research data  management  
Research data  management 
Research data  management 
Data  management  plan 
Yale University 
http://guides.library.yale.edu/ datamanagement 
Research data  management 
University of  Pennsylvania 
http://guides.library.upenn.edu/ data-management 
University of  http://www.library.ucla.edu/ California, Los  support/publishing-data- Angeles management/scholarly- 
communication-services/data- 
management-curation-services University  http://www.ucl.ac.uk/library/ College London research-support/research-data 
Data  planning and  management Data  management  and curation  services 
Research data  management  
Columbia  University 
http://scholcomm.columbia.edu/ data-management/ 
Research data  management  
John hopkins  University 
Duke  University 
http://dms.data.jhu.edu/data- management-resources/plan- research/jhu-policies-for-data- management-and-sharing/ http://library.duke.edu/data/ guides/data-management 
Data  management  services 
Data and  visualisation  services 
Cornell  University 
https://data.research.cornell.edu/ 
North western  University 
http://libguides.northwestern. edu/datamanagement 
Research data  management  plan Research  
support service  repositories 
424 
harvard  Dataverse  Network 
Data management policies:  retention and maintenance of  research records and data. Research data security policy 
Data space 
box service  with unlimited  data storage 
Data management guides  –provide general and  university-specifc guidance Research data management  policy imperial research data  policy 
Library does with  Research division, IT division; Institute  for Qualitative  Social Science Library with Offce  of Information  Technology  Library with  Research offce and  ICT Division 
Institutional  Data management policy in  eTh  Scientifc IT  repository eTh guideline for research integrity Services Archive Digital Curation  
Centre 
DASh Research data management  Library does with  
policy Research and IT  
Department Research  Guidelines for specifc  Library alone Computing  repositories and local storage  
Centre Storage  solution  
system 
Guidelines Research Data  
Consultation Group  
from different  
departments Scholarly  Provide links to subject- Library alone Commons specifc and general data  
repositories 
Merit 
Provides links to policies of  funding bodies, dmp tool 
Library alone 
Lists various  NERC Data  Centres Academic  Commons 
Ucl research data policy 
Library with IT  division,  
Library alone 
JhU DATA ARChIVe 
Links to general and special  repositories, detailed plan  about how to manage research  data 
Detailed plan about how to  manage research data 
Library alone 
Duke Digital  Repository 
Links to general and special  repositories, detailed plan  about how to manage research  data 
Policies, plans  
Library alone 
e-Commons, CUGIR. 
Selected data 
Research data policies 
IT@Cornell, CISER  computing, Cornell  University Library Library and  Research Offce 
listed for  sharing of data 

========8========

