DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 37, No. 5, September 2017, pp. 353-359, DOI : 10.14429/djlit.37.11723 
 2017, DESIDOC 
Ict  Literacy among Library Professionals Working in the  university Libraries in  
maharashtra, India : a  Study 
Sadanand Y. Bansode*  and Rahul R. Viswe 
# 
*Department of Library and Information Science, Savitribai Phule Pune University, Pune - 411 007, India 
#S.K.N. SInhagad School of Business Management, Pune - 411 041, India 
*E-mail: sadanand@unipune.ac.in 
abStract 
The purpose of this study is to assess the information communication technology (ICT) literacy of the library  professionals working in university libraries in Maharashtra. The study gives an overview of the present level of ICT  literacy among library professionals and it helps to know the need for training and orientation in the areas such as  ICT-based resources, services and tools to the library professionals working in university libraries in Maharashtra.  A structured questionnaire based survey was conducted to analyse the ICT literacy among library professionals. The  fndings of the study reveal that, the ICT literacy level of the library professionals working in university libraries  in Maharashtra is satisfactory. Majority of library professionals have acquired the basic ICT literacy skills which  is required to handle day to day library operations, but still few library professionals need to enhance their literacy  level in the area of open source library automation software, digital library software and institutional repository  software etc. The study suggests that, university libraries should organise in-house training and orientation programs  on ICT-based resources and services or depute their library professionals to attend the training and orientation  programs on regular intervals, in order to enhance the ICT Literacy level of library professionals. 
Keywords: ICT literacy; Information and communication technology literacy 
1. IntroductIon 
Information  communication  technology  (ICT)  has  made  great  impact  on  the  every  feld  of  the  society  such  as  agriculture, health, education, business, industries, and so on1.  Libraries are not exception to these fast pace changes happen  in the society. ICT has changed the overall functioning of the  libraries. To provide relevant information within short span of  time  it  become  essential  for  libraries  to  adopt  an  ICT-based  information  system  and  ICT  infrastructure2.  In  early  days  when manual library system was in existence, they faced many  problems  due  to  consistently  growing  size  of  information  sources  and  lack  of  storage  space,  this  has  forced  libraries  to  adopt  the  ICT-based  library  systems  to  overcome  these  diffculties3. 
Since  the  implementation  of  ICT  has  transformed  the  operation, functions and services of the libraries, it has become  indispensable for the library professionals to enhance their ICT  literacy by acquiring new ICT skills and knowledge, to fulfll  the changing information need of the user community4. In this  changing  ICT  environment  the  library  professionals  needs  to acquire the skills of using various ICT tools, Internet and  Intranet,  e-resources,  ICT-based  services,  operating  systems,  application  software,  library  automation  software,  digital  library  and  institutional  repositories,  database  management  and  programming5.  ICT  literacy  has  become  essential  for  the library professionals to adopt the emerging technological  
Received : 01 July 2017, Revised : 21 August 2017  
Accepted : 22 September 2017, Online published : 23 October 2017 
changes  and  fulfll  the  digital  information  need  of  the  users  within short span of time6. 
2. Ict   L Iteracy 
Wijaya  and  Sunrendro7   described  that,  the  literacy  comprises  of  two  different  terms  i.e.  ICT  and  literacy.  ICT  is  considered  as  the  fusion  of  computer  technology  and  telecommunication  technology,  while  literacy  is  considered  as an ability to learn and improve individual’s capability. In  broad-spectrum  ICT  literacy  is  considered  as  the  necessary  skill  are  required  to  use  the  ICT  to  perform  the  day-to-day  professional work. ICT literacy enables the library professionals  to use digital information resources effectively in their place  of  work.  This  includes  the  use  of  ICT  to  perform  routine  professional  tasks  most  effciently  and  effectively  including  word  processing,  using  spreadsheets,  creating  databases  and  presentations,  manage  networks,  using  Internet,  performing  automated activities, providing ICT based services, managing  social and ethical issues in the library8. 
3. Statement  of  ProbLem 
The  advancement  in  ICT  has  transformed  the  way  of  functioning and operation of library and information centers.  The  services  and  facilities  being  provided  by  the  modern  libraries totally depends upon the ICT skill level of the library  professionals.  ICT  literacy  is  prerequisite  for  the  library  professionals to perform the day-to-day operations and activities  in  the  libraries9.  It  has  become  very  diffcult  for  the  library  
353 

========1========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  5,  SEpTEMBER   2017 
professionals  to  survive  in  the  present  ICT  era  without  ICT  literacy, as the application of ICT has changed the mind set and  approach of users towards the library. Hence it is prerequisite  for  the  library  professionals  to  possess  the  contemporary  ICT  Literacy  skills  and  uphold  the  practical  approach  while  working in the digital information age10. University libraries  in Maharashtra are well equipped with ICT infrastructure and  procured various e-resources to cater the electronic information  need of its users. But on the other hand it is also essential that,  the  libraries  should  have  competent  library  staff  to  handle  these ICT-based resources, services and tools more effectively  and effciently. The present study attempts to investigate the  present ICT literacy among library professionals and identifes,  if  needed  the  need  of  training  and  orientation  in  ICT-based  resources and services to the library professionals working in  the university libraries in Maharashtra. 
4.   o bjectIveS 
The objectives framed for the study are: 
(i) To assess the present levels of ICT literacy among library  
professionals. 
(ii) To  identify  the  training  methods  used  by  library  
professionals for enhancing ICT literacy. 
(iii) Find out the hindrance faced by the library professionals  
to enhance the ICT literacy. 
(iv) To provide the suggestions for the enhancement of ICT  
literacy level of library professionals. 
5. ScoPe and  LImItatIonS 
The present study is limited to 17 state universities and  149 library professionals working in the university libraries in  Maharashtra. The selection of the universities in Maharashtra  was done based on the UGC list and are covered under section  12  (B)  of  UGC Act  1956. The  study  considers  only  regular  full time library professionals who are working at the time of  survey, which include Librarian, Deputy Librarian, Assistant  Librarians,  Information  Scientist,  Technical  Assistant,  professional Assistant, and Library Assistants. 
6.   m ethodoLogy 
Survey method has been deployed to carry out the present  study. To meet the specifc objectives of the study, structured  questionnaires  was  designed  and  the  same  was  distributed  among  library  professionals  to  collect  the  necessary  data  on literacy of using ICT based tools, resources and services  among library professionals, means and methods of enhancing  ICT  literacy,  the  hindrances  faced  by  library  professionals  in enhancing ICT literacy and training and orientation needs  of  library  professionals  in  ICT-based  tools,  resources,  and  services. The questionnaires were personally distributed among  149 library professionals. Out of 149 library professionals, 134  library professionals have responded to the research study. The  data collected through the questionnaires has been converted  into machine readable format and imported into the statistical  package for the social sciences (SpSS). 
7.   d ata anaLySIS  and  InterPretatIon 
The data has been analysed and inferences are made based  
354 
on standard statistical methods. A detailed analysis of the data  and its interpretation has been presented in graphs.  
7.1   d esignation-wise response 
The responses received from the library professional are  categorised  according  to  their  designations  which  has  been  represented  in  the  Fig.  1.  Figure  1  shows  the  designation- wise  response  of  library  professionals.  Out  of  134  library  professionals  majority  82  (61.19  %)  are  Semi  professional  Staff, which constitutes 24 (29.27 %) Technical Assistant, 2  (2.44  %) professional  Assistants  and  56  (68.29  %)  Library  Assistant; whereas 52(38.81 %) are professional Staff, which  comprises  of  10  (19.23  %)  Librarian,  8  (15.38  %)  Deputy  Librarian,  29  (55.77  %) Assistant  Librarian  and  5  (9.62  %)  Information Scientists. 
figure 1. designation-wise response rate.  
7.2 Ict-based tools  and technology 
Resources and services being provided by libraries are  centred towards the ICT, hence it has become necessity for the  professionals to be literate with technical skills and expertise  in using ICT-based tools and technology most effectively. To  investigate  the  literacy  of  ICT-based  tools  and  technology  among the professionals, professionals are asked to indicate  their current literacy of ICT-based tools and technology; the  responses  received  from  the  library  professionals  has  been  described and has been depicted in Fig. 2. 
Figure  2  shows  the  literacy  of  ICT-based  tools  and  technology among the professionals. It could be clearly seen  that, the literacy of desktop computer among 131 (97.76 %)  professionals and mobile/smart phone among 124 (92.54 %)  professionals  was  found  high,  as  majority  of  professionals  preferred  basic  computing  technology  which  is  being  commonly use and easily get available at libraries, where as  literacy of laptop among 107 (79.85 %) professionals, web  camera among 83 (61.94 %) professionals and USB modem  among 74 (55.22 %) professionals was found low, because  these  devices  are  more  preferred  for  the  personal  use  by  professionals. As far as storage devices are concerned literacy  of  pen  drive  among  131  (97.76  %)  professionals  and  CD/ DVD  among  123  (91.79  %)  professionals  was  found  high,  because  of  the  compatibility,  portability  and  low  operating  cost  of  these  storage  devices,  whereas  literacy  of  portable  

========2========

BANSODE  & V ISWE : ICT LITERACY AMONG  L IBRARY pROFESSIONALS  W ORkING IN  U NIVERSITY  L IBRARIES IN  M AHARASHTRA 
figure 2.  Literacy of Ict-based tools and technology. hard  disk  among  72  (53.73  %)  professionals  and  SD  Card  among 59 (44.03 %) professionals was found low due to its  portability,  compatibility  and  high  operating  cost  of  these  devices.  The  literacy  about  Television  among  131  (97.76  %)  professionals,  CD/DVD  player  among  126  (94.03  %)  professionals  was  found  very  high,  whereas  the  literacy  of  LCD projector among 96 (71.64 %) professionals was found  low. As far as communication media technology literacy is  concerned,  the  literacy  of  Internet  among  131  (97.76  %)  professionals and E-mail among 129 (96.27 %) professionals  was found high as compared to the literacy of fax among  94  (70.15  %)  professionals,  Wi-Fi/bluetooth  among  91  (67.91  %)  professionals,  intranet  among  72  (53.73  %)  professionals, extranet among 17 (12.68 %) professionals  and telex among 10 (7.46 %) professionals because of its  accessibility and widely preferred communication media  technology  by  the  academic  as  well  as  non-academic  community for offcial purpose. It can be extracted here  that  majority  of  library  professionals  are  well  versed  with the computing technology, storage devices, printing  and  scanning  technology,  audio  visual  technology  and  communication  media  technology,  hence  the  literacy  about  these  emerging  ICT  technologies  is  found  high  among majority of library professionals. 
7.3   e lectronic resources 
Use of electronic resources has become very common  and the library professionals need to be well versed with the  use of various e-resources. To reveal the literacy of using  various electronic information resources; professionals are  requested  to  indicate  their  literacy  pertaining  to  various  electronic  resources.  The  responses  received  from  the  
professionals have been represented in Fig. 3. 
Figure 3 clearly indicates that majority of the professionals  i.e. 115 (85.82 %) are literate in using the e-journals, followed  by 114 (85.07 %) e-newspapers, 111 (82.84 %) e-books, 106  (79.10 %) e-database, and 98 (73.13 %) in using e-thesis. It can  be diagnosed here that majority of professionals are found well  literate of different electronic resources. Amongst all electronic  resources  E-journals  are  found  most  preferred  e-resources  among  majority  of  library  professionals,  it  may  be  because  E-journals  are  becoming  increasingly  a  valuable  source  of  electronic information in university libraries, therefore majority  of libraries procured E-journals through various consortia as  well as through individual subscription. 
figure 3. Literacy of electronic resources. 
7.4 Ict-based  Services 
To  reveal  literacy  of  ICT-based  services  among  professionals;  the  professionals  are  asked  to  indicate  their  current  literacy  of  various  ICT-based  library  services.  The  responses  received  from  the  professionals  have  been  represented in Fig. 4. 
figure 4. Literacy of Ict  based library services. 
355 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  5,  SEpTEMBER   2017 
Figure  4  reveals  that,  out  of  134  respondents  majority  118  (88.06  %)  of  professionals  are  found  well  literate  of  Web OpAC, followed by 109 (81.34 %) CAS, 106 (79.10 %)  reprographic service, 95 (70.90 %) bibliographic service, 89  (66.42 %) CD-ROM service, 79 (58.96 %) indexing service, 78  (58.21 %) abstracting service, 77 (57.46 %) SDI, 73 (54.48 %)  e-document delivery service, 66 (49.25 %) multimedia service,  40 (29.85 %) online reservation service, 36 (26.87 %) bulletin  board  service,  whereas  only  22  (16.42  %)  professionals  are  found literate of translation service. 
It  can  be  summed  up  here  that  majority  of  library  professionals  are  found  well  literate  of  web  OpAC,  reprographic  service,  C-ROM  service  and  CAS.  Since  these  services are provided by them on a regular basis to the users,  whereas literacy of bulletin board service, e-query service and  translation service was found low among library professionals  due to lack of knowledge and expertise to use these ICT-based  services. 
7.5   o nline discussion groups  and  Social media 
Library and information professionals needs  to play  an  intermediary  role  between  the  information  resources  and information users and expected to communicate with  the  diverse  groups  of  people  through  e-mail,  fax,  web  sites, blogs, discussion group, bulletin board, etc. Hence it  is necessary for the professionals to be literate of various  online discussion groups and social media tools. To reveal  which kind of online discussion groups and social media  technology being most preferred by professionals for the  information  communication,  the  professionals  are  asked  to  indicate  their  literacy  of  various  online  discussion  groups and social media. The responses received from the  professionals have been represented in Fig. 5. 
Figure 5 clearly indicates that, out of 134 professionals  majority  119  (88.81  %)  professionals  were  found  to  be  literate  of  e-mail/instant  messaging/chat  followed  by  101  (75.37  %)  social  networking  (e.g.  Orkut,  Facebook,  Whatsapp etc.), 87 (64.93 %) discussion groups, 69 (51.49 %)  wikis, 58 (43.28 %) blogging, 43 (32.09 %) Listserv, 39 (29.10  %) RSS Feeds, and only 18 (13.43 %) professionals are found  to be literate of social book marking. It can be accumulated  here  that  majority  of  professionals  are  actively  participative  in  online  discussion  groups  and  social  media  and  with  this  participation  the  professionals  keep  themselves  update  with  
figure 5. Literacy of online discussion groups and social media. 
356 
the current developments in libraries and information centres,  but  still  few  professionals  are  lacking  with  the  literacy  of  Blogging, Listserv, RSS feeds and Social book marking. 
7.6 Software 
Library  professional  needs  to  be  well  verse  with  the  set  of  technological  skill  required  to  manage  the  software  applications in the feld of library, because the comprehensive  operating knowledge of different software leads to the effective  implementation  of  computer  based  information  system  in  libraries. The literacy of different types of software among the  professionals are summarised as: 
7.6.1  Library Automation  Software 
To reveal the literacy of library professionals pertaining  to  library  automation  software,  they  were  asked  to  indicate  their  current  literacy  of  different  automation  software.  The  responses  received  from  the  library  professionals  have  been  represented in Fig. 6. 
figure 6. Literacy of library automation software. 
Figure 6 shows that majority 67 (50 %) of professionals  were found literate of SOUL automation software, followed by  55 (41.04 %) LIBSYS, 28 (20.90 %) SLIM, 17 (12.69 %) CDS/ ISIS, 15 (11.19 %) kOHA, 11 (8.21 %) E-GRANTHALAYA, 5  (3.73 %) WINISIS and NEWGENLIB, 3 (2.24 %) LIBSUITE  and  Other,  2  (1.49  %)  of  EVERGREEN  and  EASYLIB,  whereas only 1 (0.75 %) of LIBSOFT and AUTOLIB library  automation  software.  It  can  be  extracted  here  that  majority  
of  professionals  are  found  well  literate  of  SOUL  and  
LIBSYS software as it has been installed in their respective  
libraries. Few library professionals felt that they do have  
sound knowledge of SLIM, kOHA, SOUL and CDS/ISIS  
as many organisations are conducting training programmes  
for these software’s.  
7.6.2    Digital  Library  Software  and    Institutional    
    Repository 
Literacy  of  digital  library  software  and  institutional  repository  has  become  very  essential  for  professionals   to  embark  upon  the  problems  and  challenges  raised  in  constructing and managing a digital web based library. To  assess  the  literacy  about  digital  library  and  institutional  

========4========

BANSODE  & V ISWE : ICT LITERACY AMONG  L IBRARY pROFESSIONALS  W ORkING IN  U NIVERSITY  L IBRARIES IN  M AHARASHTRA 
repositories, the library professionals were asked to point out  their literacy about digital library and institutional repositories.  The  responses  received  from  the  library  professionals  have  been represented in Fig. 7. 
Figure 7 shows that, out of 134 respondents majority 57  (42.54  %)  professionals  were  found  literate  of  DSpace,  21  (15.67 %) Greenstone, 6 (4.48 %) E-print and only 3 (2.24 %)  Fedora digital library software. It can be stated here that the  literacy of institutional repository and digital library software’s  is found low among professionals.  
figure 8. training methods of enhancing Ict  literacy. 
figure 7. Literacy of digital library and institutional repository  
software. 
7.7   t raining methods  used  for enhancing  Ict 
Literacy 
To  know  various  training  methods  of  enhancing  ICT  literacy skills by the library professionals, they were asked  to  point  out  which  training  methods  are  obtained  by  them  to enhance their ICT literacy skills. The responses received  from the professionals have been represented in Fig. 8. 
Figure 8 reveals that, 117 (87.31 %) professionals have  enhanced  their  ICT  literacy  through  self  study  followed  by  other methods such as trial and error method 76 (56.72 %) and  formal education such as undertaking the computer course 74  (55.22 %). It can be diagnosed that the majority of professionals  acquire the ICT skills and knowledge themselves through self  study and trial and error method. The library authority should  take  initiative  and  organise  in-house  workshops,  seminars,  conferences and ICT training at workplace more frequently to  increase the ICT skills of library professionals. 
figure 9.  hindrances faced in enhancing Ict  literacy. 
7.8   h indrances faced  in enhancing  Ict   Literacy 
To understand various hindrance faced by the professionals  while  enhancing  ICT  literacy  skills,  the  professionals  were  instructed  to  point  out  the  hindrances  faced  by  them  in  enhancing ICT literacy skills. The responses received from the  professionals have been represented in Fig. 9.  
Figure 9 indicates that the major hindrance in enhancing  ICT skills by professionals is their day-to-day busy working  schedule  as  74  (55.22  %)  professionals  out  of  134  have  responded to this. It is followed by the other hindrance such as  
Inadequate training 47 (35.07 %), lack of funds 29 (21.64 %)  and lack of awareness 24 (17.91 %) are the other constraints  and obstacles in acquiring ICT skills. It can be inferred that  majority of library professionals could not acquire the suffcient  ICT  skills  due  to  their  day-to-day  busy  working  schedule  and do not get opportunities to enhance their ICT skills and  knowledge.  
7.9 Suggestions  for  the enhancement  of  Ict 
Literacy 
To  overcome  the  diffculties  and  problems  faced  by  the  library  professionals  in  enhancing  ICT  literacy  level,  the  suggestions  were  invited  from  the  library  professionals  through an open ended question to get the real time feedback  
357 

========5========

DJLIT, VOL.  37,  NO.  5,  SEpTEMBER   2017 
for  enhancing  ICT  literacy.  The  various  responses  received  from the library professionals have been collated together and  represented in the Fig. 10. 
Figure 10 indicates that out of 134 library professionals,  118 (88.06 %) professionals suggested that in-house training  programmes  for  staff  development  are  the  most  effective  ways  for  updating  the  ICT  knowledge/skills,  103  (76.87  %)  suggested  that  attending  conferences,  workshops  in  the  relevant area and whereas 82 (61.19 %) feels that going for  higher studies/formal courses can enhance the ICT knowledge/ skills of professionals.  
figure 10. Suggestions for the enhancement of Ict  literacy. 
8.   fI ndIngS   of the  Study 
• Majority of library professionals were well versed with  
the  computing  technology,  storage  devices,  printing  
and  scanning  technology,  audio  visual  technology  and  
communication  media  technology,  hence  the  literacy  
about these emerging ICT technologies was found high  
among majority of library professionals. 
• Amongst  all  electronic  resources  E-journals  was  found  
most  preferred  e-resources  among  majority  of  library  
professionals, it may be because E-journals are becoming  
increasingly a valuable source of electronic information  
in  university  libraries,  therefore  majority  of  libraries  
procured  E-journals  through  various  consortia  such  
as  UGC  INFONET,  DELNET,  INDEST  etc  as  well  as  
through individual subscription. 
• Majority of library professionals were found well literate  
of Web OpAC, Reprographic Service, CD-ROM service  
and CAS. Since these services are provided by them on  
a regular basis to the users, whereas literacy of bulletin  
board  service,  e-query  service  and  translation  service  
was found low among library professionals due to lack of  
knowledge and expertise to use these ICT based services. • Majority  of  library  professionals  were  actively  
participative  in  online  discussion  groups  and  social  
media and with this participation the professionals keep  
themselves  update  with  the  current  developments  in  
358 
• 
• 
• 
• 
libraries  and  information  centres,  but  still  few  library  professionals  are  lacking  with  the  literacy  of  blogging,  Listserv, RSS feeds and Social book marking. Majority of library professionals are found well literate  of SOUL and LIBSYS software as it has been installed  in their respective library for automating library activities  and  services  and  all  library  professionals  are  using  the  same to carry out various library activities. Few library  professionals  felt  that  they  do  have  sound  knowledge  of  SLIM,  kOHA,  SOUL  and  CDS/ISIS  as  many  organisations  are  conducting  training  programmes  for  these software’s and possibly the library staff must have  undergone the same.  
Literacy  of  institutional  repository  and  digital  library  software’s  was  found  low  among  library  professionals.  One of the major reason for lack of literacy might be that  the few library professionals usually look after the digital  library section even though majority of them might have  fexibility to access the digital library software. Majority  of  library  professionals  acquire  the  ICT  skills  and knowledge themselves through self study and trial  and error method.   
Majority  of  library  professionals  could  not  acquire  the  suffcient ICT skills due to their day to day busy working  schedule  and  do  not  get  opportunities  to  enhance  their  ICT skills and knowledge. Library professionals lack the  proper ICT training at work place. 
9. SuggeStIonS     
Based on the fndings of the study the suggestions have  been made to viz. library professionals and library authority. 
9.1   f or  Library  Professionals 
• To cope up with the technological changes adopted by the  
libraries, library professionals needs to uplift their literacy  
of various ICT-based tools and technology by undergoing  
various computer courses. 
• Library professionals entail to make use of E-thesis most  
regularly and frequently in order to increase their literacy  
of using E-thesis and E-publisher. 
• Library professionals needs to increase their literacy of  
various ICT based services such as bulletin board service,  
e-query service and translation service, etc. by adopting  
the  practical  knowledge  of  these  services  or  needs  to  
visit other libraries which are providing these ICT-based  
services in order to provide these services to their users  
more effectively and effciently. 
• Library  professionals  need  to  uplift  their  literacy  of  
using various online discussion groups and social media  
technology by attending various training programme and  
short-term courses on web-based technology and social  
media technology to keep themselves updated, to interact  
professionally with the groups of diverse people and to  
market their library services among social media users. • To enhance the literacy of library professionals about open  
source automation software, university libraries needs to  
arrange in-house training and orientation programmes on  
various open source automation software or needs to send  

========6========

BANSODE  & V ISWE : ICT LITERACY AMONG  L IBRARY pROFESSIONALS  W ORkING IN  U NIVERSITY  L IBRARIES IN  M AHARASHTRA 
• 
their library professionals to attend the various training  and  orientation  programs,  workshops  on  various  open  source automation software. 
Library professionals need to attend various workshops,  seminars, conferences and training programmes on digital  library and institutional repository to uplift their literacy  towards the digital library and institutional repository. 
9.2   f or  Library authority 
• Library authority should take an initiative and organise  
in-house  training  programmes,  workshops,  seminars,  
conferences at workplace more frequently and needs to  
encourage their library professionals to attend the training  
programmes on various ICT aspects conducted by other  
institutions/organisations  to  enhance  the  ICT  literacy  
level. 
• Library authorities needs to acknowledge the benefts of  
ICT in libraries and always strive to raise the level of ICT  
literacy among the library professionals by organising in- 
house  ICT  training  programmes,  workshops,  Seminars  
and conferences on regular intervals to enhance the ICT  
literacy of library professionals and facilitate the effective  
utilisation of ICT-based tools, resources and services by  
library professionals. 
10.   c oncLuSIonS 
Based on the present study, it can be sum up here that,  majority of library professionals working in university libraries  in Maharashtra are ICT literate, which is required to perform  day to day library work, but still few library professionals have  lack the literacy of ICT-based tools, resources and services. In  spite  of  having  good  literacy  level,  the  library  professionals  need to enhance their literacy in various open source library  automation software, digital library software and institutional  repository software, etc. 
The  existing  ICT  training  and  orientation  provided  by  the  university  libraries  in  Maharashtra  is  not  fully  suffcient  to create ICT literacy among the library professionals. Library  professionals  need  to  attend  various  workshops,  seminars,  conferences and training programmes on ICT more frequently in  order to enhance their level of ICT literacy. Library professionals  need to undergo various short-term computer courses in order  to  increase  their  literacy  and  confdent  in  performing  ICT  related works more effectively and effciently. 
The university library authorities needs to acknowledge  the  benefts  of  ICT  in  libraries  and  always  strive  to  raise  the level of ICT literacy among the library professionals by  organizing in-house ICT training and orientation programmes,  workshops, Seminars and conferences on regular intervals in  order to enhance the ICT literacy of library professionals and  facilitate the effective utilisation of ICT-based tools, resources  and services by library professionals. 
referenceS 
1. Velmurugan,  V.S.  &  Amudha,  G.  Use  of  ICT  based  
resources and services among the users of arts and science  
colleges  in  Virudhunagar  district: A  study. Int.  Res.:  J.  
Libr. Inf. Sci., 2014, 4(4), 522-535. 
2.     p artap, Bhanu & parmar, Seema. Awareness, access and  
use  of  ICT  based  information  resources  and  services  
among the users of Nehru Library: A case study of CCS  
Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar, Haryana (India).  
Int. J. Digital Libr. Serv., 2014, 4(2), 206-227. 3.     p aul,  Olaifa  Taye  &  Oluwakemi,  Oyeniyi  J.  Research  
library development in Nigeria: The role of information  
communication  and  technology. Int.  J.  Sci.  Res.,   2014,  
3(3), 256-259. 
4.     Susan, Mathew k. Impact of information communication  
technology  (ICT)  on  professional  development  and  
educational  needs  of  library  professionals  in  the  
universities of kerala. Cochin University of Science and  
Technology. 2011. ph.D. Thesis. 
5.     Liaquat,  Ali  Rahoo;  Wahid,  Bux  Mangrio  &  Arabella,  
Bhutto. Measuring ICT skills of library professionals of  
public sector universities of Sindh province, pakistan. J.  
Libr. Sci. Res.,2016, 2(1), 41-48. 
6.     Nonthacumjane, p. key skills and competencies of a new  
generation  of  LIS  professionals.  IFLA  Journal,  2011,  
37(4), 280–288. 
7.     Wijaya, S.W. & Surendro, k. ICT literacy as an indicator  
of  e-government  Readiness.  In   2nd  Information  and  
Communication Technology Seminar, School of electrical  
and  informatics  Engineering.  Bandung  Institute  of  
Technology, Bandung, Indonesia, 2006, pp. 404-407. 8.     k amba, Manir Abdullahi. ICT competency framework for  
library and information science schools in Nigeria: The  
need  for  model  curriculum. Int.  J.  Libr.  Inf.  Sci., 2011,  
3(4), 68-80. 
9.     Hicks,  Deborah.  Information  technology,  change  and  
information  professionals’  identity  construction:  A  
discourse analysis. In 77th  ASIS&T Annual Meeting, 31  
October-5  November,  Seattle,  WA,  USA,  2014.  51(1),  
1-9. 
10.    Ajeemsha,  S.  &  Margam,  M.  Competencies  for  LIS  
professionals in the working environment: Analysis and  
dimensions. Int. J. Libr. Inf. Stud.,  2012,  2(4), 18-25. 
contrIbutorS 
dr  Sadanand  bansode   is  presently  working  as  professor  and  Head  of  the  Department  in  the  Department  of  Library  &  Information  Science,  Savitribai phule, pune  University, pune.  He  has  published  more  than  55  papers  journals,  conferences  and  has  authored  Two  book.  His  areas  of  specialisation  are:  Information  technology,  Web  2.0,  digital  library,  information  literacy,  etc. 
The  present  study  has  been  carried  out  under  his  guidance.  He  has  acted  as  a  Research  Supervisor. 
dr rahul viswe is presently working as a Librarian at S.k.N.  Sinhgad  School  of  Business  Management,  pune.  His  area  of  specialisation  is  ICT  literacy.  He  has  published  8  research  papers  in  journals  and  attended  20  conferences,  seminars,  workshops. 
The  present  study  is  the  outcome  of  his  phD  topic  carried  out  on  ICT  Literacy  under  the  supervision  of  Dr  Sadanand  Bansode. 
359 

========7========

