DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 38, No. 2, March 2018, pp. 102-109, DOI : 10.14429/djlit.38.2.11879 
 2018, DESIDOC 
Information Security Measures of Libraries of Central Universities of Delhi : A Study  
Vikas Singh and Madhusudhan Margam* 
Department of Library and Information Science, University of Delhi, Delhi – 110 007, India 
*E-mail: mmadhusudhan@libinfosci.du.ac.in 
AbStrACt 
The paper is to examine the information security measures, physical, organisational and technological in Jawahar  Lal Nehru University (JNU), University of Delhi (DU) and Jamia Millia Islamia (JMI) in Delhi. The paper uses a  mixed-method approach that combines both quantitative and qualitative analyses of information security measures  with the help of a specially designed checklist. The fndings of the study reveals that JNU scored 69.23 per cent  highest information security features, followed by DU with 66.15 per cent, and JMI got the lowest total score with  63.07 per cent. The study has also revealed that all the university libraries under study have been lagging behind  in physical security measures. It is hoped that the present study will help in improving the information security  lacunas in libraries under study. The fndings of the study will not only guide the university librarians to improve  their Information security measures, but also open the foodgates for improvements of information security in fast  changing technological world so that they can overcome the limitations being faced by librarians. 
Keywords:  Security measures; Physical security; technical security; organisational security; Delhi; India 
1.  IntroDUCtIon 
Library and information security is the method which has  been used to conserve and preserve the integrity, availability  and  confdentiality  of  electronic  information.  Security  control  reduces  the  impact  or  probability  of  security  threats  and  vulnerabilities  to  a  level  acceptable  to  the  organisation.  Information  security  is  as  important  as  it  has  ever  been,  but  the  challenges  to  determine  the  factors  contributing  to  information  insecurity  prove  to  be  of  complex  nature.  In  libraries, information systems (IS) are widely used to deliver  services and collections to local and remote patrons. This is  typically done in order to control access to the information in  diferent ways, depending on its importance, its sensitivity, and  its  vulnerability  to  theft  or  misuse1.  Moreover,  connecting  a  library to the outside world via the Internet has changed the  type  of  risks  faced  associated  with  and  the  controls  used  to  secure the services the IS support2-5. 
Information  security  management  in  the  context  of  library  management  describes,  controls  that  a  library  needs  to  implement  to  protect  its  information  assets  from  all  potential  threats  to  ensure  the  confdentiality,  integrity  and  availability  of  its  information  resources6and  help  to  identify  and reduce critical security risks and types of network attacks,  for  proper  management  of  information  security  in  digital  libraries7.  Libraries  should  be  concerned  about  security  and  should  spend  considerable  sums  on  preventing,  detecting  and  resolving  security  breaches.  In  order,  to  reach  desirable  level of protection against threats and to provide the necessary  mechanics  to  protect  organisation’s  assets  and  knowledge,  a  vast variety of management approaches and methods have been  
Received : 09 September 2017, Revised : 27 October 2017  Accepted : 22 November 2017, Online published : 23 March 2018 
102 
developed in the last decades. Libraries should review some of  the plans, procedures, policies, some tools and methods that  can be used to protect library system including Organisational,  Physical  and  technological  security.  This  paper  gives  an  overview of current approaches in physical, organisational and  technological  security  measures  in  select  central  university  libraries in Delhi. 
2.  LIterAtUre revIew 
There  are  many  articles  and  case  studies  available  on  this  topic  by  various  authors;  some  of  the  more  relevant  articles  are  reviewed.  Information  security  is  means  and  ways  of  protecting  data  from  unauthorised  access,  change,  misuse,  loss  and  ensures  its  availability  whenever  required.  At  the  beginning,  information  security  was  focused  mainly  on technical issues and the responsibility was left to technical  experts8.  University  libraries  face  a  number  of  security  challenges  with  their  collections  (both  print  and  non-print).  Library  collections  constitute  the  bedrock  for  services  provided to the community and serve as important assets to the  library9. Ismail10  developed a model named LISSAM (library  information  systems  security  assessment  model),  consistsof  fve  components:  information  security  policy,  technological  security foundation, administrative tools, methods, procedures  and control and awareness creation. Ma11, et al.stressed upon  the network security risks in digital medical libraries and their  efective preventive measures, and pointed out the major faws  in their CD-ROM and full-text databases and their preventive  measures.  
RFID is considered to be the latest technology being used  in libraries for self-checkout and check in, book identifcation,  sorting and conveying of library books and for theft detection.  

========1========

SINgh & MARgAM : INFORMATION  S ECURITy MEASURESIN  C ENTRAL  U NIVERSITy LIbRARIESOF  D ELhI: A STUDy 
RFID system may be a comprehensive system that addresses  authenticate  or  not.  Jackson33   describes  the  tips  for  creating  both  the  security  and  materials  tracking  needs  of  a  library.  awareness and best practices for cyber security for information  RFID technology saves money too and quickly gives a return  professionals. 
on investment12. Samy13, et al.  examine the hardware security  
threats  that  are  damaging  the  physical  components  in  an  3.    o bjeCtIveS  
information system. On the other side, gawde14  presents the  
software  security  threats  that  are  jeopardising  the  operating  (i) 
systems  and  related  applications.  Network  security  threats  which  are  related  to  the network  such  as  virus  and  hackers,  
whereas,  data  security  threats  is  related  to  threats  related  to  (ii) 
data,  such  as  unauthorised  access  are  discussed  by  various  authors15-19. 
hagen20, et al.  reveals implementation of organisational  information  security  measures.  Zhdanov21   examines  the  information  security  solutions  and  policies  which  consist  of  three essays. The frst two essays present theoretical models  
The objectives of the study are: 
To study the diferent information security measures with  
regard to Physical, Organisational and Technological in  
university libraries under study; 
To compare the diferent information security measures in  
studied libraries and rank them based on various features,  
and 
(iii) To provide suggestions for improve information security  
measures in studied libraries. 
The  scope  of  the  study  is  confned  to  three  central  universities in Delhi, i.e., University of Delhi (DU), Jawaharlal  
and  the  last  essay  used  the  data  about  attacks  in  network  Nehru University (JNU), and Jamia Millia Islamia University  
trafc  in  combination  with  graphical  formalisms  which  is  
(JMI).  The  study  aims  to  evaluate  the  information  security  
known  as  met  graphs  to  derive  information  security  policy  measures  in  studied  libraries.  Table  1  presents  the  list  of  rules.  It  also  provides  the  practitioners,  newcomer  with  a  Central University libraries in Delhi with their establishment  systematic  but  intuitive  way  to  analyse  information  security  and universal resource locators (URLs). 
policies  whereas,  good  design  of  a  library  should  integrate  
A structured checklist was designed keeping in view of the  
security for the protection of its collections, building and its  stated objectives and literature available so as to know various  occupants.  The  main  focus  is  to  give  an  environment  that  qualitative  and  quantitative  information  security  features.  
balances both safety and comfort. Carey22  explain the passive  
The Checklist comprises of 77 questions, categorised as two  
security  measures  such  as  transparency,  openness,  visibility,  main parts, preceded by a rating Table, viz. Part-I: Qualitative  and  building  organisation  are  key  to  the  creation  of  a  safe  analysis   (12  descriptive  questions)  and  Part-II:  Quantitative  
environment.  Ohno23   re-investigated  the  security  measures  sufered from natural disasters such as earthquakes, torrential  
analysis  (65 questions). Each part of the checklist contains a  set of related questions and the responses of the each section  
rains and heavy snowfall. In this article, he reports some of  are presented in respective tables. 
his attempts to improve the situation and suggests the type of  
system to purchase including computers in place, the security  
table 1.  
needed to protect the past and present campus security issues.  butters24 discuss  the  threats  of  RFID  technology  in  libraries  
Central universities library websites and their year  of establishment 
University Library 
UrL of the library 
and to probe their technical feasibility and what sort of action  
Central Library, University of Delhi  http://crl.du.ac.in 
should be taken by libraries to take the edge of the risk that  actually exists. 
Ismail  &  Zainab25   proposes  an  instrument  to  assess  the  current information systems security status in libraries. Akor26 
(DU)34 
Dr. b.R. Ambedkar Central Library,  http://www.jnu.ac.in/ Jawaharlal Nehru University  Library/Intro.htm 
(JNU)35 
analysis  showed  that  the  university  library  books  are  stolen  
Dr. Zakir husain Library, Jamia  
and  mutilated  due  to  inadequate  library  materials,  fnancial  constraint  and  selfshness  on  the  part  of  library  users.  The  
http://jmi.ac.in/zhlibrary 
Millia Islamia (JMI) University36 
study recommends that university management should provide  
4. 
adequate  library  materials  to  meet  the  information  needs  of  their  users. hanus27 examines  the  theory  by  proposing  and  validating  a  universal  defnition  of  security  awareness.  It  
training activities. Olijnyk28  adds to the accumulated wealth of  
on the nature of speciality development. Silic & back29 gives a  
DAtA  An ALySIS AnD  Interpret AtIon 
The data analysis took place during 20 July 2016 to 21  August 2016. The qualitative and quantitative responses were  
security awareness among the college students. Newby31  gives  a description of information security for libraries. Ellern32  have  looked at the state of authentication practices within a specifc  
provides practitioners with an instrument to examine awareness  
received  from  evaluation  checklists.  Each  time  a  cell  (i.e.,  in  a  plethora  of  settings  and  design  customised  security  
specifc feature in the checklist) was checked, one point was  
assigned  to  the  respective  feature  marked  “√”  (yes)  and  no  knowledge on the science of scholarly domains by shedding light  
point for marked “x” (no) in the study. The score for a system  
is the total number of cells checked for that security system.  critical review and future directions of research in information  
Each part has a set of related questions and the responses of  security. Kim30  reveals in his paper regarding the information  
the each part and their sub parts were analysed with the help of  
tables followed by interpretation of data. 
4.1  Qualitative Analysis  
The qualitative analysis contain various essential features  
region  (i.e.,  all  the  academic  libraries  in  North  Carolina)  in  
such as, software, anti-spyware software, cleanup software, user  
an attempt to create a profle of those libraries that choose to  
identifcation and authentication, frewall, antivirus software,  
103 

========2========

DJLIT,  VOL.  38,  NO.  2,  MARCh  2018 
server location, internal and remote computer systems, security  of  network  equipment’s  and  emergency  power  sources.  The  qualitative analysis of the checklist having Twelve (12) features  pertaining to select security systems, which is serving in the  form of a recording device for descriptive data.  
Table 2 reveals that 100 per cent university libraries are  using  Library  automation  software  of  which  JNU  is  using  Virtua, JMI is using Libsys and DU is using Troodon software.  both JNU and JMI Libraries are using Quick heal antivirus  software  to  detect  and  remove  any  spyware  threats  whereas  DU  is  using  Symantec Antivirus  to  detect  and  remove  any  spyware  threats.  Studied  Libraries  are  using  CC  Cleaner  software  to  erase  fles  or  settings  left  behind  by  a  user  and  using  identifcation  and  authentication  at  computer  network,  whereas, JNU and JMI has library network. Further, JNU also  uses  user  identifcation  and  authentication  at  laptops,  screen  savers, and at remote access. 
JNU  and  DU  uses  application  of  frewall  and  DU  also  uses  hotspot  for  mobile  laptops  that  connect  to  the  library’s  LAN, whereas, no such application is available in JMI. All the  studied libraries are using antivirus software to secure library  server, JNU is using Symantec Endpoint protection and Quick  heal, whereas, JMI is using only Quick heal and DU is using  Symantec Endpoint protection. All the studied Library servers  are placed in a secure location i.e., separate and locked room,  whereas JNU and DU is also using environmental control area  for this purpose. JNU and DU are using single sign-on system to  control data access to the library internal and remote computer  systems which is not present in JMI. For the security of network  equipment’s security, cables, locked cable trays, metal cages or  
table 2. Qualitative aspects of security systems 
Qualitative aspect of security systems 
jnU 
Library Management Software Virtua 
To detect, remove any spyware threats by use  Quick heal Antivirus of Anti-spyware software 
Cleanup software for erasing fles or settings  CC Cleaner left behind by a user 
Identifcation and authentication required for  
logging 
Remote Access Use of frewall for mobile laptops that connect  Firewall System to the library’s LAN 
Antivirus software to secure library server 
heal  
Server Location  
Workstations, Laptops, Screen savers,  Library Network, Computer Network,  
Symantec Endpoint protection, Quick  
Separate and locked Room,  Environmental Control Area  
Data Access Control Network Security equipment’s 
Single Sign-on System 
Use of alternative communication lines and  emergency power sources  
System recovery to rebuild, repair the library  computers systems  
Web fltering software  
Locked Cable Trays, Security Cables,  Metal cages/ anchoring devices Telephone Lines, generators/ Inverters,  
UPS 
Dell Recovery System 
Firewall 
anchoring devices is being used by JNU, whereas, DU is using  metal cages or anchoring devices for this purpose but no such  devices are being used in JMI. 
For  emergency  power  sources  and  alternative  communication lines all the studied libraries are using telephone  lines, generators/ inverters, UPS, etc. JNU and DU both are  using system recovery to rebuild, repair the library computers  systems  after  disaster  or  crash  in  selected  institutional  libraries, but it is not present in JMI. All the studied libraries  are using Firewall web fltering software to prevent access to  inappropriate  materials  or  sites  and  as  well  as  web  fltering  software. 
4.2 Quantitative Analysis 
The  quantitative  part  of  the  checklist  contains  65  dichotomous questions relating to: 
(i)  Organisational security  
(ii)  Physical security, and  
(iii) Technological security.  
Detailed  analysis  of  each  category  is  presented  in  the  presiding sections: 
4.2.1 Orgnisational  Security 
An organisational security measure is done by calculating  the  sum  value  for  the  presence  of  procedures,  controls,  security  policy,  administrative  tools  and  awareness  creation.  This section having 14 questions related to diferent aspects of  organisational security (Table 3).  
Table  3  reveals  that  JNU  and  DU  libraries  are  having  written library & information science security policy, whereas  
jMI 
DU 
LibSys Quick heal  Antivirus CC Cleaner 
Troodon Symantec Antivirus 
CC Cleaner 
Workstations,  Library Network,  Computer Network  -- 
Computer Network 
Firewall System and hotspot 
 Quick  heal  
Separate Room 
Symantec Endpoint  protection 
Separate and locked Room,  Environmental Control Area  
generators/  Inverters 
Single Sign-on System Metal cages or anchoring  devices 
generators/ Inverters 
Available* 
Firewall 
Firewall 
Note= JNU- Jawaharlal Nehru University, JMI- Jamia Millia Islamia, DU -University of Delhi. 
104 

========3========

SINgh & MARgAM : INFORMATION  S ECURITy MEASURESIN  C ENTRAL  U NIVERSITy LIbRARIESOF  D ELhI: A STUDy 
JMI is not having any such policy. Further, data classifcation,  
in  participating  libraries.  This  section  is  having  24  features  
retention and destruction policies for library data or materials  related to physical security features existing in studied libraries that contain sensitive information are present in JNU only. All  (Table 4). 
the  studied  libraries  are  identifed  management  policies  for  
Table 4 reveals that all the selected libraries under study  
library  and  information  system,  user  registration,  password  uses air conditioning to stabilise the humidity and temperature in  management, library hardware security, data security, software  the library building, whereas only JNU Library uses earthquake  security and they allow use of wireless devices in their library  early warning system to alert library staf and patrons prior to  such as laptops and hand devices except in DU. Further, all  damaging ground shaking but no studied library found to be  the  studied  libraries  having  policy  on  sharing,  storing  and  using any kind food detector to provide an early warning of  transmitting  of  library  data  via  external  networks  or  third  developing foods in their libraries. Only JNU and DU Library  party systems. JNU and DU have the procedure for reviewing  Systems are using lighting protectors and surge protectors to  the  current  information  security  policy  and  they  both  have  protect  any  valuable  machines  or  equipment’s  from  lighting  security administrator and have contingency disaster plan/ risk  strikes,  voltage  spikes  and  surges,  whereas,  100  per  cent  management  policy  for  dealing  with  natural  and  man  made  institutions  keep  security  guards  to  monitor  people  entering  
disasters, whereas these are not existing in JMI.  
Interestingly,  100  per  cent  staf  and  patrons  in  studied  
and leaving the library buildings and sites, but only JMI uses  
libraries at various levels are made aware of their responsibilities  
with  regards  to  protecting  the  information  systems  security  and  also  provide  Library  and  information  security  training  and  orientation  programs  to  their  staf.  Further,  JNU  and  DU  libraries  organise  program/workshop  for  staf/  patrons  regarding  information  security  and  well  defned  structured  information available in their library websites. 
4.2.2 Physical  Security 
Physical security indicates that unauthorised access into  the  library  building,  leaking  and  theft  or  vandalism  threats  
table 3. organisational security  
organisational Security Features 
Library & information science security policy  Classifcation of data, retention , destruction  policies for sensitive information 
Identifed management policies for user  registration and password management Written policy regarding library hardware  security 
Written policy regarding data security Written policy regarding software security Use of wireless devices in library such as  laptops and hand phones. 
Policy on storing, sharing and transmitting  of library data via external networks or  contractors systems. 
Procedure for reviewing security policy Security administrator 
Contingency disaster plan/ risk management  policy  
All staf aware of their responsibilities  regarding security 
Training and education programs for staf Organise program/workshop for staf/patrons  Total Score (maximum 14) 
Institution jnU jMI DU  X  
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
X 
 
 
 
  
X X 
  
 
X 
 
 
 
 
   
 X 08 
   12 
note= ‘’ = yes; ‘X’ = No. 
table 4. physical security  
physical Security Features 
Institution jnU jMI DU 
Air conditionings to stabilise the temperature  and humidity  
Earthquake early warning system  Flood detector an early warning system Lighting protectors and surge protectors  Security guards to monitor people  Automatic Sprinkler System (fghting against  intense fres)  
Smoke Detector  
Fire extinguishers  
Fireproof Installation the building and areas User identifcation and authentication  entrances and exits 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ √ √ √ 
X X X √ 
X X √ √ 
X 
√ 
X 
X √ √ 
√ √ √ 
X √ X 
Magnetic stripe swipe cards Electronic Locks  Proximity cards Wireless gates 
biometrics System window security 
√ X X X X 
X X X X X 
X X X X X 
Locks 
guards 
grillers 
bars 
Screens 
Films 
Door protection security Cylindrical locks Deadbolts 
Mortise locks 
Normal Door Locks Total Score (maximum 24) 
√ X √ X √ X 
√ √ √ √ √ √ 
√ √ √ √ √ √ 
√ X √ X 12 
X X X √ 13 
X X X X 10 
Note= ‘√’ = Yes; ‘X’ = No. 
105 

========4========

DJLIT,  VOL.  38,  NO.  2,  MARCh  2018 
automatic sprinkler system (fghting against intense fres) and  smoke detector in the library building and areas, because it was  built newly. 
100 per cent studied libraries are using Fire extinguishers  in their library building and nearby areas. On the other hand,  JNU  and  JMI  are  using  freproof  installation  in  the  library  building and surrounding areas. In the user identifcation and  authentication  entrances  and  exits  segment  only,  JNU  user  uses  magnetic  stripe  swipe  cards.  Interestingly,  no  studied  Library uses electronic locks, proximity cards, wireless gates  or  biometrics  system  for  this  purpose  (biometrics  system  being  used  for  staf  attendance).  Window  security  (lock,  griller, screens) and bars are available in all studied libraries  but flms are available only in JMI and DU. Door protection  security i.e., cylindrical locks, mortise locks are available in  only JNU, whereas deadbolts facility is not available in any  of the studied library. Further, normal door locks are present  in JMI. 
table 5. technological security  
technological security features 
Institution 
4.2.3        Technological  Security 
The Technological security refers to the security of library  software,  hardware,  network  security,  server  security,  data  security, workstations security and electronic security systems  such as RFID, Fire alarms, burglary protection and barcode,  etc. This  is  the  last  part  of  the  checklist  and  having  highest  number  of  features,  i.e.,  27  features  related  to  technological  security of the studied libraries (Table 5). 
Table 5 reveals that all studied libraries uses technological  security features except desktop security software for disable  certain features of workstations, tests and automatic debugging  to  remove  any  defects  from  hardware  components  or  new  software, virus protection and security programs/ software(s)  that  installed  for  web  browser  and  email  programs  and  also  system  recovery  to  repair,  rebuild  the  library  computers  systems. 
Interestingly,  in  the  context  of  electronic  security  system  none  of  the  studied  libraries  are  using  RFID  system  to protect library materials, motion/sensor detectors and smart  cards. barcode  technology  was  used  for  their  routine  work,  and  CCTV  was  to  safeguard  their  materials  were  common  in all studied libraries, but, only Delhi University was using  Biometrics system for staf attendance. Furthermore, JNU and  JMI  Libraries  are  using  Fire  alarm.  Moreover,  JMI  and  DU  have installed CCTV cameras in Reading room, but, JNU and  DU have done it in stack rooms. JMI and Delhi University has  installed CCTV cameras in corridors and server area computer  labs which were sensitive and expensive. Surprisingly, all the  studied  libraries  are  using  web  fltering  software  to  prevent  access to inappropriate materials or sites.  
jnU jMI DU Authentication for software √ √ √ Authorisation for software √ √ √ Privacy for software √ X √ Workstation security from threats and viruses √ √ √ Desktop security software for disable certain  √ √ X features of workstations 
Tests and automatic debugging to remove any  √ √ X defects from hardware components or new  
software  
Virus protection and security programs/  X √ √ software(s) that installed for web browser and  
Email programs 
System recovery to repair, rebuild the library  √ X √ computers systems  
Desktop security software and antivirus  √ √ √ software to receive regular updates  
Wi-f connection √ √ √ Network identifcation and wireless intrusion  √ √ √ detection systems 
Server protection √ √ √ Anti-virus software on servers and antivirus  √ √ √ defnition fles are kept up-to-date 
Regular backups of data √ √ √ 
electronic security system 
RFID X X X barcode √ √ √ CCTV √ √ √ biometrics X X √ Fire Alarms √ √ X Motion/sensor detectors X X X Smart Cards X X X 
CCtv  cameras 
Reading room X √ √ Stack rooms √ X √ Corridors X √ √ Computer labs √ √ √ Server areas X √ √ Web  fltering  software  to  prevent  from  √ √ √ inappropriate materials or sites 
Total Score (maximum 27) 19 20 21 
5.    t otAL  S Core oF  In ForMAtIon  
SeCUrIty MeASUreS 
The  total  score  of  study  information  security  measures  (ISM) is presented in Table 6 on the basis of previous respective  Tables 3, 4 and 5 (Quantitative analysis). A quantitative  fve point rating scale was designed based on intensity scale suggested by  Taylor-Powell37  to range from ‘very high’ to ‘very low’ to rank  the each individual information security measure and to aid in  
Note= ‘√’ = Yes; ‘X’ = No 
distinguish quality under study. The fve-point rating scale was  fxed equally based on the maximum quantitative score of 65  points. Range (Score): 53-65 – Very High; 40-52 = High; 27- 39 = Medium; 14-26 = Low; and 01-13 = Very Low. 
Table 6 presents the list of all three aspects of security  measures  in  studied  libraries.  Total  features  existing  among  the three security measures amounting for 129 out of 195, of  
106 

========5========

SINgh & MARgAM : INFORMATION  S ECURITy MEASURESIN  C ENTRAL  U NIVERSITy LIbRARIESOF  D ELhI: A STUDy 
which, technical security features tops with 60, followed by  physical security features (35) and with slight diference with  organisational security features (34).  
A cursory glance at the Table 6 reveals that out of three  
7.  ConCLUSIonS 
This study provides a quantitative and qualitative approach  that  investigated  the  implementation  status  of  information  security  measures  through  the  opinions  of  respondents.  The  
studied universities, none of the studied university had ranked  study also pointed that information security is to be efective;  ‘Very high’. All the studied libraries were ranked with ‘high,  libraries  need  to  incorporate  technical  measures  as  well  
of  which  JNU  got  the  highest  total  score  of  45  out  of  65  (69.23  per  cent),  followed  by  DU  with  43  score  (66.15  
as  information  security  policies,  security  procedures  and  awareness creation activities in their security programmes. The  
per  cent).Interestingly,  JMI  got  the  lowest  total  score  with  fndings of the study, Jawaharlal Nehru scored highest followed  
41 (63.07 per cent).  
table 6. total score of ISM 
Information security  measures and  maximum Score Organisational security  (maximum 14) Physical security  (maximum 24) Technical security  (maximum 27) Total score  
(maximum 65) Rank 
jnU 
DU 
jMI 
total  features 
14 
12 
08 
34/42 
12 
10 
13 
35/72 
19 
21 
20 
60/81 
45 
43 
41 
129/195 
high 
high 
high 
6. SUGGeStIonS 
The study proposes the following suggestions for efective  implementation  of  information  security  measures  in  studied  libraries:  
(i) Use  of  frewall  for  mobile  devices  that  connect  to  the  
library’s  LAN  is  very  essential  which  is  being  used  by  
JNU and DU only which may be used by JMI to caters the  
need of present day readers. 
(ii) Network  security  equipment’s  such  as:  Locked  cable  
trays, Security cables, metal cages/ anchoring devices are  
essential equipment they should be used in JMI Library  
for better security purposes.  
(iii) System recovery to rebuild, repair the library computers  
systems are integral part of any network security. Only  
JNU uses Dell Recovery System, whereas, otherstudied  
libraries  should  use  some  kind  of  network  security  
system.  
(iv) As  far  as  Organisational  security  is  concerned,  JMI  
lacks  in  most  of  the  features  such  as  LIS  security  
policy,  classifcation  of  data,  retention,  destruction  
policies  for  sensitive  information,  written  policy  
regarding data security and software security, procedure  
for  reviewing  security  policy,  contingency  disaster  
plan/  risk  management  policy  which  must  be  focused  
by JMI. 
(v) University  of  Delhi  must  focus  on  Physical  security  
aspects like, Air conditioning to stabilise the temperature  
and  humidity,  earthquake  early  warning  system,  food  
detector  an  early  warning  system,  smoke  detector,  fre  
extinguishers, etc. 
by University of Delhi, and Jamia Millia Islamia. Furthermore,  
it was also found that all the institutions selected for study  
have been lagging in physical security measures more and  
they have to strengthen this area. It is hoped that the present  
study will be boon for developing counties give an idea to  
the Librarians and library professionals in forming Library  
and  information  security  policy  for  their  libraries.  The  
robustness of this instrument need to be further tested and  
this will carried out in the second phase of this Study. 
reFerenCeS 
1. Rhodes-Ousley,  M.  Information  security.  Ed.  2nd.  
Mcgrawhill,  New  york,  2013,  3.  https://www. 
mheducation.com/highered/product/information- 
security-complete-reference-second-edition-rhodes- 
ousley/0071784357.html.  (Accessed  on  18  March,  
2017). 
2.   g upta,  M.  &  Sharman,  R.  Social  and  human  elements  
of  information  security:  Emerging  trends  and  
countermeasures. hershey,  2008, PA: I gI global. 3.   g uttman, b. & Roback, E. An introduction to computer  
security: The NIST handbook. NIST special publication  
800-  1.  Washington,  DC:  US  National  Institute  of  
Standards  and  Technology,  1995.  http://csrc.nist.gov/ 
publications/nistpubs/800-12/handbook.pdf (Accessed on  
10 September, 2016). 
4. Scarfone, K.; Souppaya. M. & Cody, A. Technical guide  
to information security testing and assessment. Technical  
Report Special Publication 800-11. Washington, DC: US  
Department of Commerce, National Institute of Standards  
and  Technology, 2008.  http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/ 
nistpubs/800-115/SP800-115.pdf  (Accessed  on  21  
September, 2016). 
5. Westby,  J.R.  &  Allen,  J.H.  Governing  for  enterprise  
security  (gES)  implementation  guide.CMU/SEI-2007- 
TN-020.Pittsburgh,  PA:  Software  Engineering  Institute,  
Carnegie  Mellon  University,2007.  http://www.cert.org/ 
archive/pdf/07tn020.pdf  (Accessed  on  21  September,  
2016). 
6. Ismail, R.B. Assessing information security management  
in  Malaysian  academic  libraries.  Faculty  of  Computer  
science and information technology, University of Malaya,  
Kaula Lampur, PhD thesis, 2012, 268. 
7. Ravi,  b.  Information  security  in  digital  libraries. In  
Library Security Management in Digital Era: Proceedings  
of the National Conference NCLMS-2011, February 4th-  
5th, 35-43. 
107 

========6========

DJLIT,  VOL.  38,  NO.  2,  MARCh  2018 
8. Von, S. b. Information security- the third wave? Computers  
and Security, 2000, 19, 615- 620. http://www.tut.f/units/ 
tuta/tita/2006-2007/TITA-300/the_third_wave. (Accessed  
on 11 September, 2016).  
9. Maidabino,  A.A.  &  Zainab,  A.N.  Collection  security  
management  at  university  libraries:  Assessment  of  its  
implementation status. Malaysian J. Lib. Inf. Sci., 2011,  
16  (1), 15-33. 
10. Ismail, R.b. Assessing information security management  
in  Malaysian  academic  libraries.  Faculty  of  Computer  
science  and  information  technology,  University  of  
Malaya,  Kaula  Lampur,  PhD  thesis,  2012,  268.  http:// 
studentsrepo.um.edu.my/5537/1/roesnita_FSKTM.pdf. 
(Accessed on 13 July, 2016).  
11. Ma Jun-tao, D.; huang, Qiu-sheng, & Wen, S X. Network  
Security  risks  in  digital  medical  libraries  and  their  
preventive measures. Chinese J. Med. Lib. Inf. Sci., 2010,  
19  (6), 60-1. 
12. Madhusudhan, M. & gupta, P. Use of RFID technology  
by  students  in  Indian  Institute  of  Technology,  Delhi  
and  Indian  Law  Institute,  Delhi: A  survey. World  Dig.  
Libraries, 2014, 7(2), 145-156. 
13. Samy, g.N.; Rabiah, A. & Zuraini, I. Security threats in  
healthcare information systems: A preliminary study. In  
Fifth International Conference on Information Assurance  
and Security. IEEE Comp. Society,  2009 (18-20 August). 14.   g awde,  V.  Information  systems  misuse  -  threats  
&  countermeasures,  Infosecwriters,  2004  
http://infosecwriters.com/text_resources/pdf/ 
informationsystems_misuse.pdf.>  (Accessed  on  
December 10, 2016). 
15. Williams, R.L. Computer and network security in small  
libraries:  A  guide  for  planning.  Texas  State  Library   
Archieve  Com, 2001.  http://www.tsl.state.tx.us/ld/pubs/ 
compsecurity/ (Accessed on 21 September, 2016). 16. Farahmand  ,  F.;  Navathe,  S.B.;  Sharp.  G.P.  & Enslow,  
P.h.  Assessing  damages  of  information  security  
incidents  and  selecting  control  measures: A  case  study  
approach. In Workshop on the Economics of Information  
Security,  2005 .  http://infosecon.net/workshop/pdf/39.pdf   
(Accessed on 11 November, 2016). 
17. Eisenberg,  J.  &  Lawthers,  C.  Library  computer  and 
network security.Infopeople, 2005. http://www.infopeople. 
org/resources/security (Accessed on 1 November, 2016). 18. Mell,  P.;  Kent,  K.  &  Nusbaum,  J.  guide  to  malware  
incident  prevention  and  handling.  National  Institute  of  
Standards  and  Technology,  Special  Publication  800-83,  
gaithersburg, MD, U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Technology  
Administration,  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  
Technology,  2005.  http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/ 
nistpubs/800-83/SP800-83.pdf  (Accessed  on  21  
September, 2016). 
19.   y eh, Q. & Chang A.J. Threats and countermeasures for  
information system security: A cross-industry study. Inf.  
Mgt.,  2007,  44,  480-491.  https://pdfs.semanticscholar.o 
rg/814b/46a816bbb07ab82139df257e9adaca3ee49f.pdf  
(Accessed on 25 May 2017) 
108 
20.   h agen,  J.M.;  Eirik,  A.  &  Jan,  h.  Implementation  and  
efectiveness  of  organizational  information  security  
measures. Inf. Mgt. Comp. Sec.,  2008,  16(4), 377-97. 
doi:  10.1108/09685220810908796> 
21. Zhdanov,  D.  Information  security  in  organizations:  
Drivers,  policies  and  compliance  incentives.  University  
of Minnesota, 2007. 
22. Carey, J. Library security by design. Lib. Arch. Sec.,  2008,  
21(2), 129-40. 
23. Ohno, F. Current state of security at the Niigata university  
medical and dental library. J. Japan Med. Lib. Assn.,  2008.  
55(1), 30-3.  
24.   b utters, A. RFID systems, standards and privacy within  
libraries. The Elect. Lib., 2007, 25  (4), 430-9. 
doi: 10.1108/02640470710779844 
25. Ismail, R. & Zainab, A.N. Information systems security  
in special and public libraries: An assessment of status.  
Malaysian  J.  Lib.  Inf.  Sci.,   2011,  16(2),  45-62.  https:// 
arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1301/1301.5386.pdf (Accessed  
on 20 October, 2017). 
26. Akor, P.U. Security management for prevention of book  
thefts in university libraries. A case study of benue state  
university library, Nigeria. Lib. Phil. Prac., 2013. http:// 
digitalcommons.unl.edu/Libphilprac/995  (Accessed  on  
25 November, 2016). 
27.   h anus, b. T. The impact of information security awareness  
on  compliance  with  information  security  policies:  A  
phishing perspective, 2014. http://search.proquest.com/d 
ocview/1719103457?accountid=10461  (Accessed  on  20  
December, 2016). 
28. Olijnyk, N.V. Information security: A scientometric study  
of  the  profle,  structure,  and  dynamics  of  an  emerging  
scholarly  speciality,  2014.  http://search.proquest.com/ 
docview/  1530479755?accountid=10461  (Accessed  on  
21 September, 2016). 
29. Silic, M. & back, A. Information security: critical review  
and future directions of research. Inf. Mgt. Comp. Secu.,  
2014, 23(3), 279-308. 
doi: 10.1108/IMCS-05-2013-0041 
30. Kim,  E.  Recommendations  for  information  security  
awareness training for college students.Inf. Mgt. Comp.  
Sec., 2014, 22(1), 115-126. 
doi: 10.1108/IMCS-01-2013-0005 
31. Newby,  g.b.  Information  security  for  libraries,  2014.  
https://www.petascale.org/papers/library-security.pdf  
(Accessed on 5 October, 2016). 
32. Ellern, g.; hitch, R.  & Stofan, M.A. User authentication  
in the public area of academic libraries in north Carolina.  
Inf. Tech. Libr., 2015, 34(2), 103-132.  
doi: 10.6017/ital.v34i2.5770 
33. Jackson,  D.W.  Cyber  security:  best  practices  for  
information professionals. AALL Spectrum,  2016, 12-16. 34. Central Library, University of Delhi (DU). http://crl.du.ac. 
in (Accessed on 1 November, 2016). 
35. Dr.  B.R.  Ambedkar  Central  Library,  Jawaharlal  Nehru  
University (JNU). http://www.jnu.ac.in/Library/Intro.htm  
(Accessed on 10 November, 2016). 

========7========

SINgh & MARgAM : INFORMATION  S ECURITy MEASURESIN  C ENTRAL  U NIVERSITy LIbRARIESOF  D ELhI: A STUDy 
36. Dr.  Zakir  Husain  Library,  Jamia  Millia  Islamia  (JMI)  ContrIbUtorS 
University.  http://jmi.ac.in/  zhlibrary  (Accessed  on  10  
November, 2016). 
Mr vikas Singh  is currently working in the Shri Ram College  37. Taylor-Powell,  Ellen.  Ways  to  word  answer  choices  in  
of  Commerce,  University  of  Delhi,  New  Delhi.  he  obtained  
questionnaires,  Program  Development  and  Evaluation,  
his MLISc and MPhil in Library and Information Science from  
University  of  Wisconsin  System,  2008.  https://www. 
the University of Delhi and Post graduate Diploma in Library  
scribd.com/document/338993195/English-Multiple- 
Networking from Indira gandhi National Open University, New  
Choice-Likert-Answers (Accessed on 27 October, 2017). 
Delhi.  he  presented  several  papers  in  Conference/Seminar  
and  published  in  Journals.  his  specialised  fields  are  Library  
management  software  and  library  security  measures.  
Dr  M.  Madhusudhan  is  currently  working  as  an  Associate  Professor in the Department of Library and Information Science,  University  of  Delhi.  Under  his  supervision  17  PhDs  were  awarded. He has published three books, more than 60 research  articles and 25 chapters. His areas of interest are evaluation of  websites and web-OPACs, ICT in libraries, social networking  sites,  e-resources,  mobile-based  library  services,  etc.  
109 

========8========

