DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 38, No. 2, March 2018, pp. 82-87, DOI : 10.14429/djlit.38.2.12098  
 2018, DESIDOC 
REVIEW  PAPER 
Information Use, User, User Needs and Seeking Behaviour: A Review 
B. Subhash Reddy@, M. Krishnamurthy#, and A.Y. Asundi* 
@AMET University, Kanathur, Chennai - 603 112, India  
#DRTC, Indian Statistical Institute, Bengaluru - 560 059, India  
*Department of Library and Information Science, Bangalore University, Bengaluru - 560 056, India  
*E-mail: ashokasundi@rediffmail.com 
ABSTRACT 
The studies on the user, user information behaviour, and seeking have been continuing since last 50 years or  more. Ranganathan’s fve laws brought the phrase ‘use’ reordering from preservation. The studies on user and user  behaviour with varying characteristics has not changed and still going on to study the impact of ICT and use of  electronic resources. Several hidden revelations on users’ approach to information identifed by Voigt, types of readers  identifed by Ranganathan and the ASK model by Belkin have been expounded to visualise the user categories and  attributes of the user, user information behaviour and so on. The aim of this paper is only a perspective review of  the literature on information user, with an intrinsic scope for some new research possibilities in this area. 
Keywords: Information user; Information needs; Information behaviour; Anomalous state of knowledge  
1. INTRODUCTION 
The studies on information use, user and user behaviour,  information  seeking,  have  been  going  on  since  mid-20th Century.  The  area  has  still  been  a  subject  of  current  study  with  ceaseless  advances  infuencing  library  and  information  science.  This  hypothesis  is  based  on  the  succinct  statement  made by Connaway1, et al.as; ‘the study of user behaviours,  also referred to as information behaviour, information seeking  behaviour research or user studies is not a new line of inquiry’.  Ranganathan2 emphasised on studying the user behaviour by a  statement made in the context of Fourth Law. It states; ‘perhaps  the most convenient method of studying the consequences of  this law (Fourth Law) will be to follow the reader from the  moment  he  enters  the  library  to  the  moment  he  leaves  it’.  McNinch3 reports  the  empirical  study  on  users’  information  needs and gathering and behaviour habits presented by Bernal  and others at the frst International Conference on Scientifc  Information  organised  by  the  Royal  Society  held  in  1948’.  Bernal  then  presented  a  preliminary  analysis  of  a  pilot  questionnaire  survey  on  the  use  of  scientifc  literature  and  said ‘Librarians will be interested to learn that the analysis of  this questionnaire indicated that approximately 80 per cent of  all scientifc literature is obtained from libraries and that use  of reprints and subscription to journals played a minor role.  ‘It  is  also  worth  to  note  that  the  Conference  was  limited  to  consider the subject only, from the point of view of use and  service to the scientifc community’. Ranganathan2  formulated  his fve laws, advocating a shift from preservation to use and  
Received : 12 October 2017, Revised : 25 January 2018  Accepted : 09 February 2018, Online published : 23 March 2018 
82 
highlighted the use and user of library and books as early as  in 1931. The two studies exemplify the user interaction with  the library materials directly on shelves or through the library  catalogue or searching scientifc literature. The study by Bernal,  however,  was  more  concerned  with  the  access  to  scientifc  literature and the abstracting indexing services. These studies,  in brief, showed a gradual shift and changing focus on the use  and users of the libraries and the library resources. 
The  1960s  saw  the  advent  of  online  information  retrieval  systems  that  changed  information  access  from  the  physical  environment  to  machine  environment.  The  studies  on  information  retrieval  and  more  extensive  studies  on  users’  interaction  with  the  machine  for  information  retrieval  opened up for the adoption of information retrieval tools like  a structured thesaurus. The new millennium with the ordered  impact  of  information  communication  technology,  as  more  and more sources of information going digital, the use, user  and user information seeking totally shifted library’s physical  environment to virtual environment. The emergence of World  Wide Web transformed the user information seeking to more  or less to ‘Search Engines’ and the phrase ‘googling’ became  common search method on the Web. The questions such as ‘does  Google is alternative to Library’ are now lingering in the minds  of the users and library professionals. However, this could be  a credulous thinking as Google cannot be an alternative to the  library on the other hand studies on user information seeking,  gathering  and  information  use,  with  the  web  in  focus,  set  a  new trend. These inferences imply that the study of use, user  and his or her information needs and information seeking and  behaviour would always be subject to research by library and  information professionals. The paper has attempted to highlight  

========1========

REDDY, et al.: InFORMATIOn USE, USER, USER nEEdS And SEEKInG  B EHAVIOUR: A REVIEW 
researches in the core areas of user covering the contemporary  developments since the period of Bernal.  
Further,  Ranganathan4  brought  forth  new  modes  of  approach,  by  conceiving  different  types  of  readers  coming  to  the  library  seeking  information.  Melvin  Voigt’s5   three  information  seeking  approaches  were  the  new  elucidations  on  users’  information  seeking  associated  with  specifc  types  of  information  sources.  Therefore,  it  would  be  desirable  to  deliberate of these concepts and interpret them to reveal the  hidden and inherent thoughts surrounding them. The review in  this papers is systematically presented so that the successive  developments  are  explicitly  visualised  and  evaluated  for  the  further study. 
behaviour, information need, information gathering, information  seeking and information search are referred throughout the vast  literature published on this subject. But it would be desirable  in this context to relook into these phrases and concepts for  discerning, inclusive and exclusive meanings and defnitions,  not just etymologically, but by their inherent meanings of the  concepts. The diagrams are given below present the relationship  between the phrases, Information behaviour, and information  seeking and information search. The missing link ‘Information  need’ is added by the current authors, in the Fig. 1(b) to the  Fig. 1(a) the fgure that was presented by Wilson7. 
The  present  paper  has  made  an  addition  to  include  ‘Information  need’  which  is  an  intermediary  between  ‘information  behaviour  and  information  seeking’  because  ‘need’ is a behaviour and ‘seeking’ happens only when there  is  a  ‘need’  and  is  followed  by  searching  for  information,  incidentally when in need. 
It was felt desirable to know the meanings and defnitions  of some of the basic concepts of this area so that a discerning  elucidation of the underlying concepts can be rightly understood.  These defnitions and meanings are taken from WordWeb13, an  Online Dictionary. 
(a) 
(b) 
2.  LITERATURE  REVIEW 
Some  contemporary  studies  on  information  needs  of  users,  in  brief,  are  presented  here  as  part  of  this  review.  Incidentally, a good review of the literature on information  needs  extensively  attempted  by  Adegbore6  has  been  considered  here.  Wilson  and  Walsh7conclude  stating;  ‘scope  of  information  seeking  behaviour  research  is  vast  and  many  new  concepts  and  methods  are  being  developed  with  the  help  of  researches’.  In  addition,  Case8   said  ‘Research  in  information-seeking  behaviour  occupies  a  niche  at  the  intersection  of  psychology,  management,  communications,  and  information  science.  Further,  it  is  estimated  that  there  are  more  than  10,000  publications  in these and other disciplines related to the basic human  quest  for  knowledge’.  Anwer 
9 
  expressed  that  ‘during  the past 30 years or so, a considerable body of literature  has  been  produced  dealing  with  information  needs  and  information-seeking  behaviour  of  both  individuals  and  groups in a variety of contexts. Another comprehensive  survey  of  the  research  studies  conducted  in  2003by  Tenopir10on the use of electronic resources published by  Council on Library and Information Resources, fnds that  more than 200 recent research publications that focus on  the use of electronic library resources are published between  1995  and  2003.  Prabha11 examines,  it  is  rather  surprising  that information overload environment has created ‘a sense  of inadequacy and anxiety’ as ‘how users seek information  sources  and  how  they  choose  the  content  to  meet  their  needs. Yet the library and information science literature has  neglected  to  study  how  individuals  decide  what  and  how  much information is enough to meet their needs and goals’.  In recent years several metric methods and tools are created  to  evaluate  the  user  and  usage  of  electronic  resources  and  one such study is reported by Franklin12 in this context. So  there  are  many  questions  still  remain  unanswered  as  the  information  environment  is  changing  in  many  dimensions.  It would, therefore, be apt to study some classic theoretical  basis, so as to fnd whether they can be recalled in the new  era. 
Figure 1. Showing  differences  in  components  –  see  addition  of  
3.  MEANING AND  DEFINITION  OF  
UNDERLYING  CONCEPTS 
3.1 Meaning  and  Definition 
Often  the  concepts  and  phrases,  use,  user,  information  
‘Information need’. 
3.1.1  Use  
The word ‘use’ is both a Verb and a noun. The verb implies  consumption, put into service or seeking for information. So,  this could be the meaning and defnition of ‘Use’ hence the  word is largely an inclusive concept, and is more pragmatic. 
3.1.2 User 
One  who  makes  use  of  things;  the  types  of  user  are  ‘Individual’ or ‘someone unknown’. The user is at large, his  behaviour unknown till he interacts with the system. 
3.1.3 Information  Need  
Activity that releases entropy. Need differs from Want as  the former is an intuitive, stimuli and/or urge. need is not want.  There is a good paraphrase, given later. 
3.1.4 Information  Gathering  
Accumulating,  collecting,  assembling,  aggregation. The  functions or acts for the present and future use of information.  There  are  types  of  gathering-  seeking,  harvesting  and  mobilising. 
83 

========2========

DJLIT, VOL.  38,  NO.  2,  MARCh  2018 
3.1.5 Information  Seeking  
An act of searching for something, an attempt to acquire  or gain something. It is further explained that seeking is the  psychological  feature  that  arouses  an  organism  to  action  towards the desired goal, the reason for the action that which  gives purpose and direction to behaviour. 
3.2  Examining  the  Underlying  Concepts 
The difference between ‘use’ and ‘user’ can be discerned  with the studies on ‘use’ and ‘user’. Use studies imply, the actual  use of materials, whereas user studies have some methodologies  which are a prerequisite for an information system design. In  the system design, user-friendliness of the system would be a  key objective. The system design is conceptual and functional,  based on the user response from a methodological study of the  user. There  is  a  peculiar  situation  especially  in  management  control, that ‘The information we have is not what we want, the  information we want is not what we need, the information we  need is not available’. This gives the distinguishing features of  the phrases ‘needs’ and ‘wants’ and this is a normal situation  the user expresses when he interacts with the system. 
Users’ needs are - information needs- information needs  are - usually - unclear and ‘messy’, while a part of them may  remain  unexpressed  and  unfulflled-  information  needs  can  be clarifed or can be generated during information seeking.  The  term  ‘seeking’  has  several  synonymous  meanings  and  defnitions.  And  again,  according  to  wordweb13 it  includes,  searching, looking for, attempting, browsing and chancing and  functionally is well articulated in the library and its resources  and services. It has also been stated by Kuhltau14  that ‘Seeking’  means  a  search  process,  and  ‘provides  essential  knowledge  and  user  centred  approach  for  anyone  providing  library  and  information  service’.  Information  seeking  implies  several  concepts, it can be need, behaviour and the need-based in the  changing information environment.  
According  to  one’s  needs  and  patterns,  information  products and services are designed and created. For instance,  the  ‘Periodical’  is  an  information  channel  to  cater  to  the  current information needs of the user. Nicholas and Williams 
15  have  mapped  the  changing  information  seeking  behaviour  in  the  changing  information  environment  due  to  the  impact  of the Internet in particular and the infuence of information  communication technologies on library resources, services. It  was  Ranganathan16,  Bradford  and  others  conceived  the  idea  of  documentation  as  a  specialised  library  service  to  cater  to  the needs of specialists’ information needs. In fact, Wilson 
17 gave a model constituting the concepts of ‘information needs  information  seeking,  information  exchange  and  information  use’  as  a  means  of  charting  the  behaviour  of  an  individual  faced with the need to fnd information.  
A  systematic fow diagram consisting of ‘surveying  (exploring),  chaining,  browsing,  differentiating,  monitoring,  extracting,  verifying  and  ending  as  the  components  of  information  seeking  behaviour’  is  presented  by  Ellis  and haugan18  is presented in Fig.  2. These are changing with changes in the information  environment.  They  discuss  on  the  characteristics  of  information seeking, which can be interrelated, their  
84 
elucidation features refer to both micro and macro behaviour  level was depicted in a model as shown below and the model  has a strong validation grounded on empirical studies17. 
Several  other  studies  on  the  behavioural  characteristics  of the user are also identifed and are sequentially presented  below, with references. 
• The  users  can  be  identifed  as  individuals,  groups  by  
communities. The individual characteristics can be of age,  
experience in research, job background and seniority and  
so on19. 
• Many psychological characteristics and effectiveness of  
available services and characteristics of user environment  
are the key behaviours20. 
• The other behavioural characteristics also depend on the  
institutional environment and work activity 
21. 
• On the other hand, surveying, the engineers and industrial  
research  workers  have  a  sequence  of  events  such  as;  
surveying, chaining, monitoring, browsing, distinguishing,  
fltering, extracting and use18. 
• The  user  can  be  categorised  as  internal  and  external.  
They  include,  individual,  psychological,  sociological,  
demographic,  organisational  (work  related)  and  
professional22. 
• The  eight  levels  of  user  characteristics;  functional,  
reading,  and  visual,  personality,  capacity,  satisfaction,  
interest, and variability have also been identifed by some  
researchers23. 
• Three main characteristics; 
 i)  demographic (Age, gender)  
ii) Institutional (designation, status, intuition)  
iii) Professional (Educational qualifcations, Salary, Special  
current research, languages are known, interdisciplinary-  
history and political science) have also been identifed by  
yet another researcher24. 
In  summary,  it  can  be  stated  that  there  is  still  a  hazy  picture of user information seeking behaviour characteristics.  In this context, it is hypothesised user behaviour is still in an  anomalous state to understand the user information behavioural  characteristics24 . In this context, the categories or types of readers  identifed by Ranganathan4  would be suitable to understand the  user behaviour. In fact, in each of the categories, the user is in  need of information, but his approach to information system  (library or library staff) varies and Ranganathan 
4 
 also provides  some solutions to these situations of readers and also how to  deal with and he illustrated them with several cases. 
4.  FACETS  OF  INFORMATION  NEEDS AND  
USER 
As  discussed  earlier,  there  are  a  number  of  studies  on  
Figure 2. Flow diagram of Ellis and Haugan18. 

========3========

REDDY, et al.: InFORMATIOn USE, USER, USER nEEdS And SEEKInG  B EHAVIOUR: A REVIEW 
information needs and information user. From the review of  past  classic  texts,  this  study  has  identifed  some  underlying  concepts  on  the  user,  user  needs  and  user  approach  to  information  enunciated  by  Ranganathan4,  Bernal26,  Taylor28,  Voigt5, Belkin25, as the mention of them are not found in any of  the previous studies. 
4.1 Ranganathan’s  Perceptions  of  Use  and  Reader 
The  precedence  to  trace  the  beginning  of  use,  user  behaviour and information needs etc., some important insights  on the subject can be recalled. First, the concept of User in  Ranganathan’s each of the Five Laws of Library Science can  be correlated as shown in Table 1.  
In the frst three laws, the user concept is connoted, the  fourth law stresses on the service mean to fulfll the user needs,  for  example,  the  user  assistance/reference  service  is  one  of  the means of satisfying user needs. The ffth law connotes the  Trinity; the books, the readers, and the staff. The law apropos  perceives changes in the user and user needs. 
Table 1. Five laws and concepts of use, user information seeking Laws Name of the law Perceived concept 
1 Books are for use Use 
2 
Every read his/her book   User needs  
(books for all) (user = reader) 
3 Every book its reader Relevance (book-reader) 
4 Save the time of the readers Service agreement 
5 Library is a growing organism Change is constant 
Interestingly  the  OCLC  made  a  research  study  of  Five  Laws  of  Library  Science  and  conceptualised  ‘Reordering’  the fve laws and placed the ‘fourth law’ as the frst law. This  research  study  proposed  a  rethinking  of  his  fve  laws  and  attempted to reorder the fve laws centred on the reader or the  user as late as in 2015 focusing on digital era1. 
Further, the monograph has also provided new kinds of  users of the IT-based information environment. They are; Baby  Boomers, Millennials, Digital Natives and Adults, and studied  their  information  seeking  behaviour.  So,  there  is  a  relation  between type of users and their information seeking behaviour  also1. 
Further,  Ranganathan  in  his  Reference  Service  has  identifed different types of readers to come to the library. He also  probes into the ‘psychology’ of readers and their analysis, their  minds and mental build-up and temperament. Ranganathan has  probably come to categorise them by his close observation of  readers from the time he enters the library and till he leaves the  premises. So, they are derived from both psychological as well  as from pragmatic approaches. Based on these psychological  traits  he  identifes  the  following  types  of  readers  coming  to  the library. Each one of the types characterises the pattern of  information content and the user behaviour patterns which can  also be experienced in the present information environment4.  
Six types of readers’ with different behaviour patterns; • Obsession        
• Superiority complex (self reader) 
• Inferiority complex (meek feader) 
• Traumatic complex 
• Mere ignorance (complaining reader) 
• Thief/fraud 
Ranganathan4  justices  these  behaviours  by  narrating  a number of cases for each of the type of reader and how to  understand their needs and also serve their needs. For example,  he  presents  a  case  of  the  diffcult  reader  with  ‘Obsession’  contextually an ‘Insurance Agent’ who was struggling to refer  to the library catalogue. The case narrates how the reference  librarian comes to his help and connects him with his needs.  However, all types of readers can be provided with due attention  as Ranganathan4states’the foor of a library is always believed  to be a place of great equality’. 
4.2 Bernal’s  Survey Analysis 
Bernal26  made a contribution with a user analysis on the  transmission of information. It would be interesting to know  from his survey analysis that, he identifed information users  into  following  categories,  stating  that  ‘I  feel  it  would  be  worthwhile looking more closely both into the users and uses  of scientifc and technical information. It is already mentioned  above the contribution of Bernal regarding use and user.  
The  second  international  conference  on  Scientifc  Information  was  held  in  1958  in  Washington  d.C.,  under  the  aegis  of  national  Academy  of  Sciences,  USA27.  The  conference delineated, from the point of view of the kind of  information  services  required,  users  can  be  divided  into  the  following  categories,  which  are  strictly  functional’.  In  fact,  these categories suggest the information needs based on user’s  activities and work. It is for the frst time a succinct comparison  is made to understand the information needs to be based on the  user categories and their activities.  
i. Workers in fundamental research 
ii. Workers in applied research or development, including,  
medical and agricultural research 
iii. Technologists, including engineers, architects, medical  
practitioners, and agriculturists 
iv. Writers of reports, textbooks, teachers, and students etc. v. Scientifc and technical journalists 
vi. The interested public 
vii.   h istorians of science 
4.3 Taylor’s  Levels  of  Information  Needs 
Secondly, Taylor28  has explored information needs from  the  angle  of  psychology  and  has  identifed  four  levels  of  information needs; 
i. Visceral needs - which is intuitive rather than from  
reasoning 
ii. Conscious need – having awareness of need 
iii. Formal need – Conventional, intentional need iv. Comprised need – Follow-up need 
 He further explains that ‘the visceral need is an unexpressed  need, but it becomes a conscious need when a person creates a  mental description of it. A person then formalises the need into  a rational statement and may seek an answer to it by using an  information system, transforming it into a compromised need. 
4.4 Melvin Voigt  –  Users’ Approaches 
Interestingly none of the papers so far surveyed by this  paper  have  quoted  Melvin  Voigt5   who  as  early  as  in  1961  
85 

========4========

DJLIT, VOL.  38,  NO.  2,  MARCh  2018 
identifed three approaches by which users seek information.  The users’ approach to information correlated with the category  of information sources is presented in the Table 2. 
Table 2. The users’ approach to information correlated with  
the category of information sources  
Approach to information Category of information sources  Current approach Primary information  
Everyday approach 
Secondary information (reference  
sources) 
Exhaustive approach 
Secondary/tertiary information  
(reference/referral sources) 
The modes of approach can be met with the appropriate  information  source  and  the  users’  needs  are  well  articulated  with the kind of approach with the right information source.  It  also  empowers  the  libraries  or  librarians  to  identify  the  sources available outside one’s own premise which is termed  as Referral service. 
4.5 Belkin’s ASK  Model 
Despite  all  these  elucidations  on  needs  and  types  of  needs and approaches, still, there is a state of ambiguity in the  expression of the need by the user. It was identifed by Belkin25  as  ‘the  Anomalous  State  of  Knowledge’  (ASK).  He  has  extended the psychological approach with the inquiry into the  reasons for seeking information and has developed the concept  of ASK. he hypothesises that information need arises from the  recognised  anomalous  users’  state  of  knowledge  concerning  some topic or situation and that in general, the user is unable  to specify.  
The  condition  ‘anomalous  state  of  knowledge’  is  the  discrete  mental  model  of  the  information  system  and  the  user. According to the model, there is an anomalous state of  knowledge when the user cannot resolve an information need  based only on his or her existing knowledge. ASK reinforces  uncertainty. 
5.  CONCLUSIONS 
There are a quite good number of studies on this subject  and  have  been  quite  probabilistic  and  did  not  arrive  at  any  deterministic conclusions. The psychological and behavioural  perceptions are more or less dealt by most of the earlier papers.  There is a need for more of a pragmatic approach and despite  all efforts of library and information professionals, it is very  diffcult  to  understand  very  clearly  the  user  needs  and  their  information seeking behaviour which obviously has been well  conceptualised by Belkin as ASK model. So, the authors of this  paper felt there is a need to explore some unexplored studies,  which were unearthed from the contributions of Ranganathan,  Bernal,  Voigt,  and  Belkin  especially.  Their  elucidations  on  users’  information  needs  and  information  provisions,  the  authors  for  current  paper  felt,  were  rather  missing  from  the  previous studies and the paper has inventively tried to identify  them and their inherent characteristics in fulflling the needs  of the users, which is the primary objective any information  system. This is the positive outcome of this study and is open  
86 
to further research in those concepts and insights. 
REFERENCES 
1. Connaway, L.S. & Faniel, I.M. Reordering Ranganathan:  
shifting user behaviours, shifting priorities. SRELS J. Info.  
Manag., 2015, 52(1), 3-23. 
2. Ranganathan, S.R. Five Laws of Library Science. Reprint  
edition. Ess Ess Publications, new delhi, 2006. 
3. Mcninch, J. H. The Royal Society Scientifc Information  
Conference, London, June 21-July 2, 1948. Bulletin Med.  
Libr. Association, 1949,  3 (2), 136-141. 
4. Ranganathan,  S.R.  Reference  service.  Bombay,  Asia  
Publishing house. Part D.1961. 
5. Voigt,  Melvin.  Scientists’  approaches  to  information.  
American Library Association, Chicago, 1961. 
6. Adegbore, Adebayo, Muritla & Salaam, M.O. Information  
needs and acquisition of school pupils in Abeokuta, Ogun  
State, Nigeria. PNLA Quarterly, 2012, 76(4), 42-53. http:// 
www.pnla.org/assets/documents/Quarterly/pnlaq76- 
4summer2012.pdf  (accessed on 21 September 2017) 7. Wilson, T.d. & Walsh, C. (1996) Information behaviour:  
an  interdisciplinary  perspective. A  report  to  the  British  
Library Research and Innovation Centre. London: British  
Library Research and Innovation Centre. (British Library  
Research and Innovation Report 10). http://informationr. 
net/tdw/publ/infbehav/prelims.html  (Archived  by  
WebCite7reg; at http://www.webcitation.org/69Akr0dPL  
(accessed 20 on September 2017)  
8. The  case,  D.O.  Looking  for  information:  A  survey  of  
research  on  information  seeking,  needs  and  behaviour.  
Academic Press, San Diego, CA, 2002. https://www.ncbi. 
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC153169/   (Accessed  on  2  
Sept 2017). 
9.     Anwar,  Mumtaz  A.;  Al-Ansari,  Husain  &  Abdullah,  
Abdulnaser.  Information  Seeking  Behaviour  ofKuwaiti  
Journalists. Libri,2004, 54(4), 228-236. 
10.    Tenopir,  Carol.  Use  and  users  of  electronic  library  
resources: An  overview  and  analysis  of  recent  research  
studies. Council on Library and Information Resources,  
Washington, D.C., iv. 2003. 
11.    Prabha, Chandra; Connaway, Lynn Silipigni; Olszewski,  
Lawrence & Jenkins, Lillie What is enough: Satisfcing  
information  needs.  In   Library  in  the  life  of  the  user:  
Engaging with people where they live and learn, edited  
by  Lynn  Silipigni  Connaway,  OCLC  Research, dublin,  
36. 2015. 
12.Franklin, Brinley; Kyrillidou, Martha & Plum, Terry. From  
usage  to  user:  Library  metrics  and  expectations  for  the  
evaluation  of  digital  libraries.  In   Evaluation  of  digital  
libraries: An insight into useful applications and methods,  
edited  by  Giannis  Tsakonas,  Christos  Papatheodorou,  
Chandos Publishing. 2009, 17-39.  
13. www.wordweb.info  (Accessed 20 September 2017). 14.    Kuhlthau,  Carol  Collier.  Seeking  meaning:  A  process  
approach  to  library  and  information  services.  Ed.  2nd.  
Libraries Unlimited. Introduction. Santa Barbara, 2003. 15.    Nicholas,  David  &  Williams,  Peter.  The  changing  
information environment: The impact of the Internet on  

========5========

REDDY, et al.: InFORMATIOn USE, USER, USER nEEdS And SEEKInG  B EHAVIOUR: A REVIEW 
information seeking behaviour in the media. In  Information  
needs, Seeking and Use in different Contexts, Sheffeld,  
UK, 1998. Taylor Graham Publishing, London, UK, and  
Los Angeles, USA, 1999, 451-62. 
16.    Ranganathan,  S.R.  Documentation:  Genesis  and  
development. Vikas Publishing house, Delhi, 1973.  17.    Wilson, T.D. On user studies and information needs. J.  
Document.,  1981,  37(1), 3-15. 
18.    Ellis, D. & hagan, M. Modelling the information seeking  
patterns of engineers and research scientists in industrial  
environment. J. Documentation, 1997, 53(4), 384-403. 19.    Line,  Maurice  B.  Information  requirements  to  social  
sciences: Some preliminary considerations. J. Libr. Info.  
Sci..  1969,  1(1), 1-19 
20.    Slater, M. & Fisher, P. Use of technical libraries. Aslib,  
London, 1969, 5. 
21.    Vickery,  B.C.  Use  of  scientifc  literature.  Library  
Association Record., 1961, 63(8), 263-269 
22.    Sridhar,  M.S.  Understanding  the  user  –  why,  what  and  
how. Libr. Sci. Slant Document., 1995, 32(4),153-154. 23.    Devarajan,  G.  Library  information  users  and  the  use  
studies. Becon Books, new delhi, 1995. 
24.    Kanungo, neena Talwar. Information seeking behaviour  
of  researchers  in  history  and  political  science  in  Delhi.  
delhi, University of delhi.1995, Phd  Thesis. 
25.    Belkin,  N.J.;  Oddy,  R.N.;  &  Brooke,  h.M.  ASK  for  
information retrieval I: Background and theory. Journal  
of  Documentation,   1982,  38,  61-71.  Referred  in  David  
Ellis,  new  horizons  in  information  retrieval.  Library  
Association.: London, 52. 
26.    Bernal, J.d. Scientifc information & its users. In ASLIB  
Proceedings, 1960,  12 , 423-38. 
27.    National  Academy  of  Sciences.  In  Proceedings  of  the  
International  Conference  on  Scientifc  Information,  
Washington, D.C., National Academy of Sciences.1959,  
77-81. 
28.    Taylor, R.S. Question-negotiation and information seeking  
in libraries. College Res. Libr., 1968, 29(3),178–194. 
CONTRIBUTORS 
Mr  Subhash  Reddy  B.   is  currently  pursuing  his  PhD  from  AMET  University,  Chennai.  Presently  working  as  Librarian,  PES  University,  Bangalore.  He  has  professional  experience  in   working in the engineering college library, and he has develop  special interests in user studies, information seeking behaviour,  and  library  automation.  
Dr Madaiah Krishnamurthy  received his PhD from Bengaluru  University.  Currently  working  as  an  Associate  Professor  of  Information  Science  at  DRTC,  Indian  Statistical  Institute,  Bangalore. he is the author of over eighty articles. his research  interests  are  digital  libraries,  institutional  repositories,  social  networking,  library  management  and  automation.  
Prof. A.Y. Asundi was the former Professor and Chairman, of  dLISc, Bangalore University, Bengaluru.  He was a member of  Advisory Group of IFLA-SIG on LIS Education in developing  Countries. He has written about 12 books and has contributed  more  than  250  papers  to  scholarly  journals  and  Conference  proceedings.    
87 

========6========

