DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 38, No. 3, May 2018, pp. 213-220, DOI : 10.14429/djlit.38.3.12468 
 2018, DESIDOC 
Electronic Information Resource Optimisation in Academic Libraries:  A Comparative Study on Licensing Provision of Commercial Publisher  
Arvind Kumar Singh and Bhaskar Mukherjee* 
Department of Library & Information Science, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi - 221 005, India 
*E-mail: mukherjee.bhaskar@gmail.com 
AbStRACt 
Electronic information resources are increasingly become an important component of the collection-building  activities of libraries. This paper attempts to understand how far the licenses of commercial publishers support  resource optimisation in general and what other important issues that are usually ignored by publishers, knowingly  or unknowingly, but are essential for better resource optimisation. Five international publishers namely Elsevier,  EBSCO, Sage, Springer, and Taylor & Francis were identifed and analysed their agreements that are available  in public domain with some model agreements like Liblicense model and model license developed by John Cox  Associate. Study indicates that core part of the negotiations still remain price, IP access, display, ILL/document  supply, etc. while important issues like perpetual access, archiving, self-archiving, copy of individual articles and  share the same for non-commercial use by authorised users were minor issues of the contract. Furthermore, most of  the obligations of the publishers that are identifed as core issues in Liblicense model are also absent in commercial  publishers’ license. A greater awareness of this to library managers is essential. They must be acquainted with the  clause of the license agreement of commercial publishers and must negotiate to that extent so that the access should  
be uninterrupted. 
Keywords: Electronic information; Resource optimisation; Licensing; Academic libraries; E-content; Perpetual  
access 
1.  IntROduCtIOn 
Generally, the term resource means “a stock or supply of  money, materials, staff and other assets that can be drown on by  a person or organisation in order to function effectively (Oxford  University  Press  2013)”.  In  the  context  of  libraries,  library  resources are basically sources of information. Traditionally,  these  resources  were  mostly  printed  documents,  but  with  the  advent  of  the  internet,  digital  sources  of  information  have  become  prevalent.  In  today’s  internet  dominant  world,  electronic information resources play a major role for quality  research. These resources are well accepted among academic  communities  because  of  their  24x7  hours  accessibility,  as  well  as  features  like  linking  to  related  information/page,  graphics, sound, video, and animation. These digital sources  of information include, but not limited to, online libraries and  journals, online encyclopaedias like the Wikipedia, blogs, video  logs like the YouTube, etc. Even movie clippings especially  from  history  have  played  a  large  role  in  modern  research,  and hence are classifable under ‘library resources’. Because  of the fact that these resources don’t take up more space on  library shelves and they are more durable than print resources,  they are become important sources of information in modern  libraries. Furthermore, in terms access, such digital resources  
Received : 19 December 2017, Revised : 09 February 2018  Accepted : 24 March 2018, Online published : 04 May 2018 
allow more than one user to access information at the same  time, depending on the license agreement. 
Resource  optimisation  in  general,  aims  to  discuss  how  the  open  access  environment  can  be  promoted  and  how  the  collection development may be facilitated by integrating open  access resources with institutional (access through consortia)  and  library  resources  (purchase  e-resources).  Resource  optimisation presents a new approach for optimising resources.  The  performance  is  measured  by  improving  the  quality  collection  development,  optimum  utilisation  of  resources  (man-machine-materials) and timely delivery.  
Much  has  been  written  in  the  Indian  library  literature  about the move from print to electronic serials, use of electronic  resources by various level and types of users, and the debate  over  usefulness  of  print  over  non-print  resources.  However,  there  is  little  information  in  the  literature  that  explores  the  electronic resource management activity, licensing, perpetual  access, archiving and how these concepts are well conversant  in Indian academic libraries.  
2.  ELECtROnIC RESOuRCE   m AnAgEmEnt 
In general sense, electronic resource management refer to  procedure adopted by modern libraries for selection (including  identifcation of products and their trails), licensing (including  negotiation  of  license,  technical  evaluation),  implementation  (including technical processing and promotion) and maintenance  
213 

========1========

DJLIT, VOL.  38,  NO.  3,  MAY   2018 
and review. To develop a balanced digital resources for libraries  and its optimised use, the selection and licensing phases are  crucial. In licensing phase, the librarians negotiate the license  with  the  supplier  or  vice-versa.  This  activity  includes  the  agreements relevant to the clauses for perpetual access and for  permanent  archival  copy. Also  in  this  phase,  other  technical  conditions  like  economic  and  legal  sections  of  the  license  agreement are evaluated. 
2.1 Licencing  of  Resources 
In  context  of  electronic  resource,  a  license  agreement  is  a  signed  contract  between  publisher/aggregators/service  providers  (commonly  termed  as  licensor)  with  the  libraries  (or  licensee)  which  allows  the  library’s  users  to  access  the  electronic  information  for  a  specifed  period  of  time  among  and a specifed number of users. By this mechanism, libraries  acquire  information  resource  on  rent  without  acquiring  ownership  (and  without  ‘capitalising’).  In  some  cases,  the  accessibility  remains  functional  even  after  contract  expires,  in most cases archival access is restricted. These licences also  mention how the information can be used for non-commercial  educational, or research purposes; at what extent information  can be stored, printed or downloaded, and transmitted among  users, who is liable for knowingly or unknowingly violations  or  misuse  of  the  information  by  library  users,  whether  the  information  will  be  permanently  accessible,  and  the  charges  for accessing the information. 
The  use  of  a  book  is  governed  by  copyright  law.  The  copyright law allows libraries for free consultation by users,  lend the document as and when needed, the right to reproduce  it to some extent (regulated by norms which differ from country  to country), and the right of perpetual archiving. The electronic  license, especially e-journals, on the other hand, is governed by  a private contract to access three levels of data, viz. articles from  the current year; back issues; and a copy of articles provided  by  the  publisher  in  a  determined  format  for  archival.  This  contract  does  not  allow  ownership  of  the  resource  provided  by the license. Otherwise mentioned in the contract, libraries  do not have even the right to archive it without the specifc  authorisation  of  the  publisher.  In  some  cases,  the  publishers  guarantee perpetual access of previous years, but this provision  is the object of a specifc clause to be negotiated. 
2.2  Licensing  of  E-Contents-  International  Scenario 
The  American  Library  Association1   released  Principles  for Licensing Electronic Resources in 1997. In the same year,  The Dutch Association of University Libraries and the German  Association  of  Research  and  University  Libraries  in  North  and  Middle  Germany2   adopted  a  set  of  licensing  principles  entitled Guidelines and Checklist for Librarians.  This formed  the basis for development of International Coalition of Library  Consortium’s (ICOLC)3  Statement of Current Perspective and  Preferred Practice for the Selection and Purchase of Electronic  Information. By using available principles, in 1999, Ligue Des  Bibliotheques Europeennes de Recherche (LIBER)4  developed  European  Licensing  Principles.  In  1999  also,  Publishers  Association/Joint Information System Committee (PA/JISC)5 designed  a  model  entitled  Model  Electronic  Site  Licensing  
214 
Initiative  (NESLI)  to  support  license  negotiation  for  higher  education in UK. 
Another  major  breakthrough  was  the  creation  of  LIBLICENSE  project  in  1997  by  CLIR/DLF6.  The  “LIBLICENSE Model License aims to be format-neutral, i.e.,  to be applicable not just to e-journals, but also to other scholarly  electronic formats such as books, databases, reference works,  AV material, and so on”6. In November 2014, a totally revised  and recast model license has been developed by discussing and  collaborating with numerous stakeholders. 
In  2000,  the  Committee  on  Institutional  Co-operation  (CIC)7  – a consortium of 12 major universities of US developed  a Statement on Standardise Agreement Language for vendors  negotiating  with  members  of  the  consortium.  This  is  not  a  model license but rather check-list for negotiation. 
John  Cox  Associate8,  an  international  publishing  consulting  frm  that  specialist  in  licensing  developed  a  suit  of  four  generic  models  license  and  make  them  available  in  public domain in 2000. These models are for single institution,  consortium,  public  libraries  and  other  special  and  corporate  libraries.  This  project  was  sponsored  by  four  international  subscription  agents  namely  Ebsco,  Harrassowitz,  RoweCom  and Swets Blackwell.   
California Digital Library (CDL)9, recently has developed  an important model license incorporating current best practices  in licensing and feedback from University California librarians,  licensing staff, attorneys, peers, and CDL colleagues. In these  licensing  clauses  like  text  and  data  mining  (TDM)  section  clarify that authorised users may not only engaged in text and/ or data mining activities for academic research purposes but  also share the results with others so long as the purpose is not  to create a product for use by third parties that would substitute  for the licensed materials.  
3.  LItERAtuRE   R EvIEw 
There  is  not  much  of  academic  works  available  on  commercial licensing policies. Most of the available literature  are  in  form  of  reports  and  discussed  on  either  problem  of  archiving  or  consortium  purchase  policies.  For  example,  Giordano  investigates  the  problems  perceived  by  academic  libraries for archiving and preservation of electronic journals,  and discusses the organisational practices implemented in this  area. Scigliano10  on the other hand, investigates the cost-beneft  analysis  for  an  electronic  product  acquired  by  an  academic  library consortium. 
Since  the  scope  of  electronic  resources  has  broadened  in new century, signifcant concern on licensing for e-books  has started growing. One of the earlier studies conducted by  Croft11, discusses the several models of licensing and examines  the  inter-library  loan  clause  of  various  libraries.  She  also  discussed  the  importance  of  model  licence  for  libraries  and  vendors. Dygert & Langendorfer12  similarly also explains the  key components of a license agreement, including examples  and sample clauses.  
4.  ObjECtIvES 
The overall objective of this paper is twofold: • To  understand  how  far  the  licenses  of  commercial  

========2========

SINGH  & M UKHERJEE  : A C OMPARATIVE  S TUDY ON  L ICENSING  P ROVISION OF  C OMMERCIAL  P UBLISHER 
• 
publishers  support  resource  optimisation  by  comparing  licensing provision with models licenses; and  To  identify  license  issues  that  are  usually  ignored  by  publishers  knowingly  or  unknowingly,  while  licensing  but  are  essential  to  be  considered  for  better  resource  optimisation. 
5.    mE thOdOLOgy 
Since the intention of this study is to compare the provision  of  clauses  in  licensing  for  digital  access  by  international  publisher/licensors,  we  have  attempted  to  gather  the  license  agreement  of  fve  selected  international  publishers  that  are  available  in  public  domain.  These  publishers  are:  Elsevier,  Ebsco,  Sage,  Springer,  and  Taylor  &  Francis.  For  this  we  explore frst the offcial website of these publishers and if it  was unavailable at publisher’s website, attempted were made  to  gather  the  same  by  accessing  website  of  various  reputed  universities worldwide. Simultaneously, two important model  licenses:  LIBLICENSE  Model  License  and  Model  license  developed by John Cox Associate were explored. On the basis  of these two model licenses we prepare a check-list of various  clauses  and  examine  the  clauses  of  commercial  publisher’s  license agreement with this check-list. 
6.  RESuLt And dISCuSSIOn 
The  result  of  our  study  is  elaborately  mentioned  in  Appendix A. In Appendix A we have explained the available  clauses in the openly available license of various commercial  publishers.  In  the  following  section  we  have  attempted  to  explain  only  few  issues  that  are  important  to  mention  and  analyse those issues in contrast with well-known model license  namely ‘Liblicense’.  
6.1   t erms  and  Extent  of mention  of terms  in  
License 
Licensing terms & glossaries are useful for librarians to  become familiar with the standard layout and terms or clauses  within a license. Glossaries are useful tools for defnitions of  key terms and to understand what they actually mean. While  considering  the  License  agreement  of  various  publishers  we  observed  that  except  license  agreement  of  Elsevier  and  Springer, other three selected publishers explicitly mention the  connotation of terms in the License agreement. The Liblicense  model also suggests to explain the connotation of terms while  undergo licensing.  
6.2  Force majeure  
As suggested in Liblicense model “Neither party shall be  liable in damages or have the right to terminate this Agreement  for any delay or default in performing hereunder if such delay  or default is caused by conditions beyond its control, including  Acts of God, Government restrictions (including the denial or  cancellation  of  any  export  or  other  necessary  license),  wars,  insurrections, labor strikes, and/or any other cause beyond the  reasonable control of the party whose performance is affected”6.  Such provision is available with al license under consideration  except the agreement of Ebsco & Sage. The reason behind such  absent of clause is beyond the understanding of the researchers. 
6.3  Perpetual Access  & Archiving 
According  to  Liblicense  model  “Licensor  grants  to  Licensee a nonexclusive, royalty-free, perpetual license to use  any  Licensed  Materials  that  were  [accessible  or  subscribed  to]  during  the  term  of  this Agreement.  Such  use  shall  be  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  this  Agreement,  which  provisions  shall  survive  any  termination  of  this Agreement.  The  means  by  which  Licensee  shall  have  access  to  such  Licensed Materials shall be in a manner and form substantially  equivalent to the means by which access is provided under this  Agreement. If the Licensor’s means of access is not available,  the Licensee may provide substantially equivalent access to the  Licensed Materials”6. Further this model license also suggests  that  “Licensor  shall  provide  to  Licensee  upon  request,  or  Licensee may create, one (1) copy of the entire set of Licensed  Materials to be maintained as an archival copy. The archival  copy from the Licensor shall be provided without any DRM  in a mutually agreeable medium suitable to the content, and  any fees for provision of copies will be on a time and materials  basis  only”6.  While  comparing  the  provisions  of  existing  license agreements under consideration we observed that such  provisions  are  available  slightly  only  with  Sage  and  Ebsco  license.    
Model  license  suggested  by  internationally  reputed  library  organisations  like  NESLI,  ICOLC,  EBLIDA  also  contained “perpetual access” clauses, but these provisions were  unavailable in contract by most of the commercial publishers.  The  essential  clause  that  took  core  parts  of  the  available  contracts  with  the  commercial  publishers  were  issues  like  price, IP access, defnition of the “authorised users,” clauses  for displaying and ILL / document supply.  
Whether perpetual access will be fee based or free has also  mentioned  in  some  model  contract.  University  of  California  (UC) and the United Kingdom’s National Electronic Journals  Licensing Initiative (NESLi2) for higher-education institutions  state  that  perpetual  access  must  be  free.  In  contrary,  the  Canadian National Site Licensing Project13  states that members  will have to pay a fee to the publisher. UC and NESLi2 both  however, suggested that three hosting options are acceptable  for perpetual access: Access through the publisher’s site, the  library’s site, or some type of central archive hosted by a third  party. 
6.4  Extend  of users  Rights 
While  considering  this  clause  in  the  license  agreement  of  various  commercial  publishers,  we  observed  that  every  publishers allow authorised users to use a  reasonable amount  for  display,  download  or  print  the  Licensed  Materials  for  the  purpose  of  personal,  non-commercial  use,  however  no  publishers allow institutional authors to re-use their work for  scholarly  and  educational  purposes,  including  self-archiving  or depositing in institutional, subject-based, national, or other  open  repositories  or  archives.  There  is  increasing  interest  among  academics  to  re-use  their  own  works  for  scholarly  and educational purposes, for MOOCs courses, or to deposit  their works in institutional or other open repositories for wide  visibility. The Model License reads, in part, that institutional  authors “shall retain the non-exclusive, irrevocable, worldwide,  
215 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL.  38,  NO.  3,  MAY   2018 
royalty free right to use their Work for scholarly and educational  purposes,  including  self-archiving...,  and  to  comply  with  all  grant or institutional requirements associated with the Work”.  However, major commercial publisher does not mention any  such clause in their license agreement for Electronic Reserve/  MOOCs. In model license however, scholarly and educational  purposes encompass teaching, research, and institutional needs  are considered as important clause of license. 
6.5 Publishers’  Obligations 
While  considering  the  Liblicense  model  licensing  agreement we observed the clauses like discovery of licensed  materials, persistent linking, availability of online terms and  conditions,  disabilities  compliance,  support,  training,  quality  of  service,  completeness  of  content,  withdrawal  of  licensed  materials,  etc  are  parts  of  publishers’  obligation.  However,  on looking comparative provision as mentioned in Appendix  A,  such  clauses  are  absent  with  agreement  of  commercial  publishers under consideration of the study.  
7.  COnCLuSIOnS 
In the feld of e-journals, the license controls access has  popularly become the defacto  procedure of access for digital  contents  in  near  future.  It  is  well  described  that  the  print  publications are governed by copyright law, where perpetual  archiving  is  allowed.  The  electronic  contents,  instead,  are  controlled by a private contract, on which access is allowed  for  a  specifc  length  of  time.  So  understanding  various  clauses in contracts are essential. In this study it is observed  that  important  clauses  like  perpetual  access,  archiving,  self- archiving, electronic reserves, copy of individual articles and  share  the  same  for  non-commercial  use  by  authorised  users  were unavailable in contacts. The core part of the contract was  mainly with price, display of contents, IP access, ILL / document  supply etc. So the modalities of accessing archival materials,  or  other  important  issues  should  be  clearly  negotiating  with  the publishers while fnalising the contract. Furthermore, most  of the obligations of the publishers that are identifed as core  issues in Liblicense or Jon Cox Associate models were also  absent  in  commercial  publishers’  license.  In  this  changing  environment,  therefore,  the  job  of  the  library  managers  is  not only to obtain the widest possible availability of on-line  resources and reinforcing the technological infrastructures of  their sites, but also to negotiate with the obligations of licensors  in order to enhance user access. They must be acquainted with  the clause of the license agreement of commercial publishers  and must negotiate to that extend so that the access should be  uninterrupted.  
REFEREnCES 
1.  American Library Association (ALA). Principles for  
licensing electronic resources, 1997. http://www.arl. 
org/scomm/licensing/principles.html (Accessed on 15  
September  2017). 
2.  Dutch  Association  of  University  Libraries/German  
Association of University and Research Libraries in  
North and Middle Germany. Guidelines and checklist  
for libraries, 1997. http://cwis.kub. nl/~dbi/english/ 
216 
licence/licprinc.htm  (Accessed  on  25  September  
2017). 
3.  International Coalition of Library Consortia (ICOLC).  
Statement of current perspective and preferred practices  
for the selection and purchase of electronic information.   
1998.  http://www. library.yale.edu/consortia/statement. 
html  (Accessed  on  10  October  2017). 
4.  LIBER  Licensing  principles.  http://libereurope.eu/ 
liber-licensing-principles/  (Accessed  on  25  October  
2017). 
5.  Publishers  Association/Joint  Information  Systems  
Committee (PA/JISC). Framework for material supplied  
in electronic form, 1999.  http://www.jisc.ac.uk/pub99/ 
modellic.pdf  (Accessed  on  29  October  2017) 6.  CLIR/DLF,  Liblicense  standard  license  agreement.  
http://liblicense.crl.edu/licensing-information/model- 
license/  (Accessed  on  20  October  2017). 7.  Committee  on  Institutional  Co-operation  (CIC).  
Statement on standardised agreement language, 2000.  
http://www.cic.uiuc.edu/cli/contracts/standardised_ 
agreement_  language.htm  (Accessed  on  25  October  
2017). 
8.  John  Cox  Associates.  Model  licence  suite,  2000.   
http://www.licensingmodels.com  (Accessed  on  28  
September  2017). 
9.  California  Digital  Library  Model  License  Revised.  
https://www.cdlib.org/cdlinfo/2017/01/25/cdl-model- 
license-revised/  (Accessed  on  10  October  2017). 10.  Scigliano, Marisa. Consortium purchases: Case study  
for a cost benefit analysis. J. Academic Librarianship,  
2002, 28(6),  393–399. 
11.  Croft,  J.B.  Model  licenses  and  interlibrary  loan/ 
document delivery from electronic resources. Interlending   
Document  Supply, 2001,  29(4),  165-168. 
12.  Dygert, Claire & Langendorfer, Jeanne M. Fundamentals  
of e-resource licensing. The Serials Librarian,  2014,  
66(1-4),  289-297 
13.  Canadian National Site Licensing Project, 2004. http:// 
www.uottawa.ca/library/  cnslp/docs/Licen_princip. 
htm  (Accessed  on  10  October  2017). 
   
COntRIbutORS 
mr Arvind Singh is pursuing his PhD in Department of Library  and  Information  Science,  Banaras  Hindu  University, Varanasi,  India. He has published research articles in the field of Library  and  Information  Science  in  reputed  journals.    
Contribution  in  the  current  study,  he  gathered  the  data  and  carried  out  analysis. 
dr bhaskar mukherjee received his PhD in the field of library  and  information  science.  Presently  working  as  a  Professor  in  the  Department  of  Library  and  Information  Science,  Banaras  Hindu University, Varanasi, India. He has published 80 research  articles in the journals. His research interests are in webometrics,  open access, journal evaluation techniques, information storage  and  retrieval,  knowledge  organisation,  etc.  
Contribution  in  the  current  study,  he  conceptualised  the  idea  and  presented  in  the  present  form. 

========4========

SINGH  & M UKHERJEE  : A C OMPARATIVE  S TUDY ON  L ICENSING  P ROVISION OF  C OMMERCIAL  P UBLISHER 
Appendix A 
 Comparative study of license agreement of various international publishers/aggregators 
EbSCOb 
terms & conditions  Elsevier 
a 
Provision of term’s  
defnition & scope 
Agreement General Terms 
Agreement type  non-exclusive, non- 
transferable right to  
access and use 
Not Explicitly mentioned Explicitly mentioned 
Access Terms Access methods 
By range of IP based  authentication 
Notice time period  60 days’ notice to  for early termination  breaching party prior  /breach of agreement termination Force majeure/ or  War, strikes, fres,  where breach cannot  foods, power failures,  possible tele- communications  
or Internet failures or  
damage to or destruction  
of any network facilities  or servers 
Perpetual access  (access to back/ previous licensed  materials after  termination of  licence) 
Not mentioned 
Users Rights and Restrictions 
Access rights  Authorised Users only;  
different products with  
different terms 
Remote access 
Authorised Users who  are Walk-in Users is not  permitted. 
Fee & Payment Terms Payment time –  within 
Late fee 
30 days of invoice day 
1 per cent per month 
Taxes 
Excluded, to be bear by  client. 
Extend of Access Display, download  or print the licensed  materials for the  purpose of personal,  non-commercial use 
Allowed 
Sagec Explicitly  mentioned 
non-exclusive,  non-exclusive,  worldwide, non- non-transferable  transferable right to use right to access  
and use 
By range of IP based  authentication 
By range  of IP based  Authentication 
30 days’ notice to  breaching party prior  termination No such clause 
60 days’ notice to 30 days’ notice to  
breaching party  
prior termination termination 
No such clause 
Available in short 
non-exclusive,  perpetual right to  use the Products 
Unlimited access by  
Authorised Users and  only. Walk-in  patrons physically  users within  present on licensee site.  physical premises  Walk-in patrons, As  of licensee. per copyright act 1976  
and other contractual  
restriction 
Permitted to patron  Not any such  institute provision 
Authorised users  Members of libraries 
30-60 days of invoice  day 
12-18 per cent per  annum 
Sometimes claimed  separately 
60 days of  invoice day Not any such  clause Not any such  clause 
Allowed, reasonable  portion 
Reasonable  amount 
Springerd Not Explicitly  mentioned 
taylor & Francise Explicitly mentioned 
non-exclusive to use 
non-exclusive, non- transferable right to  access and use 
By range of IP based  Authentication 
By range of IP based  Authentication 
60days notice 
Breaching party prior  
War, strike, fre,  War, strike, fre,  food, governmental  food, governmental  restriction, power  restriction, power  failure, destruction, of  failure, destruction, of  network or server network or server or  
software programs ,  
labor diffculty, adverse  
weather conditions, 
any other cause 
beyond the reasonable  
control of the party  
delayed. 
Not mentioned Not mentioned 
Authorised users and  persons physically  present on licensee’s  site 
Allowed for authorised  Allowed for authorised  users. users. 
30 days of invoice day Mentioned detail 
At prevailing interest  rate 
Excluded, To be bear  by Licensee 
3% per annum+  administrative charge Excluded, To be bear  by Licensee 
Use should be in  Allowed up to extend  consistent with fair use,  of Fair Use posting complete article  
in institutional website  
is not allowed 
217 

========5========

DJLIT, VOL.  38,  NO.  3,  MAY   2018 
terms & conditions 
 Elsevier 
a 
EbSCOb 
Display, download  or print the licensed  materials for the  purpose of internal  marketing or testing  or for training Extract, abridge,  manipulation  of information  for explanation,  comment, criticism,  teaching, research,  analysis 
For preparation of  course materials 
No such clause 
No such clause 
Not allowed 
Allowed for educational, Allowed for  
scientifc & research  purpose 
No such clause 
Allowed 
Reproduce,  transfer, sublicense  or redistribute  the products for  commercial use/ sale Electronic reserve/  moocs 
Not allowed 
Not allowed 
No such clause 
No such clause 
Linking to related  materials in other  locations Interlibrary loan 
No such clause 
Allowed 
Allowed as per copyright  Allowed as per  law copyright law 
Use text mining  technologies (use of  any robots, spiders,  crawlers or other  automated down  loading programs,  algorithms to  continuously and  automatically search,  scrape, extract, deep  link, index or disrupt  the working of the  products) Rights to exclude,  modify or affect any  license (remove,  obscure or modify  in any way any  copyright notices) by  client 
To take back-up/ copying  
Not allowed 
Not mentioned 
Not allowed 
Not allowed 
No such clause 
No such clause 
218 
Sagec 
Springerd 
taylor & Francise 
No such clause 
No such clause 
Such clause available 
No such clause 
No such clause 
educational use 
Allowed 
Not allowed 
Reasonable portion Selective portion  
with prior permission  
allowed; For  
Commercially run  
courses not allowed Not allowed, even non- Not allowed proft use 
Allowed 
No such clause 
No such clause 
No such clause 
Allowed with the prior  written permission ;  for MOOCs a separate  licence needed Allowed with the prior  written permission 
Allowed as per  copyright law 
Allowed for  educational  purpose 
Allowed as per  copyright law. Loan  with For-proft and  direct individuals is not  allowed.  
Not allowed 
Allowed as per  copyright law 
Allowed for  educational purpose 
Not allowed 
Not allowed 
Prohibited  
No such clause 
One copy allowed.  Copying & storing  entire issue to  authorised users not  allowed 
Reasonable amount 

========6========

SINGH  & M UKHERJEE  : A C OMPARATIVE  S TUDY ON  L ICENSING  P ROVISION OF  C OMMERCIAL  P UBLISHER 
terms & conditions 
 Elsevier 
a 
EbSCOb 
Sagec 
Springerd 
taylor & Francise 
When author of licenced materials belongs to client’s organisation 
No such clauses 
No such clauses 
Download a copy of  No such clause individual articles  
and share the same 
Ownership Rights 
including products  
All intellectual property,  All license materials to  Products and  
developed in conjunction  with Client’s employees,  agents, or contractors with  
licensor 
Add or withdraw of  Products that has  materials reasonable grounds to  
believe is unlawful,  
harmful, false or  
infringing or products for  editorial, usage, currency,  
or other commercially  reasonable reasons. 
the Licensor 
the Intellectual  Property Rights  remain with  licensor 
No such clause 
No such clause 
No such clauses With acknowledgement  
and non-commercial  
basis. 
All license materials to  Intellectual rights  the Licensor and confdential  
information with  
licensor 
Products that has no  Products that has no  longer right to publish  longer right to publish  or it has reasonable  or Licensor believes  grounds to believe  that there is at least  infringe or other  a reasonable chance  unlawful to an infringement of  
copyright database  
right defamation or any  
other 
unlawful act. 
Written permission  from publisher needed 
No such clause 
Publisher’s Undertaking/Obligations Online contents is  Provision available complete and faithful 
Not infringe the  Declared by publisher copyright or any  
other proprietary or  
intellectual property  
rights of any licence  
materials 
Harmless from and  
against any loss,  No such declaration damage, costs,  
liability and expenses  
arising out of any  
legal action taken  
against the materials 
Maximum time to  Effective date of  make available the  agreement electronic materials  
after agreement 
Refund to the  Provision unavailable licensee a proportion  
of the fee prorated  
to the period of  
unavailability 
Ensuring server‘s  No such clause adequate capacity  
and bandwidth to  
support the usage of  
electronic materials 
Alter, abridge, adapt,  modify license  materials. 
For commercial  Abridge, adapt, modify  Use all or any part  
use of products 
Provision available 
No such declaration 
No such  declaration Declared by  publisher 
Publisher  assumes  no responsibility for  errors or omissions  nor any liability for  damages from use of the  information contained 
Declared by  publisher 
Effective date of  agreement 
Effective date of  Effective date of  
agreement 
Licensor reimburse  proportionate total fee 
Provision  unavailable 
Licensor 
No such  declaration 
license materials 
for any Commercial  Use; systematically  distribute other than  Authorised Users; alter,  abridge, adapt, modify  license materials 
No such declaration 
Declared by publisher 
reasonable endeavours  to ensure such clause Declared by publisher 
Not responsible 
Declared by publisher 
agreement 
Within 30 days after  agreement. 
Provision unavailable 
Provision unavailable 
No such clause No such Mentioned clause 
219 

========7========

DJLIT, VOL.  38,  NO.  3,  MAY   2018 
terms & conditions Licensed materials  to be available to  the client and to  authorised users at  all times and on a  twenty-four hour  basis (except during  maintenance) 
 Elsevier 
a 
EbSCOb 
98 per cent up-time per  year, with the 2 per cent  down-time including  scheduled maintenance  and repairs 
98 per cent time of a  month expect during  maintenance 
To provide or to  make arrangements  for a third party to  provide an archive  of the licensed  materials for the  purposes of long  term preservation 
Not any such clause 
Not any such clause 
Obligations and Liabilities 
Liabilities to provide  Client’s Duty  access to authorised  
users only  
Maintaining records  Client’s Duty of all authorised  
users 
Training of users  Not Mention 
about access rules &  
restrictions 
Limitation of liabilities Acts of God, war, riot,  
embargoes, acts of civil  
or military authority, fre,  
food, accidents, strikes  
or labour shortages,  
transportation facilities  
shortages or failures of  
equipment. 
Licensee 
Not elaborated 
Licensor 
Same as earlier row 
Sagec 
Springerd 
taylor & Francise 
No such  declaration 
No such clause 
use reasonable  endeavours to ensure 
Authorised  copies of  Licensed  Materials may be  retained 
No such clause 
Not such clause 
Licensee 
Licensee 
Licensee 
Not elaborated 
Both Licensee and  Licensor 
Both Licensee and  Licensor 
Not Mention 
Not Mention 
Not Mention 
Indirect, special,  Direct or indirect,  Acts of God, strike,  incidental,  special, incidental,  shortage, acts by  punitive or  punitive or  other parties, act of  consequential  consequential damages  government authority,  damages,  arising out of the use of  enemies, labour  including but not  or the inability to use  diffculty, shortage  limited to loss of  the product(s). of electric power,  data, or business  malfunctioning of  interruption,  equipment arising out of  
the use of or the  
inability to use  
the product(s). 
a. https://www.elsevier.com/__data/assets/pdf_fle/0012/79977/sample_elsevier_bv_subscription_agreement-academic-government_022514. 
     pdf 
b. https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use 
c. http://journals.sagepub.com/page/policies/terms-of-use d. https://www.minitex.umn.edu/Electronic/Springer/License.pdf 
e. http://www.tandf.co.uk/libsite/pdf/licensingInfo/TermsAndConditions.pdf 
220 

========8========

