DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 38, No. 6, November 2018, pp. 396-402, DOI : 10.14429/djlit.38.6.12860 
 2018, DESIDOC 
Selecting an Appropriate Web-Scale Discovery Service: A Study of the Big 4’s  
Vinit Kumar 
Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Lucknow - 226 025 India 
E-mail: mailvinitkumar@gmail.com 
ABStrAct 
Seeing the dynamic user demands the libraries are changing their approach to the user services. The web-scale  discovery (WSD) service is the latest attempt in this direction. There are several players in the marketplace providing  solutions for WSD with products having basic features and subtle features as well. As more players are entering  the marketplace, it becomes challenging to select appropriate WSD system. It is also paramount for the library  managers to be aware of the myriad range of features and underlying technology of WSD. This understanding will  be for making informed purchase decisions. This paper attempts to explain in detail the components of a typical  WSD system. Further, the paper evaluates the features of the Big 4’s in WSD. The paper concludes by discussing  some of the parameters to consider while evaluating the WSD system. 
Keywords: WSD; Discovery services; Primo central; WorldCat discovery services; Summon; WS-Discovery 
1.  IntroDuctIon 
Libraries  boast  about  the  increasing  number  of  subscriptions  to  journals,  electronic  content  and  databases  whereas at the same time funding agencies always complain  about the minimal full-text downloads of subscribed resources  by  the  library  patrons.  The  probable  reasons  could  be  the  limited  information  literacy  of  users,  irrelevant  content,  and  disablements of the access system. The user’s needs are very  dynamic  and  keep  on  changing  rapidly  and  dramatically.  If  we see the OCLC study1 done in 2005 asking the respondents  the question “Where do you typically begin your search for  information on a particular topic?” 87 per cent of respondents  answered, “Search Engines”. The above fnding signifes that  just increasing the number of subscriptions would not be of  much  help  to  the  users,  but  there  is  a  need  for  such  system  matching the expectations of the users for maximum utilisation  of the resources could be made. This system should operate  at  the  same  level  of  sophistication  as  other  popular  Web  destinations are operating. As warned by Coyle & Hillmann2,  “If  the  libraries  are  to  avoid  further  marginalisation,  they  need to make a fundamental change in their approach to user  services”. 
Web scale discovery (WSD) service is the latest attempt  in this direction. WSD service serves as the “front door”3  for  the researchers or “a single point of entry”4  or a “Google-like  interface”5  for the library catalogue, digital repository, journals  subscriptions, and subscribed online databases. In other words,  a unifed interface to all the internal and external resources of  the library.  
With the increased availability of content in the electronic  
Received : 28 March 2018, Revised : 12 October 2018  Accepted : 20 October 2018, Online published : 2 November 2018 
396 
format and its associated benefts, libraries started subscribing  electronic  content.  Despite  several  advantages  of  electronic  resources, they are too fragmented and prompt several issues  concerning their management and delivery. Several attempts  are  ongoing  for  providing  easy  and  intuitive  access.  One  of  the  signifcant  efforts  is  the  implementation  of  a  federated  search of all the resources subscribed by the library. Federated  search engines are a kind of meta-search engine wherein the  query received from the user is sent simultaneously to multiple  publisher  websites  and  displays  the  received  responses  to  the users as a single set. Although at the time of preliminary  implementation  of  federated  search  in  libraries,  librarians  regarded it as a “win-win-situation” but later with the passage  of time several issues surfaced on the capabilities of federated  searching. As  in  federate  searching  the  query  received  from  the  user  is  sent  to  several  resources  simultaneously,  to  save  the time the system puts a limit on the number of resources to  be searched. The more the number of resources are searched  the more will be the waiting time for the display of results.  Another issue is the speed of searching; as the searching speed  depends on the response of the slowest resource if any of the  resources delays the response, the federated search also delays  the display of results because it waits for the response from all  the resources. There are other issues related to the display of  results too, such as improper de-duplication, poor ranking and  merging of obtained responses from multiple databases due to  a variety of underlying architecture.  
These issues led to increasing distrust about the service to  the end users and resulted in the development of a new kind of  systems, WSD systems wherein the metadata is pre-harvested  from multiple resources (both local and external) and stored in  a central index. Once the metadata is available in a centralised  

========1========

KuMAR : SELECTING AN APPROPRIATE WEB-SCALE DISCOVERY SERVICE: A STuDY OF THE BIG 4’S 
location, better ranking methods, proper merging, effcient de- duplication and a customised display is possible.  
1.1 WSD components 
In  general,  a  typical  WSD  system  involves  following  components  like  central  index,  a  link  resolver,  relevance  algorithms, and user interface.  
1.1.1  Central  Index 
The central index is the base on which the success of a  discovery  system  relies.  Different  service  providers  follow  varied  approaches  for  building  a  central  index.  The  process  starts  with  harvesting  metadata  from  publishers  and  content  providers. The harvesting of metadata involves the following  methods: 
• Scrapping publisher website, 
• OAI-PMH compliant services. 
• A single update fle (in XML format) directly uploaded by  
the content provider through FTP to a specifed location  
on discovery system.  
The  decision  about  the  method  depends  on  the  content  provider’s underlying system architecture. A content provider  applies either of the above methods or at times all of the above  methods.   
The collected metadata provided by content providers is  raw data, and the central index cannot directly index raw data.  The raw obtained data is normalised keeping in view the felds  available  in  the  index  and  de-duplication  is  done  to  remove  the  duplicate  entries  for  the  same  item.  Seeing  the  variety  of content providers this process involves the application of  complex  computing  algorithms.  Metadata  once  harvested  needs to be regularly updated with any new content added to  the repository of content providers. The service provider based  on the availability of new content usually sets the frequency  of adding new records. For automatic updating of the central  index,  service  providers  write  automated  transfer  routines,  Load  tables  and  indexing  algorithms.  The  central  index  is  maintained and usually hosted in a cloud environment by the  service  provider. The  hosted  environment  helps  them  in  the  seamless  update,  maintenance,  troubleshooting  and  feature  addition. 
1.1.2  Link  Resolver 
Metadata obtained from the content providers have a feld  storing  the  direct  link  to  the  full  text  of  the  document. The  proper resolution of this link is paramount so that when the  end user tries to access the full text, it becomes available. The  full text involves text, fgures, tables, and graphs. The service  provider for this task usually deploys an open-uRL compliant  link resolver software. As the failure rate about the ability of  link resolvers to generate a link to the full text is moderately  high, the major players have developed specialised programs  to increase the effectiveness. For example, EBSCO Discovery  Service (EDS) uses smart links and custom links in addition to  the open source link resolver.  
1.1.3    Relevancy Algorithms 
Before  the  display  of  results  obtained  from  the  central  
index,  the  ranking  of  results  according  to  the  relevance  of  search terms is made. Relevancy ranking involves defning the  priorities among the felds of metadata. The service provider  usually sets emphasis on criteria such as currency, availability  of full-text, keyword appearance in the title, matches on the  subject headings, author-supplied keywords, keywords within  abstracts, match on the full text of the documents. Some service  providers  also  allow  the  individual  libraries  to  infuence  the  algorithm as per their local needs. The popularity of the service  highly depends on the quality of the relevancy algorithms.  
1.1.4  User  Interface 
Most of the WSD service providers give high importance  to the user interface (uI) as this part directly interacts with the  end user. Includes following interface 
• Single  search box and advanced search options • Faceted navigation to flter or drill down the results as per  
facets 
• The  inclusion  of  enriched  content  from  services  like  
Google Books, Syndetic Solutions 
• User profles 
• Carts to easily mark items to save for later use • Availability of search history  
• Export  of  records  to  reference  managers  or  an  email  
address 
• Sharing on social networking websites 
• Spell checker/ “Did you mean?” 
• RSS feeds for search alerts and email alerts 
• Subject-specifc profles 
• Research starters 
• Mobile user interface. 
The service providers also allow branding customisations  to the interface such as logo, look and feel as per needs, Search  Widgets to place on the library website, custom search boxes  and Catalogue enhancements.  
2.    r elAteD  Wor KS 
The  available  literature  on  WSD  services  comprises  of  several studies underlining the importance of discovery service  for libraries and patrons, their usability, case studies reporting  the implementation at different libraries and studies reporting  the comparison and evaluation of different available discovery  tools.  
Several systematic reviews are available in the literature  reviewing the available literature on discovery systems. Moore  &  Greene6   presented  a  historical  review  of  the  literature  on  discovery  systems  with  an  aim  to  recapitulate  the  published  available  knowledge  for  the  selection  and  evaluation  of  discovery tools. They also summarised the criteria proposed  by  different  authors  for  the  evaluation  of  discovery  tools.  Similarly,  Frederiksen4   reviewed  the  available  literature  comparing the discovery services and published an annotated  bibliography on discovery systems. Vaughan7  proposed features  of a model discovery service by analysing the feedback from  library  staff,  the  Discovery  Task  Force  report,  and  vendor  interviews.  The  paper  also  reported  the  recommendation  of  discovery  service  to  the  university  of  Nevada,  Las  Vegas  library. Similarly, Newcomer8  also reviewed the literature and  
397 

========2========

DJLIT,  VOL.  38,  NO.  6,  NOV  2018 
proposed recommendations for selecting a discovery tool for  music-related content. 
Several  attempts  have  been  made  by  researchers  in  reporting the comparisons and evaluation results of different  discovery  tools.  Foster  and  MacDonald9   compared  Serial  Solutions’  Summon  and  EBSCO  Discovery  Service  based  on  their  usability. They  also  studied  the  behavioural  aspects  of users while using the search features of individual systems  and compared the overall user experience at the Illinois State  University. The fndings are of importance for the librarians  making purchase decisions to understand the user experience  and usability of Summon and EDS. Similarly, Djenno10, et al.  compared the usability of Summon and WorldCat Local at the  university of Illinois at Chicago. They evaluated the selected  two discovery systems based on frst the chances of continuing  with  the  particular  discovery  tool  and  second  to  study  the  search behaviour of users. Their study found faculty preferring  Summons  than  WorldCat  Local.  Similarly,  Chickering  and  Yang11  compared fourteen major discovery tools by framing a  benchmark comprising of sixteen criteria based on the highly  expected features reported in the literature regarding the “next  generation  catalogues”  with  an  aim  to  update  the  librarians  about the features of the available tools. Ronda12  of  university  of Texas library published a comparative report on Summon,  EDS and WorldCat Local using the criteria such as “content,  user interface/searchability, pricing, and contract options”.  
There  are  few  studies  comparing  the  online  academic  databases  with  discovery  tools. Asher, A.D.,  Duke,  L.M.,  &  Wilson,  S.13   studied  the  search  effcacy  of  EDS,  Summon,  Google Scholar and subscription-based databases. The study  reported that the users highly rely on the default search settings  provided by the vendors and showed their inability to evaluate  sources. Ketterman, E. and Inman, M.E.14  compared PubMed  and  Summon  and  found  that  the  Summon  discovery  system  produces  quality  results,  but  it  cannot  be  a  replacement  of  PubMed, a subject-specifc database. 
There  are  several  case  studies  reported  in  the  literature  reporting  the  implementation  and  evaluation  of  discovery  systems  at  different  libraries.  Bull,  S.,  Craft,  E.  and  Dodds,  A.15   studied  the  usability  of  Primo-based  discovery  service  at the university of Birmingham. Nichols et. al.16  studied the  usability of  Primo  in  a  mid-sized  academic research  library.  Similarly, Cassidy, E.D., Jones, G., McMain, L., Shen, L. and  Vieira, S.17  studied the usability of EDS among the students at  the Newton Gresham Library of Sam Houston State university  (SHSu)  and  reported  that  there  is  a  demand  for  local  customisations in the EDS interface as there is a good level  of confusion among the students about the source types and  icons, facets/limiters, relevancy ranking, integrated search of  EDS. In a similar study, Thompson, J.L., Obrig, K.S. & Abate,  L.E.18  reported their experiences of implementing EDS in an  academic health science library. Pinkas M.M. et al.19  reported  their path to selecting a discovery tool for the university of  Maryland Health Sciences and Human Services Library.  
3.   oB jectIveS 
The  objective  of  this  paper  is  to  elucidate  in  detail  the  components of a typical WSD system. Further, the paper aims  
398 
to evaluate typical features of discovery layers in the Big 4’s  of WSD. The paper aims to discuss some of the parameters  to  consider  while  evaluating  the  WSD  system  for  purchase  decisions. 
4.    r eSeArch MethoDology 
The features selected in this study have been developed  from the available literature dealing in detail on the comparative  evaluation of WSD services. The list is derived from Moore &  Greene’s listed criteria6 based on their systemized review of  the literature. The features are further tallied from Vaughan’s7  proposed  features  of  model  discovery  service  which  were  based on the feedback of library professionals. Although the  features list is not a comprehensive list of all features, it helps  to  understand  the  availability  of  the  majority  of  features  in  selected WSD services. Also, the scope of the comparison is  limited to the features only and does not attempt to compare the  usability of selected WSD services, based on user’s feedback. 
5.    S cope 
Web Scale Discovery systems have moved from academic  research level to production level. Several vendors are seeing  it as a global opportunity as a business product and are heavily  competing among academic libraries through their products.  The  major  products  commonly  referred  to  as  the  Big  4’s  in  WSD  in  the  marketplace  are  WorldCat  Discovery  Services  from  OCLC,  Summon  from  Serials  Solutions,  EBSCO  Discovery Service from EBSCO and Primo Central from Ex  Libris. Although  there  are  several  products  available  in  the  marketplace this study is limited to the above four discovery  layers only seeing their popularity and time since inception.  
5.1 Worldcat  Discovery  Services 
OCLC  released  WorldCat  Local  in  the  year  2007  after  completing a pilot project at university of Washington. Initially,  WorldCat Local was developed as a customised and localised  copy of OCLC’s WorldCat catalogue. Now it is available in  two versions, a preview version WorldCat Local “quick start”  and  premium  version  WorldCat  Local.  The  “quick  start”  version  is  available  to  the  subscribing  libraries  of WorldCat  catalogue whereas non-subscribing libraries can purchase the  WorldCat Local. With the passage of time, OCLC updated its  discovery layer and named it as WorldCat Discovery Service.  The upgrade involved a refurbished interface and inclusion of  more content in its central index due to an increasing number  of  collaborations  with  the  content  providers. 
  12,20,21 
  It  is  an  amalgamation  of  two  OCLC  products,  WorldCat  Local  and  FirstSearch.  
5.2  Summon WS-Discovery 
After six months of development time, the Serials Solutions  released its WSD solution, Summon in July 2009. Primarily  targeting the academic libraries Summon is available as hosted  software-as-a-service model to minimise the maintenance cost  for the subscribing libraries. The product includes the Summon  service and the Summon index. The pricing of the product is  not publicly disclosed and depends on several factors such as  a size of the organisation, the number of users, and level of  

========3========

KuMAR : SELECTING AN APPROPRIATE WEB-SCALE DISCOVERY SERVICE: A STuDY OF THE BIG 4’S 
required customisations. The Summon index indexes content  discovery  layer  based  on  the  available  trade  literature  and  sourced from several publishers and journals. Including content  methodology  mentioned  in  methodology  section.  Table  1  providers like ProQuest, LexisNexis, IEEE, and Emerald, etc.  presents an overview of the features available in the Big 4’s  The unique aspect of Summon is its coverage of Newspaper  of WSD. 
articles apart from the other content types such as thesis and  
dissertations, proceedings, music scores, and books. 
 9,12,13,22,23,24 
It could be said from the above analysis of the features  of Big4’s that all the above-selected discovery layers attempt  
The Serials Solutions regularly releases a list of participating  to add new features apart from the typical features of WSD.  
publishers on its website.  
5.3 eBSco   Discovery  Service 
Starting  the  development  of  EDS  since  2008,  EBSCO  released  its  Web  Scale  Discovery  solution  in  early  2010.  EDS emanate out of the EBSCOhost, an already established  Abstracting and Indexing service of EBSCO. EDS provides a  unifed interface for the resources subscribed by the library as  well as the resources locally available in the library. The EDS  offers a complete solution as per the requirements of a WSD  service.  It  provides  Central  Index, user  interface  and  other  tools like EBSCO’s LinkSource link resolver (Smart Link and  Custom link) and Widgets. The price of the product relies on the  factors like the size of the local resources, the variety of local  resources and the level of customisation required by a library.  EBSCO offers this product as a hosted cloud-based platform  and restricts local installation which saves maintenance cost  from  the  part  of  libraries  and  allows  the  content  provider  to  implement  the  updates  quickly.  EBSCO’s  central  index  includes  content  from  EBSCOhost  and  other  publishers  additionally it also covers items from open access resources  such  as  open  access  repositories  and  open  access  journals.  The content providers include major publishing houses such  as  LexisNexis,  Cambridge university  Press,  IEEE,  Ingenta,  Emerald,  Elsevier,  Wiley,  Taylor  and  Francis,  etc.  Recently  EBSCO has entered into a collaboration with Web of Science  to provide citation counts9, 12,13,17,18,25. 
5.4   p rimo central  
Primo Central is an extension of Primo the next generation  discovery layer of Ex Libris. The third version of Primo was  offcially released in 2010 as Primo Central Ex Libris’s WSD  solution. Primo Central consists of the Primo discovery layer  and central index. The local library or Ex Libris can host the  discovery layer while the central index is hosted by Ex Libris  only. The price of the product depends on hosting chosen by  the instance and other factors such as the user base and the  number of resources to be included in the central index. The  Primo Central Index harvests millions of electronic scholarly  resources from aggregators, primary and secondary publishers,  and open-source repositories. Ex Libris collaborates with the  content providers through a Primo Central Publisher Program  available on its website. The publishers already in an agreement  are  IGI  Global,  Lexis  Nexis,  Wiley-Blackwell,  Thomson  Reuters, etc. apart from these several open access repositories  like arxive.org, ePrints, DOAJ, etc. are harvested16,26. 
6.  Big  4’s  in  WSD: comparative Analysis  of  the  
Features.    
The analysis of the selected big 4’s of WSD is based on  the content analysis of their websites and evaluation of each  
However,  to  rank  these  web  services  a  detailed  analysis  of  features using weighted checklists would be required. 
7.  SelectIng DIScovery lAyerS 
Since the discovery layer is emerging as a vital service  in  any  library  and  particularly  in  academic  libraries  and  the  more  and  more  discovery  service  providers  are  entering  the  marketplace12  the selection of the appropriate layer for a library  becomes challenging. It becomes more challenging due to the  presence of too many parameters to consider while evaluating  the discovery layers. On the basis of the features in Table 1,  this section discusses some of the parameters that one should  consider while selecting an appropriate discovery layer.  
7.1 content comprehensiveness 
The  coverage  of  content  by  a  discovery  service  is  an  important  factor  while  considering  the  discovery  service  for  adoption. One should note that not everything subscribed by  the  library  will  be  covered  under  WSD  tools  because  some  publishers have not yet started to release their metadata for the  general public or are ready to sign a contract with such third- party discovery systems. The broader the content coverage, the  better the discovery system will be for a library. Due to this,  almost all the major players keep on increasing their content  coverage. 
7.2  Metadata harvesting efficiency 
The  effciency  to  harvest  the  metadata  as  soon  as  it  is  available from the content providers is also an important factor  as delay in metadata harvesting will lead to non-availability of  “known-items” in the discovery system and would eventually  generate distrust about the ability of the service.  
7.3   r equest processing  Speed 
One of the reasons most libraries prefer discovery services  over  federated  search  engines  is  the  latter’s  slow  request  processing speed. The internal architecture of federated search  engines requires sending user query to several databases and  then post-process the received results before display. However,  all the distributed databases are not equally effcient to post the  responses on time causing to increase response time. Similarly,  in the case of discovery systems, the request processing speed  matters a lot. The request processing speed is measured as the  time spent by the system after the user query is received and  the results are displayed to the users. During the trial period,  one  should  always  do  a  small  statistical  evaluative  study  to  check the request processing speed of the service.  
7.4   r elevancy ranking 
Among the long list of retrieved results from the discovery  service, it is important to order the results in such order that the  
399 

========4========

DJLIT,  VOL.  38,  NO.  6,  NOV  2018 
table 1. comparison of features of Worldcat local, Summon, eDS, primo central 
Feature 
Worldcat local 
Summon 
Company 
OCLC 
ProQuest/Serials Solutions 
Year 
2007 
2009 
Content  coverage 
WorldCat and other  content providers 
Several Content providers 
Relevancy  ranking 
Proprietary. Match on Keywords, (no full  text), 
Proximity searches in  title subject and author.  Currency, 
Weights to library  available records 
Proprietary. 
Match on keywords (both  metadata and full text),  Proximity and frequency  based relevance ranking,  Weights based on the type  of content, citation counts,  currency 
Linking resolver 
Own link resolver  knowledge base can  also be confgured  to use library’s link  resolver 
uses library’s  link resolver 
Result flters 
Include author, content,  format, language, topic, audience, and  year 
Content type, Subject terms,  
Full text, local availability,  publication date, language 
Export/RSS  feeds 
HTML, rich text, CSV,  or the citation tag  format RIS, Reference  managers 
Email, RSS feed, Reference  
Manager 
Availability of  widgets 
WorldCat Local search  box widget 
Summon Search Box  
Web 2.0  
Supports social sharing 
- 
Catalogue  enhancements 
Google Books  Integration 
- 
usage statistics 
Adobe SiteCatalyst 
Summon Analytics  
Mobile uI 
Available with  dedicated App for  Android 
Available 
Customer  support 
Available 
Available 
result that is most likely to be of interest to the user is placed on  top. For achieving this, computer algorithms are applied to the  result set. These algorithms differ as per the category of users  for whom the system is intended for. For discovery services,  the  relevancy  ranking  is  a  signifcant  factor,  because  of  the  
400 
eDS 
primo central 
EBSCO 
Ex Libris 
2010 
2010 
EBSCOhost and other  content providers 
Several content providers 
Proprietary (but disclosed  the criteria). An algorithm based on Weights to  Subject headings, author- supplied keywords, title,  abstract, full-text. Currency. No weights  to library  available records.  
Proprietary. An algorithm based on term frequency, feld  weighting, number of times a  record has been accessed, and  currency. Individual libraries  can choose boosting  metrics.  Also, it includes content  enrichment service data if  subscribed by the library. 
uses Smart links and  Custom links and library’s  link resolver 
SFX Link Resolver 
Dynamic facets are  available depending on the  content type. 
Filters like source types,  Publisher, publication,  Geography, content provider (local or external) 
Title, author, and publication  information, database,  resource type, geographic,  language, classifcation, genre,  and title of the journal.  
Email, Reference managers,  XML, MARC21, user- specifc  alerts as RSS feeds 
Email, Delicious, Connotea,  and reference management  software, RSS feeds 
EDS search box, widgets  for openDOAR, JCR,  Wikipedia, Scimago  Ranking 
Search  box, Social networking  buttons. 
Supports social sharing 
Supports social sharing  
Google book preview, Table  of Contents from LOC,  Goodreads user reviews 
Supports Content enrichment  services such as Syndetic  Solutions, Amazon and  Content Café. 
EBSCO admin 
Eclipse BIRT (Business  Intelligence and Reporting  Tools) 
Available 
Available, SMS integration 
Available (country level) 
Available 
poor ranking of results due to the poor ranking of results the  user will be unable to fnd the records of their interests despite  the  availability  of  a  record  in  the  system  (comprehensive  coverage).  Most  of  the  discovery  services  have  proprietary  

========5========

KuMAR : SELECTING AN APPROPRIATE WEB-SCALE DISCOVERY SERVICE: A STuDY OF THE BIG 4’S 
relevance  ranking  mechanisms  and  use  custom  developed  reFerenceS algorithms.  Some  vendors  have  disclosed  the  parameters  1. 
that their algorithms take care while relevancy ranking. EDS  
claims the following parameters; Match on subject headings  
from  controlled  vocabularies,  match  on  article  titles,  match  
on author keywords, match on keywords within the abstracts,  match on keywords with full text28.The relevancy ranking of  
discovery services can be evaluated by statistically studying  
the results obtained when searched for a ‘known-item’.  
7.5 Integration  with  IlS  and other  Systems 
Discovery systems should have compatibility to integrate  seamlessly with the Integrated Library Software (ILS) of the  library. The integration should be without manual intervention  like uploading fles manually or from the database to vendor  specifed locations. The discovery service should provide tools  to display the availability of items in a user-friendly manner.  Apart from this, the discovery should also have the ability to  broaden the search to other libraries to which the library has  signed an ILL agreement. 
A thorough verifcation of the discovery service capability  to  integrate  with  other  library  online  services,  such  as  institutional  repositories,  newspaper  clipping  service,  library  guides and learning management systems before fnalising a  purchase. 
The  above  list  is  merely  an  indication  of  few  facets  to  be considered while evaluating discovery layer a similar list  should be developed by considering the local requirements of  the library, as the WSD layer service effciency highly depends  on local needs. Thorough research on the available customer  success stories and evaluation studies would also be helpful in  easing the selection process. Similarly, requesting the vendors  for a fully customised trial of the WSD service (including the  catalogue  and  other  library  resources)  and  conducting  local  evaluative study will be the best way to conclude. 
8.    c oncluSIonS 
Resource  discovery  tools  help  the  users  to  search  the  local library resources, institutional repositories, open access  content and the subscribed external resources at the same time  within a single interface.  
In  this  paper,  the  technical  aspects  of  a  typical  WSD  service are discussed by giving the overview of the components  of  WSD  service  like  central  index,  link  resolver,  relevancy  algorithms  and  interface.  The  paper  further  outlined  the  features and a brief history of four major players of WSD, the  Big 4s. Similarly, the primary criteria for selection of WSD  layer for a library are discussed in detail including the content  comprehensiveness,  metadata  harvesting  effciency,  request  processing speed, relevancy ranking, and integration with ILS  and other systems. 
WSD developments have seen a vast improvement in the  coverage of central index to several user-friendly improvements  in the user interface of these systems. As the WSD systems  evolve over time and widely adopted by libraries, the limitations  of  the  systems  will  be  overtaken.  On  the  similar  lines,  the  vendors will introduce several innovations as the needs of the  information seekers evolve.  
De  Rosa,  C.  &  Online  Computer  Library  Center.  
Perceptions  of  libraries  and  information  resources:  A  
report to the OCLC membership. Dublin, Ohio, OCLC.  
2005. http://www.oclc.org/content/dam/oclc/reports/pdfs/ 
Percept_all.pdf  (Accessed on 12 December 2016). 2. Coyle,  K.  &  Hillmann,  D.  Resource  description  and  
access  (RDA):  Cataloging  rules  for  the  20th  century.  
D-Lib  Magazine   [Internet],  2007,  13(1/2).  http://www. 
dlib.org/dlib/january07/coyle/01coyle.html  (Accessed on  
17 September 2018). 
3. Lown,  C.;  Sierra, T.  &  Boyer,  J.  How  users  search  the  
library from a single search box. Coll. Res. Lib., 2013,  
74(3), 227–241. 
doi: 10.5860/crl-321 
4. Frederiksen,  L.  Exploring  Discovery.  Public  Ser.  Q.,  
2015, 11(1), 43–47. 
doi: 10.1080/15228959.2014.995861 
5. Vaughan,  J.  Web-scale  discovery  what  and  why?  Lib.  
Technol. Rep., 2011, 47(1), 5. 
6. Moore,  K.B.  &  Greene,  C.  Choosing  discovery:  A  
literature  review  on  the  selection  and  evaluation  of  
discovery layers. J. Web Lib., 2012, 6(3), 145-163. 
doi: 10.1080/19322909.2012.689602 
7. Vaughan, J. Investigations into library web-scale discovery  
services. Inf. Technol. Lib. (Online), 2012, 31(1), 32–82. 
doi: 10.6017/ital.v31i1.1916 
8. Newcomer, N.L. The detail behind web-scale: Selecting  
and confguring web-scale discovery tools to meet music  
information  retrieval  needs. Music  Ref.  Serv.  Q., 2011,  
14(3), 131-145. 
doi: 10.1080/10588167.2011.596098 
9. Foster, A.K. & MacDonald, J.B. A tale of two discoveries:  
comparing  the  usability  of  Summon  and  EBSCO  
Discovery Service. J. Web Lib., 2013, 7(1), 1–19. 
doi: 10.1080/19322909.2013.757936 
10. Djenno,  M.;  Insua,  G.;  Gregory,  G.M.  &  Brantley,  J.S.  
Discovering usability: comparing two discovery systems  
at  one  academic  library. J.  Web  Lib.,  2014, 8(3),  263– 
285. 
doi: 10.1080/19322909.2014.933690 
11. Chickering, F.W. & Yang, S.Q. Evaluation and comparison  
of discovery tools: An update. Inf. Technol. Lib. (Online),  
2014, 33(2), 5–30. 
doi: 10.6017/ital.v33i2.3471 
12. Rowe,  R.  Web-scale  discovery:  A  review  of  Summon,  
EBSCO  discovery  service,  and  WorldCat  Local. The  
Charleston Advisor, 2010, 12(1), 5-10.  
doi: 10.5260/chara.12.1.5 
13. Asher, A.D.; Duke, L.M. & Wilson, S. Paths of discovery:  
comparing the search effectiveness of EBSCO discovery  
service, summon, google scholar and conventional library  
resources. Coll. Res. Lib., 2013, 74(5), 464-488. 
doi: 10.5860/crl-374 
14. Ketterman, E. & Inman, M.E. Discovery tool vs. PubMed:  
a  health  sciences  literature  comparison  analysis.  J.  
Electron. Res. Med. Lib., 2014, 11(3), 115-123. 
doi: 10.1080/15424065.2014.938999 
401 

========6========

DJLIT,  VOL.  38,  NO.  6,  NOV  2018 
15. Bull, S.; Craft, E. & Dodds, A. Evaluation of a resource  
discovery  service:  FindIt@  Bham. New  Rev.  Acad.  
Lib., 2014, 20(2), 137-166.  
doi: 10.1080/13614533.2014.897238 
16. Nichols, A.; Billey, A.; Spitzform, P.; Stokes, A. & Tran,  
C.  Kicking  the  tires:  A  usability  study  of  the  Primo  
Discovery Tool. J. Web Libr., 2014, 8(2), 172–195. 
doi: 10.1080/19322909.2014.903133 
17. Cassidy, E.D.; Jones, G.; McMain, L.; Shen, L. & Vieira,  
S. Student searching with EBSCO discovery: A usability  
study. J. Electron. Res. Lib., 2014, 26(1), 17-35.  
doi: 10.1080/1941126X.2014.877331 
18. Thompson,  J.L.;  Obrig,  K.S.  &  Abate,  L.E.  Web- 
scale  discovery  in  an  academic  health  sciences  library:  
Development  and  implementation  of  the  EBSCO  
discovery service. Med. Ref. Ser. Q., 2013, 32(1), 26–41. 
doi: 10.1080/02763869.2013.749111 
19. Pinkas,  M.M.;  Baglivo,  M.D.,  Klein,  I.R.;  Brown,  E.;  
Harris,  R.  &  Gerhart,  B.  Selecting  and  implementing  
a  discovery  tool:  The  university  of  Maryland  Health  
Sciences  and  Human  Services  Library  experience. J.  
Electron. Res. Med. Lib., 2014, 11(1), 1-12. 
doi: 10.1080/15424065.2013.876574 
20. Vaughan, J. OCLC WorldCat Local. Lib. Technol. Rep.,  
2011, 47(1), 12. 
21. Breeding, M. National Information Standards Organization  
(u.S.). The future of library resource discovery: a white  
paper commissioned by the NISO Discovery to Delivery  
(D2D) Topic Committee, 2015. 
http://www.niso.org/apps/group_public/download. 
php/14487/future_library_resource_discovery.pdf 
(Accessed on 12 December 2016) 
22. Buck, S. & Mellinger, M. The impact of serial solutions’  
summon  on  information  literacy  instruction:  Librarian  
402 
perceptions. Internet Ref. Serv. Q., 2011, 16(4), 159–181. 
doi: 10.1080/10875301.2011.621864 
23. Meredith,  W.  Web-scale  search  and  virtual  reference  
service:  How  Summon  is  impacting  reference  question  
complexity and reference service delivery. Internet Ref.  
Serv. Q., 2013, 18(1), 1–13.  
doi: 10.1080/10875301.2013.803005 
24. Vaughan,  J.  Serials  Solutions  Summon.  Libr.  Technol. 
Rep., 2011, 47(1), 22–29. 
25. Vaughan,  J.  EBSCO  discovery  services.  Libr.  Technol.  
Rep., 2011, 47(1), 30–38. 
26. Vaughan, J. Ex Libris Primo Central. Libr. Technol. Rep.,  
2011, 47(1), 39–47. 
27. Silton,  K.  Assessment  of  full-text  linking  in  Summon:  
One institution’s approach. J. Electron. Res. Libr., 2014,  
26(3), 163–169. 
doi: 10.1080/1941126X.2014.936767 
28. Narayanan, N. Choice of discovery: Evaluating web-scale  
discovery  services,  2014.    https://www.researchgate. 
net/profle/Nikesh_Narayanan/publication/281810761_ 
Choice_of_Discovery_Evaluating_Web_Scale_ 
Discovery_Services/links/55f9173708aeafc8ac1ec568. 
pdf  (Accessed on 15 December 2016). 
contrIButor 
Dr vinit Kumar  received his PhD in library and information  science.  Currently  working  as  an  Assistant  Professor  at  the  Department  of  Library  and  Information  Science,  Babasaheb  Bhimrao Ambedkar university (A Central university), Lucknow,  India.  He  is  having  more  than  seven  years  of  experience  in  teaching  and  research  of  library  and  information  science.  He  has  successfully  guided  students  leading  to  MPhil  (LIS).  His  research  interests  are  :  Library  online  services,  open  data,  research  methods  and  digital  libraries. 

========7========

