DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 38, No. 5, Sept 2018, pp. 349-353, DOI : 10.14429/djlit.38.5.12892 
 2018, DESIDOC 
Library Drone Delivery Programme: A Study 
Francis Nath 
Rain Forest Research Institute, Deovan Sotai, Jorhat - 785 001, Assam, India 
E-mail: francisnath123@gmail.com 
AbStrAct 
There has been a signifcant paradigm shift in drone applications. Exclusively available only for military  missions in the past application of drones has made its way to various platforms and the library is the one such  platform that is being examined here. A signifcant feature of a drone that is its delivery feature can prove immense  potential in bringing information to the users in the form of books or other library documents. A study is done on  various elements of the drone facility, its payload capacity, the integration of such a facility with the library, the  procedure of processing user requests via drone delivery, drone technology and procedure for making delivery, the  regulations in India concerning fying of drones and the advantages and limitations of using drone delivery service.  It is an emerging technology that has yet to see its full potential in civilian platform. In today’s digital era with  diminishing demand for physical books caused by electronic documents, drone delivery can breathe fresh air into  the library services by bringing back the popularity of books and making them available to the users in the click  
of a button. 
Keywords: Drones; Unmanned aircraft system; GPS; Location delivery; Library service; Drone regulations 
1.  IntroDuctIon 
The idea of drones would generally refer to the remotely  controlled  military  aircrafts  used  for  eliminating  terrorist  activities.  While  drones  have  become  a  staple  in  modern  warfare,  their  application  to  non-military  missions  has  risen  dramatically  in  just  the  past  few  years.  And  despite  the  rich  operational  history  of  several  now  well-known  drone  models  over  the  past  two  decades  of  confict,  it  is  a  new  generation  of  platforms  and  technology  that  have  captured  the public’s attention and interest.[1]  Since drones have been  commercialised  and  permitted  for  civilian  uses    it  is  now  being used by various individuals and organisations to carry  out  various  tasks  and  activities  which  include  flming  and  aerial  photography,  shipping/  delivery,  search  and  rescue  operations,  geographic  mapping,  wildlife  monitoring,  law  enforcement, crop monitoring, pollution and land monitoring,  meteorological services, etc. Since drones have found its way  to a lot of non-military uses, its usage can also be applied to  the library. The most apparent reason for requirement of drones  is for document delivery especially books. With the constant  rush in the 21st  century people don’t always have the luxury  of time to visit the library whenever they want. In addition to  time, location also acts as an added disadvantage. It may be  convenient for people living in an area close to the library or  have a time saving path free from the usual heavy traffc but  not all people in the society have such a privilege. Drones can  
Received : 9 April 2018, Revised : 19 July 2018  
Accepted : 31 July 2018, Online published : 5 September 2018 
cut short the time and distance and can deliver books wherever  and whenever the patron requires it. 
Delivery drones are no longer a sci-f or a virtual dream.  Companies  like  FlyTrex  from  Israel  have  created  a  fully  operational  drone  delivery  service  that  can  deliver  food  and  consumer goods to the people which is currently being used in  Iceland. Similarly other companies such as Amazon’s Prime  Air,  DelivAir,  etc.  have  provided  promising  possibilities  for  the future. 
2.  LIterAture revIew 
Ida Arlene Joiner in her article titled “Is there a drone in  your library’s future?” discusses about drones as a resource in  the library for the interested people to get frsthand knowledge  and experience on drone usage. She mentions various libraries  like  The  Mandel  Public  Library  and  Arapahoe  Colorado  Libraries  that  are  engaged  in  providing  demonstrations  and  imparting  education  on  new  technologies  including  drone  usage.[2] 
The American  Library Association  stresses  on  the  fact  that drones will create new opportunities for content creation  and research. Thus a piece of valuable technology in the world  of information and academics it states that we ought to see it  more often in the libraries as a part of its resources. 
 [3] 
Various  studies  and  opinions  connecting  libraries  and  drones are available that focuses on various aspects of drones  in libraries such as — Drone Lending Program i.e. drones as  a library resource available for circulation, as a resource for  use in maker-spaces, for library tour, etc. But any resource that  
349 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  38,  NO.  5, SEPT   2018 
focuses extensively on the usage of drones by libraries for the  purpose of delivering documents is unavailable. 
3.  PurPoSe of LIbrAry Drone- 
DeLIvery ServIce 
In  densely  populated  cities  libraries  are  generally  centrally located whether it is a National Library or a District  Library. Even though the central location was chosen keeping  in mind the factors of visibility and accessibility by the users  it has now become inconvenient for many to visit the library  because due to rapid expansion of cities the location of such  libraries  are  no  longer  in  a  central  position.  Expansion  has  also created a larger city population and hence more library  users from far-off distances within the city. There are various  causes for this inconvenience such as exhaustion from work  i.e.,  for  people  who  can  only  visit  the  library  after  working  hours,  people  who  cannot  make  time  to  visit  the  library  for  various reasons whether personal or offcial, traffc jams which  also  is  a  common  problem  in  big  cities  or  unavailability  of  transport  or  direct  routes  to  the  library  which  might  lead  a  library visitor to change cabs or buses multiple times to reach  the desired destination leading to a wastage of time, money,  etc.  Delivery  drone’s  can  easily  overcome  this  disadvantage  and open new possibilities for both libraries and its patrons by  delivering books at the location desired. The idea here is to use  delivery drones to deliver books and other documents either to  the user’s doorsteps or make use of drone GPS technology to  deliver it right into the user’s hands regardless of the location  where the person might be.  
4.  PAyLoAD cAPAcIty 
The  average  weight  unmanned  aerial  vehicles  roughly  classifed  as  commercial  delivery  drones  can  carry  is  approximately 4.8 lbs (2.2 kg)4  and it can be anything from  food  items  to  medicinal  supplies  to  mechanical  equipments,  etc. which requires tight packaging to ensure safe and secure  delivery. So it is safe to determine that a drone can at a single  time deliver 2 to 5 book depending upon the capacity of the  drone and weight of the package considering most libraries if  not all would issue an average of 5 book per user which is a  suffcient capacity to loan out books via drones while heavier  books might cut short the quantity. 
5.  PrIce eStImAtIon 
Start-ups have tried to come up with delivery drones for  sale. One such start-up is Matternet, which has come up with  delivery drones recently and plans to sell them commercially.  However, Matternet’s delivery drones, called Matternet ONE,  are extremely expensive - they cost $  5000 per unit. There  has  been  so  far  only  one  company  that  has  been  successful  with  its  delivery  drone  system  and  has  made  its  delivery  drones  available  to  businesses  and  the  general  public,  and  that company is a small Isreali start-up called Flytrex and the  delivery drone introduced by them is called the Flytrex Sky.  Flytrex Sky costs about $ 649 and it is the only company that  has  been  successful  till  date  with  the  drone  delivery  system  and has made it available to businesses and the general public5.  Many  Indian  start-ups  like Aarav  Unmanned  Systems, Aero  
350 
360,  Bubblefy,  Drona  Aviation,  etc.  have  started  creating  and experimenting with drones and once a successful product  launches from these companies the expenses for purchasing a  professional drone can be cut by a large margin.  
6.  Drone eLementS 
Before exploring the functionalities of using a drone in a  library it is important to understand the technicalities that are  associated with operating a drone. An over-simplistic view of  an unmanned aircraft is that it is an aircraft with its aircrew  removed and replaced by a computer system and a radio-link.  In reality it is more complex than that, and the aircraft must  be properly designed, from the beginning, without aircrew and  their accommodation, etc. The aircraft is merely part, albeit an  important part, of a total system6. A drone is not a complete  system in itself but is an element of a larger system known as  Unmanned Aircraft System. An Unmanned Aircraft System or  UAS comprises of three essential elements. 
• Unmanned Aerial Vehicle or UAV 
• Communication Data Link 
• Ground Control Station7 
6.1   u nmanned Aerial vehicle  
The  Unmanned  Aerial  Vehicle  (UAV)  or  commonly  known as drones is the aircraft responsible for delivering the  books either to his/her doorsteps or to their hands irrespective  of their location. Delivery Drones is the term commonly used  to describe the UAV’s used for delivering packages. 
6.2   c ommunication  Data  Link 
A Communication Data link is a term that describes the  communications  between  the  Ground  Control  Station  and  the  UAV.  The  task  of  data  links  is  to  provide  uplinks  i.e.,  communicating information from the GCS to the UAV such as  determining fight path, changing altitude, etc. and downlinks  i.e.,  communicating  information  back  from  the  UAV  to  the  Ground Control Station. These transmissions are usually in the  form of radio frequencies. 
6.3  Ground control  Station 
A Ground Control Station is responsible for man-machine  interface.  It  allows  humans  to  control  the  unmanned  aerial  vehicles in air. Responsible for sending and receiving uplinks  and downlinks to and from the UAV, the GCS is also usually  the place where the pre-fight activities are carried out including  fight  path  determination,  height,  speed,  etc.  GCSs  vary  in  physical size and can be as small as a handheld transmitter or  as large as a self-contained facility with multiple workstations.  Larger military UASs require a GCS with multiple personnel  to operating separate aircraft systems8. 
7.  ImPLementAtIon of LIbrAry Drone- 
DeLIvery ServIce 
The  frst  and  foremost  requirement  for  this  service  to  work  in  a  library  is  the  availability  of  a  library  application  software  which  can  either  be  an  extension  of  the  Integrated  Library Management Software used by the library or a different  software designed specially to connect and communicate with  

========2========

NATH: LIBRARy DRONE DELIVERy PROGRAMME: A  S TUDy 
the library’s ILMS interface. This is because most ILMS does  not have a smart-phone version of it and an added advantage  of it is that the mobile friendly software can make use of the  smart-phone’s  technologies  such  as  the  GPS.  The  user  will  use  the  library  app  to  borrow  books  from  the  library.  He/  She will browse through the library collection via the library  app, select the document required and set it to borrow. There  might  be  a  requirement  for  a  separate  circulation  section  to  process requests for drone delivery and return. It may or may  not be necessary and depends upon how busy the library is.  While this section processes the requests a separate set of staff  especially trained for handling drones shall collect the required  documents,  place  it  carefully  for  the  drones  to  make  safe  delivery and make ready for launch. The staff in the Ground  Control Station also known as drone pilots shall be responsible  for fying the drones and making safe delivery to the patron.  There are two possible ways of using drones to deliver books  to users — a) drone delivery to the user address, and b) drone  delivery based on real time location via GPS.  
7.1  Drone  Delivery  to  the user Address 
The simplest way of drone delivery of books can be done  is by delivering it to the patron’s doorsteps. This will require  a  drone  with  camera,  a  launch  pad  and  the  Ground  Control  Station in the library as mentioned above where the trained  staff shall remote control the drones. The camera will provide  the navigation system which is to show real time video feed  on the computers in the control station similar to a car driver  watching the road or a helicopter pilot except controlling from  a remote location i.e., the library. 
figure 1. A step by step visualization of circulating documents with  
the integration of drone tech. 
7.2  Drone  Delivery based  on real time  Location  
via  GPS.  
This  system  of  drone  delivery  is  similar  to  the  one  explained  above  except  it  will  make  the  delivery  right  into  the user’s hands. The user will be required to keep his GPS  turned on before the library initiates the delivery process. A  notifcation via the library app can be used to alert the user about  the initiation of the delivery process and that he/she is required  to  turn  on  the  GPS  and  keep  it  turned  on  until  the  delivery  process is completed. Once connection is made with the user’s  smart-phone GPS the delivery can be then initiated. While the  delivery is still in the air it can also periodically request the  user for secure location updates until it arrives because safe  delivery  might  be  a  little  problematic  or  even  impossible  in  locations such as a busy street or inside a public bus, etc. 
Drone GPS can also be used in a similar way to (Fig. 1) to  make delivery to the user’s doorsteps. Advanced GPS drones  makes  use  of  a  technology  known  as  GPS  Drone Waypoint  Navigation  System  that  allows  the  drone  to  fy  on  its  own  without any manual intervention. This is because GPS Drone  Waypoint Navigation System allows setting of destination or  pre-planned points that can be confgured into the drone remote  control navigation software. The drone can be instructed as to  where to fy, at what height and also the speed of the fight. The  drone even remembers the spot from where it was launched  and at the press of a button it can automatically fy back to  where it started from. 
8.    b eSt PrActIceS  of L IbrAry Drone- 
DeLIvery ProGrAm 
These are the essential points to consider for a successful  implementation of an UAS in the library. 
8.1  Analysing requirements 
Analyse the requirements of an UAS in the library. “Why  is it necessary?”, “What does it plan to achieve?” etc. are some  of the important points that needs to be evaluated. 
8.2  Documenting requirements 
It is important to document the requirements that arise af- ter evaluation of various issues such as regulatory compliance,  security  analysis,  type  of  drones,  data  storage  (operational  data), UAS maintenance, etc. 
8.3  Site  and Airspace Analysis 
Evaluation of the site in question is required to identify  issues such as whether there are wireless routers or other signal  emitting devices nearby that may interfere with signal transmis- sion. Airspace evaluation such as fying over busy traffc, pri- vate/government properties, nearby airports, etc. is required. 
8.4  Drone technology 
Even  though  the  drones  in  question  here  are  delivery  drones it is essential to further evaluate it based on its payload  capacity, battery power, number of propellers, etc. 
351 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  38,  NO.  5, SEPT   2018 
8.5  Data  Storage 
Where and how to store important data such as operations  data, fight log data, etc. is an essential aspect to consider. 
8.6  Project testing 
Testing the UAV under various environment/weather con- ditions, distance, traffc, population, etc. and every other aspect  of the facility. 
8.6   f inalisation 
Evaluation of all the conditions stated above and the re- sults yielded thereafter whether favourable/unfavourable shall  determine the project fnalisation. 
9.  Drone reGuLAtIonS In InDIA 
There  have  been  several  notifcations  by  the  Offce  of  the  Director  General  of  Civil Aviation  regarding  the  use  of  Unmanned Aircraft System for civilian purposes but they were  only draft policies and nothing has been fnalised as of yet. 
One of the frst notifcations issued by the Offce of the  Director General of Civil Aviation on civilian drone operation  was  in  October  7,  2014  which  required  drone  operators  to  acquire approval from Airport Authority of India, Ministry of  Home Affairs and other concerned agencies besides Director  General of Civil Aviation. On 21 April, 2016 Director General  of Civil Aviation released a set of draft guidelines on operating  drones for civilian purposes. In October, 2017 Director General  of Civil Aviation released again a new set of guidelines with  the aim of fnalising it by December 31, 20179. 
All the draft policies and guidelines that have been issued  so far are strict with the civilian operators mainly for safety and  security issues. These guidelines contain various requirements  such as proper training of drone operators, proper maintenance  of the Unmanned Aircraft System, fying limits, payload limits,  etc.  These  guidelines  also  contain  other  requirements  that  might limit the fexibility of operating drones from a library  such as — drones can only operate within Visual Line of Sight  which would limit the area it can cover, restrictions on fying  over densely populated areas without prior approval, etc10. 
10.  ADvAntAGeS 
• As  compared  to  the  traditional  walking-to-the-library  
there  will  be  a  faster  mode  of  returning  and  retrieving  
documents to and from the library. It will also serve as an  
emergency option if a user requires a document right at  
the moment or to return a document on due date to avoid  
paying fnes 
• It is a time saving option as a patron does not have to deal  
with unusual traffc to get to the library. 
• Home delivery or location delivery have the possibility  
of  boosting  circulation as  the  user  do  not  have  to  wor- 
ry about stock piling in his/her room and borrow/return  
books as per their requirement without having to physi- 
cally be there 
• Through drone delivery the library can also act as a mo- 
bile library by bringing books to people living in far off  
distances, residents of retirement homes, etc. It will be a  
form of fuel effcient, effortless, time saving as well as  
352 
• 
• 
environment friendly mobile library service 
An  advantage  in  itself,  drone  delivery  may  also  be  branded as a premium subscription service. A monthly or  a yearly subscription option should be made available to  users with subsequent discount in an annual subscription  plan compared to a monthly. This will facilitate revenue  generation that can be utilised for periodical maintenance,  upgradation, etc. of the Unmanned Aircraft System With  the  increasing  popularity  of  e-documents  and  diminishing  interest  of  today’s  youth  in  physical  books  drone delivery will be a breath of fresh air by bringing  back the popularity of physical books. If real books are  delivered with just a touch on the smart-phone like e-books  then it can defnitely give the electronic documents a run  for its money. 
11.  LImItAtIonS 
• Weather issues such as rain or strong wind may delay de- 
livery 
• Possibility of malfunctioning mid-air over a busy street  
cannot be ruled out 
• Package security issues due to human intervention such as  
theft by doing harm to the drones 
• Legal issues such as trespassing or night time delivery,  
etc. 
12. PreSent ScenArIo of Drone  
DeLIvery 
Zookal, an Australian based platform for purchasing and  renting textbooks have partnered with Flirtey, a transportation/ delivery  company  in  2013  to  deliver  books  by  drones.  The  company  conducted  a  world-frst  drone  delivery  test  back  in  October  2013  and  to  date  has  conducted  over  a  hundred  successful  test  deliveries  of  textbooks11. Amazon  Prime Air  is currently under development for making drone delivery all  over the world. It has been dealing with the regulatory bodies of  various countries to grant permission for making drone delivery  a reality. The Amazon Prime Air webpage says, “We will deploy  when and where we have the regulatory support needed to safely  realise our vision. We’re excited about this technology and one  day using it to deliver packages to customers around the world  in 30 minutes or less.” On February 9, 2018 Drone Delivery  Canada received the Compliant UAV Operator Special Flight  Operations  Certifcate  (SFOC)  that  allowed  the  company  to  operate drones Beyond Visual Line of Sight (BVLOS)12. This  is a milestone achievement as regulatory bodies currently have  not allowed BVLOS operation of drones. On March 28, 2018  the East China Regional Administration of the Civil Aviation  Administration  of  China  (CAAC)  granted  operating  (pilot)  license to a subsidiary of China’s leading courier company, SF  Express,  in  Jiangxi  province13.  Companies  such  as  Apple,  FedEx, Google’s Project Wing, etc. are some of the important  players testing drone delivery and negotiating drone laws with  regulatory  bodies  to  implement  more  fexibility.  Currently  there  have  been  no  implementation  of  drone  technology  for  document delivery in libraries and the major reason for this  is  because  regulatory  bodies  have  not  provided  the  required  fexibility  till  date.  However  the  strictness  of  the  laws  has  

========4========

NATH: LIBRARy DRONE DELIVERy PROGRAMME: A  S TUDy 
toned down to considerable extent to allow e-commerce giants  to conduct test deliveries and results have been fruitful. These  tests have allowed the regulatory bodies to reform the laws in  favour of implementing the technology and libraries should be  ready to adopt it as such a reality is not very far. 
13.   c oncLuSIonS 
Assessment  has  been  made  on  the  drone  structure  and  the elements of the Unmanned Aircraft System facility and its  integration with the library. It yields possible results but calls  for a big investment. However it is only a one-time investment  and with subscription options there is also the possibility of  revenue generation which can be utilised for self-sustenance  of the facility.  
Drone-delivery service directly fulfls four out of the fve  laws of library science as given by Dr. S. R. Ranganathan — (a)  books are for use; (b) every reader his/her book; (c) every book  it’s reader and (d) save the time of the reader. Drone-delivery  for civilian purposes is an emerging technology and is still in  its nascent stage. There are various advantages in using drone  deliveries as well as limitations. But these limitations should  be  viewed  as  mere  challenges  to  overcome.  Drone-delivery  in libraries is not a widespread concept but we have studied  what it can achieve owing to its advantages as well as frequent  technological advancement. The regulatory bodies and policy  makers  have  already  reviewed  and  revised  the  guidelines  multiple  times  which  have  just  been  favourable  for  civilian  purposes and to hope for a fnal implementation that favours  more fexibility in drone operations is the way to go. 
referenceS 
1.  Francis,  Michael  S.  UAS  uses,  capabilities,  grand  
challenges.  Encyclopedia  of  aerospace  engineering:  
Unmanned aircraft systems, edited by Ella Atkins, Anibal  
Ollero & Antonios Tsourdos, Wiley, West Sussex, 2016,  
3-13. 
2.  Joiner,  Ida  Arlene.  Is  there  a  Drone  in  your  library’s  
future? Public Library Quarterly, 2018, 37(1), 103-110.  
doi: 10.1080/01616846.2017.1379349 
3.  American Library Association. http://www.ala.org/tools/ 
future/trends/drones (accessed on July 21, 2018). 4.  Ricardo Aitken. How much weight can delivery drones  
carry?  2015.  http://unmannedcargo.org/how-much- 
weight-can-delivery-drones-carry/ (accessed on February  
3, 2018). 
5.  Emanuel.  Delivery  drones  for  sale.  2015.  https:// 
allbestdrones.com/delivery-drones-for-sale  (accessed  on  
February 4, 2018). 
6.  Austin, Reg. Unmanned aircraft systems: UAVs, design,  
development and deployment. Wiley, West Sussex, United  
Kingdom, 2010. 
7.  Gupta,  Suraj  G.;  Ghonge,  Mangesh  M.  &  Jawandhiya,  
P.M.  Review  of  unmanned  aircraft  system  (UAS). Int.  
J. Adv. Res. Comput. Eng.Technol., 2013, 2(4), 1646-58.  
http://ijarcet.org/wp-content/uploads/IJARCET-VOL- 
2-ISSUE-4-1646-1658.pdf  (accessed  on  February  12,  
2018). 
8.  Brungardt, Joshua. Unmanned aircraft system elements.  
Introduction  to  unmanned  aircraft  systems,  edited  by  
Richard K.  Barnhart,  Stephen  B.  Hottman, Douglas  M.  
Marshall, & Eric Shappee, CRC Press, Florida, 2012, 17- 
28. 
9.  Rajagopalan,  Pillai,  Rajeswari  &  Krishna,  Rahul.  ORF  
occasional  paper:  Drones:  guidelines,  regulations  and  
policy gaps in India. Observer Research Foundation, 2018.  
https://www.orfonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/ 
ORF_OccasionalPaper_145_Drones.pdf  (accessed  on  
March 21, 2018). 
10.  Offce  of  the  Director  General  of  Civil  Aviation.  
Requirements  for  Operation  of  civil  remotely  piloted  
aircraft system (RPAS). DGAC, New Delhi, 2017. http:// 
www.dgca.nic.in/misc/draft%20cars/CAR%20-%20 
UAS%20(Draft_Nov2017).pdf  (accessed  on  March  23,  
2018). 
11.  Lim,  Jason.  Drone  startup  firtey  partners  with  The  
University  of  Nevada,  Reno  to  push  UAV  delivery  
forward.  2014.  https://www.forbes.com/sites/ 
jlim/2014/09/08/drone-startup-flirtey-partners-with- 
the-university-of-nevada-reno-to-push-uav-delivery- 
forward/#6917a64669d8 (accessed on May 10, 2018) 12.  Drone delivery Canada. Drone Delivery Canada achieves  
compliant operator status with Transport Canada. 2018.  
http://www.dronedeliverycanada.com/news/press- 
releases/drone-delivery-canada-achieves-compliant- 
operator-status-with-transport-canada/ (accessed on May  
10, 2018) 
13.  Bhunia,  Priyankar.  First  license  issued  for  commercial  
drone deliveries in China. 2018. https://www.opengovasia. 
com/articles/frst-license-issued-for-commercial-drone- 
deliveries-in-china (accessed on May 10, 2018) 
contrIbutor 
mr francis nath  is working as  Library Information Assistant  (since 2017) at Rain Forest Research Institute, Jorhat, Assam.  He  has  completed  his  Masters  of  Library  &  Information  Science  from  Gauhati  University.  He  did  his  apprenticeship  from  Lakshminath  Bezbaroa  Central  Library  -  IIT  Guwahati  (2016 – 2017). His area of interest are innovative technologies  and  services  and  ICT  in  libraries. 
353 

========5========

