DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 38, No. 6, November 2018, pp. 429-435, DOI : 10.14429/djlit.38.6.13281 
 2018, DESIDOC 
Uses and Gratifcations of the Internet and Library Information Resources:  
An Integrated Model Proposal 
Oghenere Gabriel Salubi*  and Ndakasharwa Muchaonyerwa 
University of Fort Hare, Alice, 5700, South Africa  
*E-mail: Osalubi@ufh.ac.za 
ABSTRACT 
This study sought to argue the assumptions of the uses and gratifcations theory (UGT) in information media  selection and use among iGenerations undergraduate students. One of the propositions of UGT is that audiences  consciously interact with media with the determination to satisfy a number of information needs. Taking into perspective  of the library and the Internet as information media, the limitations of UGT in illustrating the gratifcations sought  and gratifcations obtained in the use of the Internet as well as the library as information media is highlighted.  Empirical data were collected from undergraduate students who were mainly iGenerations at two universities in  South Africa. Two media were evaluated: The Internet and the library. Although the Internet was the preferred media  by the majority of the respondents, the purpose why undergraduate students predominantly use the Internet is not  in sync with their primary information needs as students. Also, the Internet was not revealed to be an alternative  media to the library although the library sometimes failed in meeting the information needs of users. The study  concluded that the assumption that users seek out other media when gratifcations obtained from media use does  not equate gratifcations sought, is not always correct. An integrated model for information media use supplemented  by the expectation confrmation theory was therefore conceptualised to justify the preference in information media  
by iGeneration undergraduate students. 
Keywords:Undergraduate students; iGenerations; Library information resources; Internet use; Uses and gratifcation  
theory 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The  central  theme  of  this  study  was  to  challenge  the  assumptions  of  the  uses  and  gratifcations  theory  (UGT)  among  iGenerations  undergraduate  students  in  information  media selection and use. The theory of uses and gratifcations  (UGT),  is  primarily  associated  with  Katz1,  et  al.  The  trio  observed that mass media use served functions either through  a  particular  content  or  by  the  media  in  question:  “to  match  one’s  wits  against  others,  to  get  information  and  advice  for  daily living, to provide a framework for one’s day, to prepare  oneself culturally for the demands of upward mobility, or to  be reassured about the dignity and usefulness of one’s role”1.  UGTs main supposition is that audiences consciously interact  with  media  with  the  determination  to  satisfy  a  number  of  information needs1,2. In other words, media is being used to  satisfy needs. 
According to Katz1, et al. UGT research bothers on seven  main issues with media use: (1) the societal and mental origins  of (2) desires, that eventually produce (3) expectancies from  (4) the media or other medium, which results in (5) distinctive  ways  of  media  exposure  culminating  into  (6)  satisfaction  of  needs as well as (7) other consequences, perchance commonly  
Received : 9 July 2018, Revised : 23 October 2018  
Accepted : 25 October 2018, Online published : 2 November 2018 
unpremeditated ones. The assumption is that media users have  instinctive  desires  that  can  be  satisfed  by  media  otherwise  referred  to  as  gratifcations.  Conceptually,  gratifcations  are  ‘‘need satisfaction’’, which are obtained when an individual’s  needs  are  met  by  some  types  of  media  sources  that  equates  their expectations1. 
Several  theories  including  uses  and  gratifcations  theory and hypodermic needle model have been put forth in  explaining  the  use  of  different  information  media.  Reports  suggests that it appears that many iGenerations children and  teens  spend  nearly  all  their  waking  hours  using  media  and  technology3.  iGenerations  also  known  as  digital  natives  are  those born in the 1990s and beyond. The ‘i’ represents both  the  types  of  digital  technologies  and  the  information  access  they  provide.  iGenerations  are  defned  by  their  technology  and  media  use  and  their  love  of  electronic  communication4.  Most  of  these  media  usages  theories  have  not  been  able  to  adequately accommodate within their various constructs, media  usage among digital natives. This paper therefore, intends on  proposing an empirically suitable model that can adequately  explain information media use by digital natives. 
2.  ReSeARCh OBjeCTIveS 
The primary aim of this paper was to argue the assumptions  of the UGT in information media selection and utilisation, in  
429 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  38,  NO.  6, NOV   2018 
particular,  the  use  of  library  information  resources  among  iGenerations  undergraduate  students. The  specifc  objectives  of the study are as follows: 
• Identify iGeneration undergraduate students’ Internet and  
library information resources use pattern 
• Ascertain  the  level  of  satisfaction  with  library  services  
provision 
• Propose a model for library information resources use by  
iGenerations based on uses and gratifcations theory 
3.  ReSeARCh QUeSTIONS 
To achieve the main aim of the study, the following research  questions were raised based on the research objectives: • What are the Internet and library information resources  
use pattern of iGeneration students? 
• How satisfed are users with library services provision? • In  what  way  could  uses  and  gratifcations  theory  be  
improved upon to explain library information resources  
use? 
4.  RevIeW OF TheOReTICAL BASIS 
A widespread impression during the early mid-twentieth  century was the “effects model” which focused on what the  media  did  to  the  audience. As  explained  by  Shoemaker  and  Reese5, it was like an early moral panic which submitted that  audiences  are  impassive  and  at  the  control  of  whatever  the  media conveys to them. In this model, the media has the power.  UGT  assumes  the  viewpoint  that  audiences  are  conscious  partakers in the use and exchange of media and that they utilise  the media for needs satisfaction. A remarkable aspect of UGT  is  the  accentuation  media  users  as  seemingly  coherent  and  active  self-aware  entity6. Also,  the  theory  suggests  a  deeper  examination  of  the  very  nature  of  humans  by  uncovering  the  several  aspects  of  needs  to  “be  connected”  socially  and  psychologically  via  communication1.  The  basic  assumption  of  UGT  therefore,  is  that  information  seekers  undertake  a  conscious role in understanding and assimilating the media into  their individual lives. A student may choose to visit the library  to do some research/ get an assignment done, or for escapism,  or merely use the discussion room with friends. An individual  may write a blog to fulfl needs for assertiveness. Contingent on  supposed needs, social and psychological features, and media  qualities, individuals use media related to gratifcations7. 
According to Shao8, people react to media on the basis of  
Table 1. UGT constructs/needs gratifed by media 
Need type 
Description 
Cognitive 
Acquisition of knowledge and information 
Affective 
Emotive, pleasurable or aesthetic experience 
Personal interaction 
Social interaction 
Enhancement of trustworthiness, assurance, and position Enhancement of connectedness with friends, classmates,  
family, and lecturers 
Tension release 
Escape and diversion 
Sources: Adapted from Katz1, et al. 
430 
how they intend to contribute, generate, or consume content.  The proliferation of user-generated online media content has  become  very  rich  (but  not  necessarily  creative  primarily  as  a  result  of  the  assumptions  of  UGT  and  its  appeal  to  users.  Information  seeking,  in  general,  is  a  complex  activity,  but  applying  this  theory  when  studying  information  seeking  processes and behaviour helps to gain an understanding as to  why certain decisions are made in the use of certain information  sources and resources. Five different constructs were identifed  from the theory as refected in Table 1. 
In UGT theory, the word gratifcation is defned as a “feeling  of satisfaction”. The expectation confrmation theory  (ECT)  was, therefore, used to evaluate the resources/services that the  library  provides  to  library  users  and  to  measure  satisfaction  levels.  ECT  better  provided  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  level of satisfaction that users obtain from the consumption of  library information resources as it measures expectations from  a media resource, the satisfaction level and a reuse intention. 
ECT initiated in the Marketing feld and was originally  proposed  by  Oliver10.  It  has  widespread  usage  in  customer  behaviour  studies  mainly  to  understand  buyer  contentment,  post-consumption  behaviour  and  service  marketing  as  a  whole10-12. ECT consists of fve distinct paradigms: expectation,  performance,  confrmation,  satisfaction  and  repurchase  intention. It proposes that consumers’ expectations in addition  to  perceived  performance  will  result  in  a  post-consumption  satisfaction10. ECT stresses its expounding infuence of post- acceptance  behaviour  and  proposes  that  before  consumption  and after interaction behaviours mutually infuence validation,  which in turn affects gratifcation and continuation intents10.  This  judgement  is  usually  a  result  of  negative  or  positive  confrmation of expectation. When a product performs beyond  the expectations of the consumer (positive confrmation), after- purchase  gratifcation  occurs.  Similarly,  disappointment  will  likely occur when a product/service falls short of consumers’  anticipations (negative confrmation10,13. 
In  this  paper,  respondents’  expectation  denotes  library  users’  anticipation  about  library  information  services.  These  preconceived perceptions are usually formed before interaction  with  library  resources.  According  to  ECT,  perceptions  of  performance are infuenced directly by before-use expectations,  and in turn, infuence validation or otherwise of beliefs as well  as  post-adoption  satisfaction  with  library  resources.  These  assessments  and/or  judgments  are  made  in  contrast  to  the  
Media example 
Internet (blogs, websites, library, television news)  
Movies, Internet (online TVs, video streaming/sharing   websites)  
Video (speaking with conviction) 
Internet (email, instant messaging, facebook) 
Television, movies, Internet, library (fction and  escapist section) 

========2========

SALUbI  & M UCHAOnyErWA: USES And GrATIFICATIOnS OF THE  In TErnET And LIbrAry InFOrMATIOn rESOUrCES 
library user’s earlier expectations.  
Although media users,  as assumed by UGT ,  are responsible  for media choices, the quality of the services rendered can be  measured and determined with the ECT based on confrmation  of  their  expectation  from  the  media.  Hence,  when  a  library  offers quality services and information materials that satisfy  the  information  needs  and  confrm  the  expectation  of  users,  there is the possibility of a reuse intention. 
5.  RATIONALe  FOR T he  STUDY 
The focus of this paper was not on  how the media (library  and the Internet) affects undergraduate students but it sought  to understand and argue what leads undergraduate students to  use a particular information source/resource, in this case, either  the  Internet  or  the  library. The  results  of  UGT  studies  have  subsequently not been applied to library information resources  use. Hence, there is a need to develop and test UGT constructs  not only to the Internet but also to the distinctive information  resources and service provision of libraries in understanding  users’ motivations. 
Since individual users manage the communicative method  of the medium in question because of their consciousness to  initiate access, the user-centered view of UGT offers a basis  for understanding the exact motives that make students have  a  preference  for  one  medium  of  accessing  information  over  another. This approach concentrates on why a particular media  is utilised rather than on media content. because many Internet  and  library  services  are  interactive  in  nature  and  necessitate  high  user  involvement,  the  argument  of  utilising  UGT  to  understand  the  Internet  and  especially  library  information  resources use seems legitimate. 
6.  MeThODOLOGY 
The  survey  research  design  was  adopted  for  the  study  with  both  qualitative  and  quantitative  data  collected  using  focus group discussion sessions and questionnaires. Students  registered for a 3-yr or 4-yr bachelor’s degree/ diploma from  two selected universities: nelson Mandela University (nMU)  and Fort Hare University (UFH) in the Eastern Cape Province  made up the study population. The study did not include fresh  students as they had only spent a few weeks on campus when  collection  of  data  was  done.  With  a  population  of  11,416  undergraduate  registered  students  at  both  universities,  the  stratifed sampling technique was adopted for this study and  fve  strata  were  constituted  along  faculties  which  consisted  of Faculties of: Law, Science, Social Science & Humanities/ Arts  (SSH/Arts),  Economic/Management  Science  (E/MS),  and Education. Only degree programmes that run for at least 3  years or 4 years, and were common to both universities were  considered during stratifcation. 
Using the raosoft® sample size calculator, the specifc  sample size was calculated with a 5 per cent margin of error,  a  95  per  cent  level  of  signifcance,  a  50  per  cent  response  distribution and a total population of 11,416. The result yielded  372  as  the  least  representative  operational  sample  size  for  the  population.  450  questionnaires  were  distributed  and  412  retrieved. Only 390 of the retrieved questionnaires were usable,  which amounted to a response rate of 86.7 per cent. Qualitative  
data  were  collected  using  focus  group  discussion  (FGd)  sessions  with  undergraduate  students.  A  total  of  six  FGDs  consisting  of  fve  to  eight  participants  were  conducted.  The  overall reliability and internal consistency of the questionnaire  were determined for each variable using Cronbach Alpha and  the  coeffcient alpha for the entire instrument was 0.90. 
In keeping up with ethical research standards for human  subjects, the research proposal and research instruments were  submitted  to  the  research  and  ethics  committees  of  UFH  and nMU.  Ethical  clearance  certifcates  were  issued  to  the  researchers from both universities. 
7.  LIMITATIONS OF The STUDY 
The study’s sample size consisting of 390 respondents at  two universities in South Africa is only a small proportion of  the whole population of iGeneration undergraduate students in  the country given that 20 per cent of South Africa’s population  falls within this category. Research studies with comprising of  larger sample sizes is therefore suggested to test this model in  order to make a sweeping generalisation of the fndings of the  study. 
8.  FINDINGS AND DISCUSSIONS 
Results  from  the  study  revealed  that  majority  of  the  respondents  (82.3  %)  were  still  teenagers.  The  library  use  pattern of respondents was measured and it was revealed 105  (27.3 %) visit the library every other day, with 170 (44.3 %)  being occasional library users. Only 50 (13 %) use the library  daily  while  59  (15.7  %)  almost  never  or  have  never  visited  the library. The total spent in the library by respondents was  revealed minimal. 
The amount of time spent in the library was also polled  and it was discovered that most of the respondents 191 (49.9  %) use the library for between 1 hrs - 3 hrs, 86 (22.5 %) spend  less than 1 hr, 86 (22.5 %) spend between 4 hrs - 6 hrs, while 20  (5.2 %) spend between 7 hrs - 10 hrs or more in the library. A  similar study reported 80 per cent of US college students make  use of the library for 3 hrs or less a week14. 
The Internet use pattern of respondents showed that 282  (72.3 %) use the Internet daily, 96 (24.6 %) use it every other  day while 12 (3.1 %) occasionally make use of the Internet.  The utilisation of the Internet has become very essential for  students  as  it  has  become  a  daily  necessity  for  academic  work15. Daily Internet use by students has also been reported in  previous studies16-18. Internet usage has also been reported to be  most ubiquitous amongst younger and more educated people19.  This result is in contrast with fndings from Adekunmisi20, et  al. where results revealed that most respondents (70 %) used  the Internet weekly. The researchers attributed this factor to the  high cost of accessing the Internet in Nigeria as the majority of  the Internet centres were privately owned by individuals whose  aim  was  purely  for  proft20.  A  report  by  the  Pew  Research  Center21  stated that Internet access has been rising in emerging  and developing nations and those in developed countries who  have the Internet access are voracious users. 
Students were asked to indicate how much time they spent  accessing the Internet daily and it was revealed that 56 (14.6 %)  of the respondents spend less than 1 hr accessing the Internet,  
431 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  38,  NO.  6, NOV   2018 
98 (25.5 %) spend between 1 hrs - 3 hrs while majority of the  respondents 132 (34.4 %) spend 10 hrs or more accessing the  Internet every day. Qualitative results from the focus group  sessions also indicated that respondents spend an average  of 4 hrs - 6 hrs daily Internet using the Internet. A student  reported, “just think of how much you spend on your phone,  you just keep going and going, 6 hrs  minimum”.  This result  amplifes the research fndings from a study at baylor University  reported by Wood22  where Internet use among female college  students was found to be an average of 10 hrs a day on their cell  phones, while male students spent nearly 8 hrs. 
The activities of respondents when they engage in when  using the Internet were also polled. Respondents were asked to  indicate their use of the Internet for activities such as academic,  communication,  entertainment,  social  networking,  among  others.  In  all  categories  listed  in  this  study,  Internet  use  for  communication purposes ranked frst (x 
̅ 
 3.4), followed by social  networking  (x 
̅ 
  3.17),  Entertainment  (x 
̅ 
  3.02)  with  academic  purposes in the fourth place (x 
̅ 
 2.95). A study of Economics  students’ uses of the Internet at Istanbul University revealed that  the most of the participants (about 76 %) make use of electronic  resources for purposes including social networking, download  of movies and music, entertainment as well as pastime such as  shopping and playing games. The use of electronic resources for  homework and getting knowledge for academic purposes via  the Internet (24 %) of the participants ranked below shopping  online, playing games and Internet surfng23. The researchers  concluded that information technologies and the Internet was  an important part of university students’ daily life, but most  of the students do not utilse the Internet for academic-related  readings and research needs23. 
The academic library provides several information services  to fulfl its role in support of teaching, learning and research  purposes. Results from the study indicates that when respondents  visit the library, the most utilised information resources/services  were: Wi-Fi 324 (83.5 %), computer laboratories 244 (63 %),  study personal books 271 (70.4 %) as well as study with library  books 218 (57.4 %). Library resources/services that are rarely/ never  used  by  respondents  include:  information  literacy  and  library  training  324  (83.5  %)  seeking  help  from  information  services librarians 280 (72.2 %) usage of ebooks 267 (69.7 %)  and library databases 216 (56.3 %). 
Most  of  the  respondents  (62  %)  expressed  satisfaction  with library services/ information resources. It can be inferred  from the above result that iGeneration undergraduate students  engage  less  with  electronic  resources  (journals,  books  and  library  databases  compared  to  print  resources.  Research  reports supporting this result from Muniandy24  revealed that  the  approach  for  searching  for  information  particularly  on  the  utilisation  of  academic  databases  such  as  Proquest  and  electronic learning resources are still low. 
9.  ReSeARCh hYPOTheSIS 
There  is  no  signifcant  relationship  between  library  services  dissatisfaction  and  higher  Internet  use  time  among  undergraduate students. 
The Internet as an alternative media for meeting academic  information  needs  by  undergraduate  students  could  receive  
432 
an  increased  amount  of  usage  when  libraries  are  unable  to  satisfactorily  provide  users  with  the  needed  information  materials. The results of this hypothesis are shown in Tables  2 and 3. 
Table 2. Library services dissatisfaction and internet use time 
ANOvAb 
Model 
Sum of  Squares 
df 
Mean  Square 
F 
Sig. 
Regression 
5.445 
1 
5.445 
4.139 
.043a 
Residual 
506.462 
385 
1.315 
Total 
511.907 
386 
Table 3. Regression coeffcient 
Coeffcientsa 
Model 
Unstandardised  coeffcients 
Standardised  coeffcients 
t 
Sig. 
B 
Std.  error 
Beta 
(Constant  
3.047 
.203 
14.998 
.000 
Library  services  dissatisfaction 
-.244 
.120 
-.103 
-2.034 
.043 
The analysis of variance (AnOVA test in Table 2 reveals  that F  =  4.139,  df  =  386  and  p  =  0.043.  Since p-value  <  0.05,  this result reveals that library users’ dissatisfaction is of  signifcance with the amount of time undergraduate students  spend using the internet. 
A  four-point  measurement  was  used  to  measure  the  satisfaction  level  of  respondents. As  Table  3  above  reveals,  the  regression  coeffcient  for  library  information  resources  use dissatisfaction is -0.244, which means that for every unit  increase in dissatisfaction level with library services, there is a  0.244 decrease in the amount of time respondents spend in using  the Internet. It is concluded from the above that the library’s  inability to provide satisfactory services is not responsible for  an  increased  amount  of  Internet  use  time  by  undergraduate  students. This could be attributed to the fact that academic use  of the Internet does not rank frst in undergraduate students’  Internet  use  pattern.  Furthermore,  undergraduate  students’  decreased use of the library as a media when compared to the  Internet is not attributive to gratifcations not obtained from the  library as assumed by UGT that audiences consciously interact  with media in a goal-oriented manner which avails them the  means  of  satisfying  a  wide  variability  of  needs1.  Although  gratifcations  sought  (dissatisfaction  with  library  services)  were not obtained, this did not directly increase the amount of  time undergraduate students use the Internet (B = -0.244, t =  -2.034, p<0.05;  as shown in Table 3).  
9.1  Implication   of  the  Results 
Considering the fndings summarised above, it becomes  

========4========

SALUbI  & M UCHAOnyErWA: USES And GrATIFICATIOnS OF THE  In TErnET And LIbrAry InFOrMATIOn rESOUrCES 
Source:  Derived  from  the  theoretical  and  conceptual  framework  coupled  with  empirical  findings  of  the  study 
Figure 1. Conceptual framework based on empirical fndings. 
necessary to appraise the results in the light of UGT. The use of  the Internet as an information media is very prevalent among  undergraduate  students;  however,  its  use  is  predominantly  not for academic purposes. The use of the Internet is not an  alternative to library information resources. 
The  choice  of  media  by  undergraduate  students  which  the UGT assume serve functions by some specifc content or  by the medium in question, has revealed that such needs may  not  be  the  media  users’  objectives  for  seeking  the  media  in  question. Put differently, although the Internet is a preferred  media by the majority of the respondents, the purpose that it  serves in the life of iGeneration undergraduate students is not  in sync with their primary objective of studying on campus.  This means that academic-related needs are not the reason for  media preference in satisfying information needs arising from  academics. Another basic assumption of the UGT is that the  audience  is  active  and  goal  oriented  in  the  usage  of  media;  people have various uses (needs) they seek to satisfy through  media. In this study, it is diffcult to conclude that the motivation  of undergraduate students’ use of the Internet over the library is  goal-oriented,  given that the primary use of the Internet is not  directed towards school work or academic-related activities. 
Furthermore,  although  as  many  as  38  per  cent  of  the  respondents  were  not  satisfed  with  library  services  provision, this did not signifcantly raise the total amount of  time Internet use time among undergraduate students. Hence,  students did not seek the Internet as alternative media for the  purpose of fulflling their academic information need, which  negates UGT’s assumption that audience members take the  initiative  to  link  need  gratifcation  to  a  specifc  media  and  that media compete with other sources for need satisfaction.  Since  users’  expectations  were  not  satisfactorily  met, which  signifcantly  led  to  a  non-reuse  intention  of  library  information resources among respondents, this should have  automatically  led  students  to  seek  their  information  needs  from other media sources (in this case Internet) as suggested  by UGT. The theory’s assumption that users seek out media  in a goal-oriented manner can be asserted in this case to be a  
non-academic oriented manner of seeking out media. 
The gratifcations that users sought from the Internet are  basically non-academic related; as such, a user’s inability to  obtain  gratifcations  sought  from  one  media  (library  has  not  made them seek out new forms of media. However, the urge  to  meet  the  affective,  personal  and  social  interaction  need  type has led users to seek out other media for the purpose of  meeting other information needs other than the cognitive need  type which the library is basically set up to provide. Individuals  form  habits  over  time,  and  these  habits  also  come  to  play  in  the  use  of  media  for  educational  purposes,  information  seeking,  entertainment  and  recreation.  Larose25 stated  that  habits might be stimulated through internal and external cues  which  were  present  in  the  context  in  which  the  habit  was  originally moulded. Media such as the Internet and libraries  are  well-known  sources  of  information  resources,  but  while  the  Internet  requires  a  careful  examination  of  its  resources,  the library provides access to accurate and relevant scholarly  as well as other information resources26. The initial selection  of media such as the library or the Internet as a medium of  satisfying information needs is guided by active choice based  on gratifcations sought27. The control of this choice of chosen  media  is  transmitted  to  non-conscious  processes  with  the  repetitive utilisation of identical media28. Thus Larose25  noted  that  uses  and  gratifcations  initially  make  habits  to  form  as  a  result  of  a  recurrence  of  behaviours  that  are  frstly  under  mindful control. 
10. CONCLUSIONS 
The formation of the habit that leads to the Internet being  preferred more than the library is as a result of perceived ease  of use of the Internet when sourcing for information materials.  According to a respondent, “you have to pace through the shelf  and it takes time” signifying it is diffcult and time-consuming  locating  information  materials  in  the  library.  However,  this  is  not  generally  correct  as  electronic  resources  and  library  databases  usually  have  searchable  contents  with  the  use  of  vocabulary control tools which make for relevant search result  
433 

========5========

DJLIT,  VOL.  38,  NO.  6, NOV   2018 
as  well  as  the  retrieval  of  precise  and  accurate  information  materials. 
The  cognitive  variable,  which  explains  the  acquisition  of information, knowledge and comprehension seem to be on  the  negative  side  of  media  utilisation  for  academic  purpose  considering the above result. Going by the fndings discussed  above, the Internet which is undergraduate students’ preferred  media  does  not  have  a  foremost  place  when  acquiring  information and knowledge for academic-related purposes. The  primary aim of making Internet access available and free on  campus is,  therefore ,  endangered because although the Internet  receives  a  high  amount  of  usage  time  among  undergraduate  students,  the  activities  carried  out  on  the  Internet  are  not  tailored towards academic productivity. 
According to the result, the library users’ dissatisfaction  did not in any way increase the amount of time undergraduate  students  spend  using  the  Internet.  Unarguably,   therefore,  although the non-confrmation of users’ expectation leads to a  reduction in library information resources reuse intentions, this  does not result in users resorting to the Internet for academic  purposes,  which should have signifcantly led to an increase in  the amount of time users spend using the Internet. 
ReFeReNCeS 
1.  Katz,  E.;  blumler,  J.  &  Gurevitch,  M.  Uses  and  
gratifcations  research.  Am.  Assoc.  Public  Opin.  Res.,  
1973, 37(4), 509-523. 
2.  Palmgreen,  P.;  Wenner,  L.  &  rosengren,  K.  Uses  and  
gratifcations  research:  The  past  ten  years.  In   Media  
Gratifcations research: Current Perspectives, edited by  
rosengren  K,  Wenner  L,  P.  Palmgreen,  beverly  Hills,  
CA: Sage, 1985, 11-37. 
3.  Lenhart, A.; Ling, r.; Campbell, S. & Purcell, K. Teens  
Mobile Phones., 2010. 
4.  Rosen,  L.D.  Teaching  the  iGeneration.  Education   
Leadership, 2011, 68(5), 10-15.  
5.  Shoemaker, P.J. & Reese, S.D. Mediating Message: Theor.  
Infuences Mass Media Content. 1996.   
6.    b lumler, J.G.; Katz, E. The uses of mass communications:  
Current  perspectives  on  gratifcations  research.  Sage  
Annu. Rev. Commun. Res., 1974, 3. 
7.  Papacharissi,  Z.  Uses  and  gratifcations.  In   An  Integr.  
Approach Commun. Theory Res., edited by Stacks, D.W.,  
Salwen, M.b., Ed. 2nd. new york: routledge, 2009, 137- 
152. 
8.  Shao,  G.  Understanding  the  appeal  of  user-generated  
media: A uses and gratifcation perspective. Internet Res.,  
2009, 19(1), 7-25.  
doi: 10.1108/10662240910927795 
9.  Katz, E.; Haas, H. & Gurevitch, M. On the use of the mass  
media for important things. Am. Sociol. Rev., 1973, 38(2),  
164-181. 
10.  Oliver, R.L. A cognitive model for the antecedents and  
consequences  of  satisfaction.  J.  Mark  Res.,  1980,  17,  
460–469. 
11.  Oliver,  R.L.  Cognitive,  affective,  and  attribute  bases  of  
the satisfaction response. J. Consum. Res., 1993, 20, 418– 
430. 
434 
12.    d abolkar,  P.A.;  Shepard,  C.d.  &  Thorpe  d.I.  A  
comprehensive  framework  for  service  quality:  An  
investigation  of  critical  conceptual  and  measurement  
issues through a longitudinal study. J. Retail., 2000, 76(2),  
139–173. 
13.    b harati, P. & Chaudhury, A. An empirical investigation  
of  decision-making  satisfaction  in  web-based  decision  
support  systems. Dec.  Support  Syst.,  2004, 37(2),  187– 
197. 
14.  Jones,  S.  The  internet  goes  to  college.  Washington,  
dC;  2002.  http://www.arl.org/arldocs/resources/pubs/ 
mmproceedings/146/jones_fles/jones.ppt.  Accessed  
February 8, 2017. 
15.    b idin, Z.; Shamsudin, F.M.; Asraf, M.H.M.F. & Sharif, Z.  
Factors infuencing students’ intention to use internet for  
academic purposes. SSRN Electron. J., 2011, 28.  
doi: 10.2139/ssrn.1867902 
16.  Odell, P.M.; Korgen, K.O.; Schumacher, P. & delucchi,  
M. Internet use among female and male college students.  
Cyberpsychology Behav., 2000, 3(5), 855-862. 
17.  Otunla, A.O. Internet access and use among undergraduate  
students of bowen University Iwo, Osun State, nigeria.  
Libr. Philos. Pract. e-journal. 2013. http://digitalcommons. 
unl.edu/libphilprac/964. 
18.  Waithaka, M.W. Internet use among university students in  
Kenya: A case study of the University of nairobi. 2013. 19.    b ashir,  S.;  Mahmood,  K.  &  Shafque  F.  Internet  use  
among university students : A survey in University of the  
Punjab, Lahore. Pakistan J. Libr. Inf. Sci. 2008, 2008(9),  
49-65. 
20.  Adekunmisi,  S.r.;  Ajala,  E.b.  &  Iyoro,  A.O.  Internet  
access and usage by undergraduate students : A case study  
of olabisi onabanjo. Libr. Philos. Pract., 2013, 1-10. 
21.  Pew Research Center. Smartphone ownership and internet  
usage continues to climb in emerging economies. 2016.  
doi: 10.1017/CbO9781107415324.004 
22.  Wood, J. College students in study spend 8 to 10 hours  
daily on cell phone. Psych Central. https://psychcentral. 
com/news/2014/08/31/new-study-finds-cell-phone- 
addiction-increasingly-realistic-possibility/74312.html.  
Published 2015. Accessed February 8, 2017. 
23.    d eniz,  M.H.  &  Geyik,  S.K.  An  empirical  research  on  
general internet usage patterns of undergraduate students.  
Procedia. - Soc. Behav. Sci., 2015, 195, 895-904.  
doi: 10.1016/j.sbspro.2015.06.369 
24.  Muniandy,  b.  Academic  Use  of  internet  among  
undergraduate  students : A  preliminary  case  study  in  a  
Malaysian  University.  Int.  J.  Cyber.  Soc.  Educ.,  2010;  
3(2), 171-178. 
25.  Larose,  r.  Uses  and  gratifcations  of  the  internet  
addiction.  In  Internet Addiction: A Handbook and Guide  
to Evaluation and Treatment, edited by youing, K.; Abreu,  
C.n. de, Hoboken, n.J: Wiley & Sons, 2011, 55-72. 
26.  Soria,  K.M.;  Fransen,  J.  &  nackerud,  S.  Library  use  
and undergraduate student outcomes: New evidence for  
students’  retention  and  academic  success. Lib.  Acad.,  
2013, 13(2), 147-164. 
27.  Kim,  K.S.  &  Sin,  S.C.J.  Perception  and  selection  of  

========6========

SALUbI  & M UCHAOnyErWA: USES And GrATIFICATIOnS OF THE  In TErnET And LIbrAry InFOrMATIOn rESOUrCES 
information  sources  by  undergraduate  students:  Effects  
of  avoidant  style,  confdence,  and  personal  control  in  
problem-solving. J. Acad. Lib., 2007, 33(6), 655-665.  
doi: 10.1016/j.acalib.2007.09.012 
28.  McQuail, d. The rise of media of mass communication.  
In Mass Communication Theory: An Introduction, edited  
by McQuail d. London: Sage, 1994, 1-29. 
CONTRIBUTORS 
Dr  Oghenere  Gabriel  Salubi   is  a  Research  fellow  at  the  department of Library and Information Science, University of  Fort Hare. He is concerned with the maximisation and productive  utilisation  of  the  Internet  cum  library  information  resources  
among  digital  natives.  His  research  interests  revolve  around  human  computer  interaction,  digital  humanities,  information  behaviour,  LIS  education  and  knowledge  organisation.  Contributions to the current paper were in the conceptualisation,  design  and  analysis  of  data  for  the  study. 
Dr  Ndakasharwa  Muchaonyerwa   holds  Ph d   in  Knowledge  Management from the University of KwaZulu-natal. Currently  working  as  a  Lecturer  in  the  Department  of  Library  and  information  Science  at  the  University  of  Fort  Hare,  South  Africa.  Her  research  interests  are  in  knowledge  management,  information  and  communication  technologies,  archives  and  records  management. 
Contribution  to  the  study  is  in  the  writing  of  the  final  manuscript. 
435 

========7========

