DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 36, No. 3, May 2016, pp.-164-172 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.36.3.9428 
 2016, DESIDOC 
Use of Online Citation Tools by Students and Research Scholars of Department of  
Library and Information Science, University of Delhi 
Margam Madhusudhan 
University of Delhi, Delhi-110 007 E-mail: mmadhusudhan@libinfosci.du.ac.in 
AbSTRACT 
This paper fnds out the citation management and the needs of students of Department of Libary and Information  Science, University of Delhi, and how online citation tools ft into their academic and research process. The results  indicate that all the respondents are aware of online citation tools and using them occasionally. EasyBib was the  popular online citation tool among respondents. The survey results show that most of the respondents learned the  online citation tools through department’s website. The main purpose of using online citation tools was for their  academic/research work. Most of the respondents were accessing online citation tools from the Delhi University  Computer Centre. They had not received any formal training for creating online citations. Simplifed and easy  bibliography and automatic creation of references list are two major benefts of online citation tools. The most  obvious impediment is that they have never used the online tools before. Meagre respondents wanted training in  using online citation tools for creating effcient references. The fndings of the study will not only help the Library  and Information Science students about knowing what a citation is and understanding the concepts of citation styles  and formatting, but also help citation-related competencies and skills in recognising citations and understanding  
their functions in research. 
Keywords: Citation tools, bibliographic management tools, students, research scholars, University, Delhi 
1.  INTRODUCTION  
“One  of  the  most  important  aspects  of  academic  writing  is  making  use  of  the  ideas  of  other  people”1,  because  “quality  academic  writing  is  built  upon  the  work of others”2.  Referencing  is  a  standardised  method  of  acknowledging  all  the  sources  of  information,  data,  and  ideas  one  uses  in  writing  an  article,  book,  thesis,  etc.  Spack3   has  pointed  out  that  “the  most  important  skill  a  student  can  engage  in  is  the  complex  activity  to  write  from  other  texts,  which  is  a  major  part  of  their  academic experience. In fact, this is an essential skill for  every student.” For this reason, “any academic text will  contain  the  voices  of  other  writers  and  reference  gives  the  readers  details  about  the  source  so  that  they  have  a  good  understanding  of  what  kind  of  source  it  is  and  could find the source themselves, if necessary. A citation  is  a  credit  or  reference  to  another  document  or  source  which  documents  both  influence  and  authority”2. 
“Citation allows us to acknowledge how the scholarship  of others has contributed to our own work, to distinguish  for  our  readers  which  ideas  are  our  own  and  which  are  borrowed,  and  to  give  our  readers  a  path  by  which  they  can  trace  the  intellectual  development  of  the  ideas  we  present”4.  In  other  words,  “the  object  of  this  is  to  supply  the  information  needed  to  allow  a  user  to  find  a  source”1.  There  are  many  formats  for  the  use  of  citations  for  different  fields  to  follow,  for  example,  American Psychological Association (APA)—used in the  
fields  of  Social  and  Behavioural  Sciences,  Psychology,  Education, Anthropology; Harvard—for Social Sciences,  Natural  Sciences,  Education,  Business;  Chicago—for  Social,  Biological  and  Physical  Sciences,  Humanities;  Modern Languages Association of America (MLA)—for  Modern Languages, Literature; American Chemical Society  (ACS)—for  Chemistry;  American  Institute  of  Physics  (AIP)—for Physics; IEEE—for Engineering and Technology;  Vancouver—for  Medicine,  Humanities,  etc. 
2.  REVIEW  OF  LITERATURE 
Citation symbolises association of ideas5. A citation  management  tool  is  any  resource,  program  or  service  that supports citation management, or, the understanding,  gathering,  organisation,  and  use  of  citations  in  research  and information literacy6. Although there is not a surfeit  of literature published on the topic of online citation tools,  but  much  of  the  available  literature  deals  largely  with  citation managers and generators, more specifically reviews,  and comparisons. Hensley7  focuses on the emergence of  citation  management  software  and  addresses  the  role  of  academic librarians in making software available and easy  to  use  for  students  and  scholars.  The  author  examines  the  features  of  several  citation  management  software  programs,  and  offers  information  on  the  best  practices  for the support and instruction of the programs. Kumar8 pointed  that  creating  citation  using  citation  tools  is  not  very popular and most of the researchers being unaware  
Received, 6 November 2015, revised on 28 March 2016, online published 26 April 2016 

========1========

MADHUSUDHAN: USE OF ONLINE CITATION TOOLS BY STUDENTS AND RESEARCH SCHOLARS OF DLIS, UNIVERSITY OF DELHI 
of  these  tools  are  used  to  manually  cite  the  sources  consulted  or  quoted  in  their  document. 
Citation tools are organised into four categories, these  include:  Citation  managers,  citation  generators,  citation  guides  and  citation  management  education.  Citation  managers,  sometimes  referred  to  as  bibliographic  or  reference management software, are programs that allow  researchers  to  store,  organise,  output  and  share  their  bibliographic  citations6.  Citation  management  software  falls into one of four distribution models: desktop-based,  web-based,  browser-based,  or  hybrid.  Each  distribution  model can be further divided into more granular categories  representing proprietary and open-source material9.  The  mission of citation tool has to provide students and faculty  with  a  quick  and  simple  means  of  citing  resources  with  great academic accuracy and honesty. Bright10  suggested  five best online citation and bibliography tools—EasyBib,  RefDot, Citefast, Bibme, and Citation Machine. EasyBib  is  reviewed  and  rated  by  Curran11,  O’Gorman12,  and  Erlandson13. Fernandez14  adequately covered Zotero, but  Curran11  and Vanhecke 
15 
 also provided relevant reviews.  Basak16  and Kern & Hensley 
17 
 provided a comparison of  RefWorks,  Endnote  X4,  Zotero,  and  Mendeley,  replete  with  a  librarian’s  perspective  on  each  tool.  Ovadia18 compares three of the free tools—Mendeley, Zotero, and  CiteULike,  and  noted  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of each. Gilmour & Cobus-Kuo19   have  added  RefWorks  to  this  grouping,  comparing  the  available  features  as  well  as  the  accuracy  of  produced  citations.  Reher  &  Haustein20   have  provided  an  in-depth  look  at  the  social  bookmarking  tools  CiteULike,  Connotea,  BibSonomy,  and  2collab  in  supporting  science,  technology,  and  medicine.  Even  though  these  online  citation  builders  have been developed to provide consistent citations with  the  rules  set  out  by  the  citation  style  guides,  users  are  ultimately responsible for the citations and should be sure  to  proofread  them  for  accuracy21   and  some  knowledge  of  proper  citation  formats  is  necessary  to  use  these  programs  effectively22.  
In addition to above reviews, comparisons, and other  related  literature,  university/college  libraries  have  been  engaged  with  the  work  of  standardisation  of  citation  formats and have developed online citation tools/services  to help the struggling students who have probably spent  more  time  formatting  their  bibliographies  than  writing  their  papers.  Some  notable  are:  North  Carolina  State  University  (NCSU)  Libraries  developed  the  Citation  Builder2. KnightCite is an online citation generator service  provided by the Hekman Library of Calvin College. This  service  simplifies  the  often  tedious  task  of  compiling  an  accurate  bibliography  in  the  appropriate  style  by  formatting  the  given  data  on  a  source  into  a  reliable  citation, eliminating the need to memorise minute details  of  style  for  multiple  kinds  of  sources23.  
From  this  review  of  literature,  it  is  clear  that,  the  task  of  managing  references  with  computers  and  software tools is not a new, but it is essential to review  
the  accuracy  of  the  citation  before  incorporating  it  into  research  work  or  assignment.  Further,  “citations  can  be  organised  and  managed  using  folders.  And  also  shared  with  and  sometimes  even  edited  by  others.  This  is  useful  for  collaborative  or  group  work. A  bibliography,  endnotes, footnotes, or in-text citations can be generated  automatically. It is often possible to export citations from  one  management  tool  into  another.  This  is  useful  when  one  has  to  switch  between  citation  tools”24.  
Several  online  citation  builders  that  are  geared  towards helping students with the main academic citation  styles:  APA,  MLA,  and  Chicago  manual  of  style  and  brief  description  of  popular  online  citation  tools  are  presented  in  preceding  sections. 
3.  ONLINE  CITATION TOOLS 
BibMe—makes it easy to create citations, builds bibliographies  and acknowledges other people’s work online and generating  MLA,  APA,  Chicago/Turabian  citation  styles  and  is  available  free  and  is  web-based25. 
Citation  Machine—automatically  generates  citations  in  MLA, APA,  Chicago, Turabian,  and  Harvard26. 
Citation  Wizard—a  free  online  utility  designed  to  automatically generate citations according to MLA style  specifications27. 
CiteULike—a free service for managing and discovering  scholarly  references  and  most  popular  social  reference  management  websites  by  helping  users  streamline  their  process  of  storing  and  managing  academic  references,  available  in  free  and  web-based28. 
EasyBib—creates a bibliography quickly using the autocite  or manual entry forms for 59 source types. Automatically  search  and  cite  any  of  the  22  designated  sources  and  bibliography formatting for MLA (free), APA and Chicago/ Turabian  citation  styles29. 
EndNote—a commercial reference management software  package,  used  to  manage  bibliographies  and  references  when  writing  essays  and  articles.  It  is  produced  by  Thomson  Reuters30. 
KnightCite—a free site that automatically produce MLA,  APA, or Chicago style citations for 28 types of sources.  It  is  provided  by  Hekman  Library  at  Calvin  College31. Mendeley—a free reference manager and academic social  network32. 
NoodleTools—integrated tools for note-taking, outlining,  citation, document archiving/annotation, and collaborative  research  and  writing33. 
OttoBib—a  website  with  a  free  tool  to  generate  an  alphabetized bibliography of books from a list of International  Standard  Book  Numbers  (ISBN)  with  output  in  MLA,  APA,  Chicago/ Turabian,  BibTeX34. 
RefWorks—a  commercial  online  research  management,  writing and collaboration tool. It is produced by RefWorks-  
165 

========2========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  3,  MAY   2016 
COS.  It  is  designed  to  help  researchers  easily  gather,  manage, store and share all types of information, as well  as  generate  citations  and  bibliographies35. 
Zotero—web-based  extension  to  help  collect,  manage,  and  cite  research  sources,  compiles  a  library  that  can  be accessed remotely, available in free in Windows/Mac/ Linux  platforms,  requires  Firefox  browser36. 
4.  STATEMENT  OF THE  PRObLEM 
Many  students  come  to  the  university  unfamiliar  with  citation  styles  and  with  little  or  no  understanding  of  how  formats  (i.e.,  article,  chapter,  book)  are  treated  and  evaluated  differently.  Skipping  directly  to  citation  managers  may  replace  what  might  be  a  valuable  part  of  the  learning  and  research  continuum.  Additionally,  citation managers and generators cannot always be relied  on  to  format  citations  properly.  This  is  a  concern  that  is  shared  with  many  teaching  faculty.  Without  a  basic  understanding of formats and citation styles, students using  citation managers and generators are more likely to submit  improperly  formatted  citations  and  bibliographies.  Few  students enjoy creating citations in the required citation  styles  and  many  of  them  committing  errors  in  creation  of  proper  citation.  In  addition,  copying  references  from  the  web-based  citation  tools  to  word  document  creates  citation  style  standards.  
Citation errors are associated with different reference  types  and  different  documents  referenced  or  cited  by  the author of the work. Errors in providing citation will  hinder scholarly communication and adversely affect the  authors, readers and academicians in the field and leave  a  negative  impact  on  them  regarding  citing  a  particular  work.  Errors  in  citations  of  a  bibliography  not  only  raise  doubts  about  the  validity  of  the  research,  but  may  also  hinder  these  functions.  Faunce  &  Job37   posit  that  inaccurate citations lend suspicion to the credibility of the  author. Inaccurate references or citation errors may lead  readers  to  wonder  about  the  care  and  attention  given  to  the writing and presentation of the article, including the  actual research findings detailed in that publication. One  of the major parameter of determining the standard of PhD  thesis is the accuracy of the citation style. Furthermore,  bibliography  of  reference  section  is  an  integral  part  but  often  neglected  component  of  the  literature.  
There  are  few  specific  studies  related  to  citation  errors by eminent authors, notable study by Lee & Lin38 who  investigated  the  conditions  of  citation  errors  in  Department of Information and Library Science (DILS) of  Tamkang University in 2007 and 2011. The study found  that  citation  error  rate  for  DILS  was  20.1%.  Citation  errors  occurred  mostly  in  references  to  books,  followed  by  conference  papers  and  theses.  Citation  error  rates  for  each  individual  thesis  ranged  from  4%  to  81.3%.  The  study  results  showed  that  citation  instruction  in  graduate programmes is highly needed to promote better  citation  behaviour.  The  use  of  reference  management  
166 
tools  combined  with  citation  instruction  via  research  methods  and  library  instruction  courses  may  effectively  reduce  the  occurrence  of  citation  errors.  
Moreover,  portability  is  now  a  key  requirement  for  bibliographic  management  tools,  so  the  users  are  looking  for  online  tools  that  are  flexible  and  easy- to-use.  Users  also  want  tools  that  support  interaction  with  research  collaborators.  Easy  sharing  of  references  and  the  ability  to  tap  into  community  knowledge  is  an  interesting  development  but  it  has  not  yet  become  a  'must-have'  feature.  As  a  result,  citing  references  accurately is critically important. “Accurate references help  foster transmission of scholarly communication, whereas  inaccurate  references  adversely  affect  authors,  readers,  and  academics,  reducing  the  accuracy  of  citation  index  databases,  or  even  impeding  scholarly  communication  quality or efficacy, while thus reducing the effectiveness  of  citation  analysis”39,  40.  In  this  context,  the  present  study  finds  out  the  citation  management  and  the  needs  of  students  and  how  online  citation  tools  fit  into  their  academic  and  research  process.  
5.  ObJECTIVES 
The  main  objectives  of  the  study  are  to: 
(i) Know about awareness of online citation tools by the  
students and research scholars of the Department of  
Library and Information Science (DLIS), University  
of  Delhi;  
(ii) Find  out  the  frequency  and  purpose  of  using  the  
online  citation  tools;  
(iii) Assess  the  influence  of  online  citation  tools  on  
academic/research  efficiency;  and 
(iv) Find out the difficulties in using the online citation  
tools. 
The scope of the study is confined to use of online  citation  tools  by  the  bonafide  students  and  research  scholars  (Bachelor  of  Library  and  Information  Science  (BLISc),  Master  of  Library  and  Information  Science  (MLISc),  Master  of  Philosophy  (MPhil),  and  Doctor  of  Philosophy  (PhD),  University  of  Delhi.  
6.  DATA ANALYSIS AND  INTERPRETATION 
A  survey  was  conducted  through  a  structured  questionnaire  randomly  circulated  personally  among  70  students  and  research  scholars  in  DLIS,  University  of  Delhi  and  received  60  filled-in  questionnaires.  The  response  rate  was  85  %  during  the  survey  period  (i.e.,  16–31  January  2015).  The  responses  received  from  the  respondents  to  12  questions  are  presented  in  the  form  of  tables  and  figures  and  analysed  by  using  a  simple  method  of  calculation. 
6.1  Distribution  of  Respondents 
Respondents’  demographic  characteristics  such  as  gender  and  educational  backgrounds  have  great  impact  

========3========

MADHUSUDHAN: USE OF ONLINE CITATION TOOLS BY STUDENTS AND RESEARCH SCHOLARS OF DLIS, UNIVERSITY OF DELHI 
on  the  use  of  online  citation  tools.  Therefore,  data  relating  to  gender  and  level  of  study  have  been  sought  from  the  respondents,  who  were  pursuing  their  Library  and  Information  Science  programmes  at  the  University  of  Delhi  (Table  1). 
Table  1  reveals  that  out  of  60  respondents,  females  constitute  53  %,  while  the  remaining  are  males  (47  %).  It  shows  that  female  representatives  are  greater  than  male  representatives. 
Table 1. Distribution of respondents 
Course BLISc MLISc MPhil PhD Total 
Male 03 14 03 08 28 (47 %) 
Female 05 16 05 06 32 (53 %) 
Total 08 30 08 14 60 (100 %) 
6.2  Knowledge  of  Online  Citation Tools 
Skills  are  pre-requisite  to  use  online  citation  tools.  The  respondents  are  having  various  skills  to  access  the  online  citation  tools.  Respondents  were  asked  whether  they  know  the  online  citation  tools.  Response  was  that  all respondents 60 (100 %) were aware the online citation  tools  and  were  using  the  same  for  their  project  reports,  assignments,  dissertations,  theses,  and  other  academic/ research  work  in  the  Department. 
6.3  Frequency  of  Use  Online  Citation Tools 
The  most  important  aspect  of  the  usefulness  of  the  online citation tool is regularity. Respondents were asked  about  the  frequency  of  use  of  online  citation  tools. The  questionnaire  providing  five  different  frequency  and  responses is presented in Fig. 1. It clearly indicates that  36(60  %)  respondents  make  use  of  online  citation  tools  occasionally, 22 % monthly, 10 % weekly, and 5 % two  or three times a week. Only 3 % of respondents use the  online  citation  tools  daily. 
The frequency use of online citation tools by respondents  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  project/dissertation/thesis  work. Further, it is revealed at the time of the study that  the  respondents  use  the  tools  during  the  last  phase  of  their academic/research work. It is also revealed that the  availability of bibliographical citation tools is free, which  gives  them  the  instant  creation  of  bibliographies.  
Figure 1.  Frequency use of online citation tools. 
6.4 Type  of  Online  Citation Tools  Used 
There  are  many  online  citation  tools  existing  both  free  and  commercial  for  Windows,  Linux  and  Mac  platforms.  The  students  and  research  scholars  are  using  different  such  tools  for  their  academic/research  work.  The  questionnaire  facilitated  ten  online  citation  tools  and  multiple  responses  regarding  usage  of  the  tools  are  presented  in  Fig.2.  
Figure  2  denotes  that  majority  of  respondents  used  the EasyBib citation tool with 53 %, followed by BibMe  with 22 % and EndNote & Online works with 6 % each  and  Citation  Builder  with  5  %.  EndNoteweb  citation  tool  was  least  used  with  2  %.  They  enable  to  create  references automatically, generate the reference list; create  links  between  the  component  of  the  citation  in  the  text  and  the  reference  list,  and  “formatting  bibliographies  through  plug-ins”41. 
Note: Respondents were allowed multiple answers. 
Figure 2.  Type of online citation tools used (n = 60). 
Interestingly,  most  of  these  packages  support  heterogeneous  data  sets,  such  as  monographs,  journal  articles,  conference  proceedings,  theses,  unpublished  works,  magazines  and  newspaper  articles,  web-based  publications,  etc.  Nowadays,  a  number  of  free  online  citation tools are available with sophisticated features to  help the students and researchers to collate and manage  citations and references in two modes, i.e., manual entry  and  auto  cite.  
6.5  Sources  of  knowledge  about  Online  Citation  
Tools  
The  respondents  were  further  requested  to  indicate  how to learn to use online citation tools in their academic/ research work. Awareness of the tools came from several  different means, including from a friend, research supervisor,  librarian, or internet search. Additional ways that students  learned of the tools include from the library’s website, or  from self instruction, trial and error method, or colleague.  A  question  was  asked  to  know,  through  which  sources  they came to know about online citation tools. Figure 3  presents  different  access  skills  of  the  respondents. 
As indicated in Fig. 3, (53 %) learned about citation  tools through DUL’s website, followed by guidance from  
167 

========4========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  3,  MAY   2016 
Note: Respondents were allowed multiple answers. 
Figure 3.  Sources through which online citation tools are known  
(n=60). 
their friends/classmates 28 (47 %), and guidance from the  supervisor (40 %). Of the respondents, 37 % have learnt  the skills through trial and error method, 20 % acquired  the skills through self-instruction, 13 % through external  sources,  and  3  %  of  the  respondents  have  reported  that  they  learnt  the  skills  by  attending  the  training  offered  by  the  University,  saw  an  advertisement,  saw  a  link  on  a  database  and  saw  a  link  on  a  journal  website. 
It  is  clear  from  the  previous  analysis  that  most  popular method of acquiring the necessary skills for using  online citation tools is the accessing of the website of the  DLIS,  University  of  Delhi,  because,  more  students  and  research scholars are accessing the same from the DLIS  website42   and  then  the  other  citation  tools  existing  on  internet. This  can  be  seen  as  implication  for  how  much  encouragement  respondents  get  from  web  support  when  completing  their  academic/research  work  successfully.  This  also  explains  why  respondents  use  Department’s  e-resources  for  their  academic/research  work. 
6.6  Purpose  of  Using  Online  Citation Tools 
Online citation tools have a wide variety of features like  “automatically create in-text references, bibliographies and  footnotes in a variety of citation styles, manage collections  of various types of research materials, including citations,  charts,  documents,  PDFs,  links,  equations,  screenshots,  graphs, images, import citation information directly from  the  Library's  Catalog,  online  indexes  and  databases,  and  the  Web,  and  share  your  library  of  citations  with  other  researchers”43.  These  tools  also  “format  citations  for  papers,  and  take  notes  on  articles  and  save  them  in  collection  of  citations”44.  The  purpose  of  using  online  citation  tools  differs  from  one  user  to  another.  Even  though the purposes are many, the respondents use online  citation  tools  for  various  purposes.  The  questionnaire  provided  for  major  purposes  and  their  responses  are  presented  in  Fig.  4. 
Figure  4  shows  that  78  %  of  the  respondents  use  online citation tools for research work (thesis/dissertation/ project work), followed by literature review (40 %), and  completion of assignments/seminar presentations (32 %).  The  percentage  of  respondents  using  such  tools  for  publishing  articles  is  17  %.  It  is  interesting  to  perceive  
168 
Note: Respondents were allowed multiple answers. 
Figure 4. Purpose of using online citation tools. that  the  respondents  use  the  online  citation  tools  for  their  research  work. 
6.7  Place  of Access  Online  Citation Tools 
A  question  was  asked  to  know  about  the  place  of  access of online citation tools from respondents (Figure  5).  Figure  5  clearly  indicates  that  63  %  of  respondents  use online citation tools from Delhi University Computer  Centre, followed by DULS Libraries (48 %), Department  Computer Labs (30 %), Home (20 %), Cybercafe (10 %),  and  Department  Library  (7  %).  Interestingly,  27  %  of  respondents  use  online  citation  tools  from  other  places,  i.e.,  university  hostels  and  college  libraries. 
Note: Respondents were allowed multiple answers. 
Figure 5. Place of access of online citation tools (n=60). 6.8  Ease  of  Use 
Respondents were asked to ascertain whether online  citation tools are easy or difficult to use. The questionnaire  provided  is  five  ratings  and  responses  are  provided  in  Fig. 6. It reveals that 80 % found that the online citation  tool  is  very  easy  to  use.  A  further  17  %  found  it  easy  to  use  and  3  %  respondents  noted  that  it  is  moderately  easy  to  use.  The  most  important  finding  is  that  no  one  stated  that  the  online  citation  tool  is  difficult  and  very  difficult  to  use.  The  results  affirm  that  usage  of  online  citation  tools  among  the  respondents  were  easy  rather  than  difficult. 
6.9  Influence  of  Online  Citation  Tools  on Academic  
Efficiency 
The  benefits  of  online  citation  tools  can  be  readily  seen.  It  is  easy  to  import  and  export  records  from  online  databases  and  is  also  able  to  connect  many  online  databases  to  search  records.  The  information  on  

========5========

MADHUSUDHAN: USE OF ONLINE CITATION TOOLS BY STUDENTS AND RESEARCH SCHOLARS OF DLIS, UNIVERSITY OF DELHI 
Figure 6. Ease of use (n=60). 
imported date, data source, and a link if the record was  imported  from  the  web,  are  automatically  stored  in  the  web-based  citation  management  tools.  If  the  searched  item  does  not  have  a  permanent  location  on  the  web,  it  is  possible  that  the  item  was  moved  from  the  location,  and/or  modified.  Therefore,  this  kind  of  information  is  important.  These  are  designed  to  capture  visual  and  audiovisual information on the web. This function greatly  extends  the  ability  to  retrieve  information,  shared  by  a  group  or  collaborative  work. 
A  number  of  citation  management  programs  allow  the  user  to  “automatically  download  references  from  an  electronic  literature  into  a  database.  This  function  enables the author to avoid typing details such as author  names, article title, or journal information. It also allows  the  user  to  search  the  literature  database  from  a  link  within  the  program”45.  Online  citation  tools  consist  of  a database in which full bibliographic references can be  entered,  plus  a  system  for  generating  selective  lists  of  articles  in  the  different  formats  required  by  publishers  and  scholarly  journals.  They  enable  to  automatically  number the references; generate the reference list; create  links  between  the  component  of  the  citation  in  the  text  and  the  reference  list;  store,  edit,  sort  and  manage  references;  electronically  create  bibliographies;  import  references from databases and library catalogues; change  referencing styles with the click of a button; edit or create  own referencing style; cite references in Microsoft word  documents  instantly  while  writing,  and  share  references  with  other  students/research  scholars. 
In view of the above, a multiple choice question was  asked from the respondents to impinge on their academic  efficiency.  The  views  of  the  respondents  regarding  various  possible  ways  by  which  online  citation  tools  influence  the  academic/research  work  are  depicted  in  Fig.  7.  Forty  six  (77  %)  of  the  respondents  said  that  it  generate  references  list  automatically,  followed  by  63  %  who  were  of  view  that  it  helps  in  automatic  number  the  references  and  e-creation  of  bibliography,  58%  said  it  saves  references  in  word  document,  47  %  said  that  it  helps  in  saving,  printing  or  emailing  the  reference  list,  45  %  said  that  it  is  easy  to  download  the  references,  30  %  said  that  it  can  change  the  referencing  style  with  click  of  a  button,  and  38  %  said  that  it  can  share  the  references  with  others.  3  %  mentioned  other  academic  
Note: Respondents were allowed multiple answers. 
Figure 7. Infuence of online citation tools on academic effciency  
(n=60). 
use, i.e., citations can be shared with and sometimes even  edited by others and export citations from one management  tool  into  another.  The  results  are  also  consistent  with  the findings of Conrad, Leonard & Somerville46   as  they  stated "managing citations, organising documents, storing  documents,  and  conducting  searches".  Similar  results  can  be  seen  in  the  study  of  McCue47   states  that  “the  two  major  benefits  that  come  from  effectively  using  digital  capture,  search  and  collaboration  tools,  are  (a)  an  increase  in  the  speed  and  (b)  improved  quality  of  the  research  being  performed.” 
Online citation tools have proved to be the effective  means  for  students  and  research  scholars  to  prepare  automatic  citations  and  find  plenty  of  articles,  which  they  read  and  subsequently  cite  in  their  work.  In  this  way,  online  citation  tools  are  crucial  in  influencing  the  students and research scholars saving lot of time in their  final  stage  of  academic/research  work. 
6.10  Support  of  Preferred  Citation  Styles 
Respondent were asked whether online citation tools  support the citation styles that they prefer. Majority of the  respondents  35(58  %)  said  that  the  online  bibliographic  citation  tools  support  the  citation  styles  gives  positive  responses  and  remaining  25  (42  %)  said  that  it  doesn’t  support  their  preferred  citation  styles. 
6.11  Difficulties  in  Using  Online  Citation Tools 
There  are  few  difficulties  while  using  the  online  citation tools by the respondents for completion of their  academic/research work. The respondents were requested  to  furnish  the  details  regarding  the  difficulties  faced  while  using  online  citation  tools.  The  major  difficulties  faced  by  respondents  in  accessing  the  online  citation  tools  are  identified  and  provided  in  the  questionnaire  and  responses  are  depicted  in  Fig.  8.  
Figure 8 highlights that the most obvious impediment  is  that  they  have  never  used  the  online  tools  before  (47  %),  followed  by  major  difficulty  of  respondents  faced  due  to  lack  of  training  (35  %),  lack  of  citation  styles  knowledge  (30  %),  language  difficulties  (27  %),  lack  of  technical  support  (23  %),  lack  of  terminals  (20  %),  instructions  in  online  citation  tool  is  not  clear  
169 

========6========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  3,  MAY   2016 
Note: Respondents were allowed multiple answers. 
Figure 8. Diffculties in using online citation tools (n=60). 
(17 %), internet bandwidth (15 %), mechanical problems  (8 %). It is to be noted that they view the lack of basic  computer skills as a mechanical problem. Some students  have  also  indicated  other  difficulties  such  as  not  found  bibliography  drop  down  menu,  pull  up  the  option,  and  style drop down menu while using the free online citation  tools  (3  %).  There  is  a  clear  indication  from  this  study  that  the  DLIS  may  equip  and  provide  more  computers  to  students  and  research  scholars  for  effective  use  of  online  citation  tools. 
6.12  Need  for  Training  
already brought revolutionary transitions in research work  particularly, review of literature and bibliography of the  project  reports,  dissertations,  and  theses.  
The results indicate that all the respondents are aware  of  online  citation  tools.  Most  of  the  respondents  make  use of online citation tools occasionally. The most used  online citation tool is EasyBib and is the first choice. The  survey results show that most of the respondents learned  the  online  citation  tools  through  department’s  website.  The  main  purpose  of  students  and  research  scholars  to  use  the  online  citation  tools  for  their  academic/research  work. Most of the respondents accessing online citation  tools  from  the  Delhi  University  Computer  Centre.  Most  of  the  students  had  not  received  any  training  and  for  those who attended the training programme, a majority of  them  noted  that  it  was  very  easy  to  use.  Simplified  and  easy  bibliography  and  automatic  creation  of  references  list  are  two  major  benefits  of  online  citation  tools.  The  most  obvious  impediment  is  that  they  have  never  used  the  online  tools  before. A  very  few  respondents  wanted  training  in  using  online  citation  tools  for  electronically  create  bibliographies,  import  references  from  databases  and  library  catalogues,  change  referencing  styles  with  the  click  of  a  button,  edit  or  create  own  referencing  style,  and  share  references  with  other  students/research  scholars.  
Respondents have realised the advantages of online  
The number of online citation tools being developed  citation tools and seem to have it as the primary medium  using  variety  of  user  interfaces  and  more  sophisticated  of  research  ideas  and  results.  The  study  proposes  the  searching  features.  For  effective  use  of  these  tools,  following suggestions for effective use of online citation  retrieving  skills  are  necessary  for  novice  user.  In  view  tools:  (i)  Citation  tools  have  a  mobile  site  (responsive  of  this,  a  dichotomous  question  was  raised  to  students  site) or mobile app; (ii) more publicity to online citation  and  research  scholars  whether  orientation/training  is  tools  in  various  social  media  by  university  library;  (iii)  required or not. Out of 60 respondents, 15(25 %) wanted  Delhi  University  Library  System  (DULS)  consist  of  37  training in using online citation tools for creating efficient libraries,  may  introduce  citation  management  education  references. However, remaining 45 (75 %) stated that the  and include introducing concepts or tools in bibliographic  training  programme  is  not  required.  The  reason  behind  instruction, classes on using citation managers, or one-on- probably  is  that  they  are  familiar  with  the  skills  and  one consultation with a subject or technology specialist;  adequate  techniques  for  the  creation  of  bibliographic  and  (iv)  DLIS  may  equip  and  provide  more  computers  
citations  pertaining  to  library  and  information  science. 
7.  CONCLUSIONS 
A citation is both a signpost and an acknowledgement.  As  a  signpost,  it  signals  the  location  of  source.  As  an  acknowledgement, it reveals that indebted to that source48.  The creation of citation is a cumbersome process for the  researchers  as  they  need  to  know  the  rules  for  citing  sources  as  per  the  approved  citation  style.  The  online  citation creation has eased up the researcher’s efforts for  citation creation as they can do so without remembering  and  consulting  the  rules  of  the  recommended  citation  style.  On  the  basis  of  above  discussion  it  can  be  stated  that  the  features  of  online  citation  tools  are  very  bright  since they provide automatic reference linking, flexibility  in  bibliographic  styles,  creating  easy  bibliography,  and  solving  research  problems.  In  this  environment,  these  resources open up many exciting opportunities and have  
170 
to  students  and  research  scholars  for  effective  use  of  online  citation  tools.  
The  findings  of  the  study  will  not  only  help  the  Library and Information Science students about knowing  what  a  citation  is  and  understanding  the  concepts  of  citation  styles  and  formatting,  but  also  help  citation  related  competencies  and  skills  in  recognizing  citations  and  understanding  their  functions  in  research.  
These findings may also help the developers of the  free  online  citations  tools  to  enhance  more  features/ services  to  suit  the  collaborative  user.  It  could  be  said  that “citation management is the foundation for scholars  to begin collecting, managing, and archiving their research  findings as well as their own scholarly output. If libraries  are  to  reinforce  these  goals,  they  need  knowledgeable  staff  and  an  effective  program  to  support  the  citation  needs  of  their  users”6. 

========7========

MADHUSUDHAN: USE OF ONLINE CITATION TOOLS BY STUDENTS AND RESEARCH SCHOLARS OF DLIS, UNIVERSITY OF DELHI 
REFERENCES 
1. UEfAP.com. Academic writing: citing sources, using  
English for academic purposes: a guide for international  
students, 2008. http://www.uefap.com/writing/writfram. 
htm  (accessed  on  5 August  2015). 
2. North  Carolina  State  University.  Citations  and  
references,  2004.  https://www.ncsu.edu/  labwrite/ 
res/res-citsandrefs.html  (accessed  on  2  September  
2015). 
3. Spack, R. Initiating ESL students into the academic  
discourse community: How far should we go? TESOL  
Quarterly ,  1988, 22(1),  29-53. 
4. Bradley, C. Plagiarism education and prevention: A  
subject-driven case-based approach. Oxford, Chandos,  
2011. 
5. Giri,  R.  &  Das, A.K.  Indian  citation  index: A  new  
web  platform  for  measuring  performance  of  Indian  
research periodicals. Lib. Hi Tech News,  2011,  28(3),  
33-35. 
6. Childress,  D.  Citation  tools  in  academic  libraries:  
best practices for reference and instruction. Ref.  &  
U.  Serv.  Quart.,   2011,  51(2),  143-52. 
7. Hensley, M. K. Citation Management Software. Ref.  
&  U.  Serv.  Quart.,   2011,  50(3),  204-8. 
8. Kumar, D. Citation tools: easing up the researchers’  
effort.  Gyankosh:  The  J.  of  Lib.  &  Inf.  Manag .,  
2013, 4(2),  46-51. 
9. William  Marino.  Fore-cite:  tactics  for  evaluating  
citation  management  tools.  Ref.  Serv.  Rev.,  40(2),  
295-310. 
10. Bright,  S.  5  best  online  citation  and  bibliography  
tools,  2013.  http://www.digitalchalk.com/  blog/5- 
best-online-citation-and-bibliography-tools (accessed  
on  17  July  2015). 
11. Curran,  M.  EasyBib  &  Zotero.  www.easybib.com.  
Tech.  Serv.  Quart.,  2011,  29(1),  88-9. 
12. O’Gorman,  J.  EasyBib.  Booklist,  2011,  107(17),  
98. 
13. Erlandson,  R.J.  EasyBib.  CHOICE:  Cur.  Rev.  for  
Acad.  Lib.,  2011, 48(8),  1446. 
14. Fernandez, P. Zotero: information management software  
2.0.   Lib.  Hi  Tech  News ,  2011, 28(4),  5-7. 15. Vanhecke,  T.E.  Zotero.  J.  of  the  Med.  Lib.  Assn.,  
2008, 96(3),  275-6. 
16. Basak, S.K. A comparison of researcher’s reference  
management  software:  Refworks,  Mendeley,  and  
EndNote.  J.  of  Eco.  &  Behav.  Stud.,  2014,  6(7),  
561-68. 
17. Kern,  M.K.  &  Hensley,  M.K.  Citation  management  
software: features and futures. Ref. & U. Ser. Quart., 
2011, 50(3),  204-8. 
18. Ovadia,  S.  Managing  citations  with  cost-free  tools.  
Behav.  &  Soc.  Sci.  Lib.,  2011,  30(2),  107-11. 
19. Gilmour, R. & Cobus-Kuo, L. Reference management  
software:  a  comparative  analysis  of  four  products.  
Iss.  in  Sci.  &  Tech.  Lib.,  2011,  66(66),  63-75. 20. Reher,  S.  &  Haustein,  S.  Social  bookmarking  in  
STM. Online,   2010,  34(6),  34-42. 
21. Walsh,  K.  4  great  online  citation  tools  for  students  
(for MLA, APA, or Chicago manual of style citation  
styles), 2011. http://www.emergingedtech.com/2011/11/4- 
great-online-citation-tools-for-students-for-mla-apa- 
or-chicago-manual-of-style-citation-styles (accessed  
on  5  June  2015). 
22. Kessler,  J.  &  Ullen,  M.K.V.  Citation  generators:  
Generating  bibliographies  for  the  next  generation.  
J.  of Acad.  Lib.,  2005,  31(4),  310-16.  
23. Jackson, K. KnightCite, 2009. http://www.calvin.edu/ 
library/knightcite/ index.php?op= aboutus (accessed  
on  2  May  2015). 
24. Western  Libraries.  Benefits  of  using  citation  
management tools. http://www.lib.uwo.ca/ tutorials/ 
benefitsofusingcitationmanagementtools, 2015 (accessed  
5  June  2015). 
25. BibMe,  2015.  http://www.bibme.org  (accessed  on  
15  July  2015). 
26. Citation machine, 2015. http://www.citationmachine. 
net  (accessed  05  July  2015). 
27. Citation  Wizard,  2015.  http://citation.jsarkis.com  
(accessed  on  2  July  2015). 
28. CiteULike, 2015. http://www.citeulike.org (accessed  
on  8  July  2015). 
29. EasyBib,  2015.  http://www.easybib.com  (accessed  
on  7  July  2015). 
30. EndNote,  2015.  http://endnote.com  (accessed  on  5  
July  2015). 
31. KnightCite,  2015.  http://www.calvin.edu/  library/ 
knightcite  (accessed  on  2  May  2015). 
32. Mendeley, 2015. https://www.mendeley.com (accessed  
on  5  July,  2015). 
33. NoodleTools,  2015.  http://  www.noodletools.com  
(accessed  on  10  July  2015). 
34. OttoBib,  2015.  http://  www.ottobib.com  (accessed  
on  5  July  2015). 
35. RefWorks, 2015. https://www.refworks.com (accessed  
on  15  July  2015). 
36. Zotero,  2015.  https://www.zotero.org  (accessed  on  
25  July  2015).  
37. Faunce, G.J. & Job, R.F. The accuracy of reference  
lists  in  five  experimental  psychology  journals”.  
American  Psychologist,  2011,  56(10),  829-30. 38. Lee, C.J. & Lin, W.Y.C. Citation errors in masters’  
theses of library and information science and information  
engineering.  J.  of  Lib.  &  inf.  Stud,  2013,  11(1),  
167-95.  
39. Pandit,  I.  Citation  errors  in  library  literature:  a  
study  of  five  library  science  journals.  Lib.  &  Inf.  
Sci.  Res.,  1993, 15(2),  185-98.  
171 

========8========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  3,  MAY   2016 
40. Smith, L.C. Citation analysis.  Library Trends , 1981,  
30(1),  83-106. 
41. Francese, E. Usage of reference management software  
at the University of Torino. JLIS.it, 2013,  4(2), 145- 
73. 
42. Department  of  Library  and  Information  Science  
Website,  2015.http://dlis.du.ac.in  (accessed  on  2  
May  2015). 
43. Bowdoin Library. Reference guides: citation management  
tools, 2015. http://libguides. mit.edu/references (accessed  
on  15  July  2015). 
44. Green,  R.  Overview  of  citation  software  at  MIT:  
Managing  your  references:  Overview,  2009.  http:// 
libguides.mit.edu/references  (accessed  on  15  July  
2015). 
45. Steele,  S.E.  Bibliographic  citation  management  
software  as  a  tool  for  building  knowledge.  J.  of  
Wound Ostomy & Continence Nursing, 2008, 35(5),  
463-68. 
46. Conrad, L.Y.; Elisabeth, L. & Somerville, M.M. New  
pathways  in  scholarly  discovery:  understanding  the  
next generation of researcher tools, 2015. http://www. 
ala.org/acrl/sites/ ala.org.acrl/files/content/conferences/ 
confsandpreconfs/2015/Conrad_Leonard_ Somerville.  
pdf  (accessed  on  23  September  2015). 
47. McCue,  R.  Research  &  collaboration  tools  for  
students,  staff  &  faculty:  Creating  a  modern  
Memex,  2012.  https://docs.google.com/ 
172 
document/d/1mAzYoaRrWZr16TjOxCxq5i6NVnf  
AnknMjPM17bC1cvE/edit  (accessed  on  2  May  
2015). 
48. Hunter, J. The importance of citation. 2006. http:// 
web. grinnell. edu/Dean/Tutorial/EUS/IC. pdf (accessed  
on  3  July  2015). 
Contributor 
Dr  M.  Madhusudhan   is  currently  working  as  Associate  Professor  in  Department  of  Library  and  Information  Science,  University of Delhi. He has 16 years of teaching, administration  and  research  experience  at  the  University  level.  Under  his  supervision,  17  MPhil,  6  PhD  and  110+  project  reports  have  been  awarded.  He  has  published  one  book,  edited  two  books,  32  international  research  articles  in  peer-reviewed  journals,  20  chapters  in  books,  9  national  articles,  and  7  international  conference  papers.  He  is  also  Editorial  Board  member  of  JLIS,  IJLIS  and  reviewer  for  five  international  LIS  journals.  His  areas  of  interest  includes:  Designing  and  evaluation  of  websites, evaluation of web-OPACs, information communication  technology  in  libraries,  social  networking  sites,  e-resources,  mobile-based  library  services,  etc.  

========9========

