DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 36, No. 2, March 2016, pp. 73-78 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.36.2.9479 
2016, DESIDOC 
Evaluation of Role of Traditional Knowledge Digital Library and Traditional Chinese  
Medicine Database in Preservation of Traditional Medicinal Knowledge  
Mohd Shoaib Ansari   
Department of Library & Information Science, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi-221 005 
E-mail: akhtarshoaib323@gmail.com 
AbsTRACT 
The purpose of paper is to describe the importance of traditional knowledge in the feld of medicine. It particularly  discusses the importance of traditional medicine knowledge in the developing countries and the challenges involved  in preservation and protectionof it. It evaluates the role of the Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL) and  Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) database with protection and preservation. The paper outlines the theoretical  aspect of knowledge preservation, especially with reference to the protection from bio-piracy. The TKDL and TCM  database codifed traditional medicinal knowledge and made them available in international languages. Both the databases  have rich collection of traditional medicine system for the help of researchers and medical professionals. The paper  discusses the theoretical and conceptual understandings of traditional knowledge, and its preservation and protection.   
Keywords: Knowledge preservation, traditional knowledge, digital libraries, intellectual property rights, Traditional 
               Knowledge Digital Library, Traditional Chinese Medicine                           
1.  InTRoDuCTIon 
Traditional  knowledge  is  a  term  generally  applied  for knowledge that is generated in informal ways. It has  generally  been  passed  on  from  one  generation  to  other  generation. It may be in the written form or transmitted  only  orally.  The  Traditional  Knowledge  can  be  held  by  individuals, communities or society as a whole1. It can also  make an important contribution to analyse environmental  and social conditions within specific regions or specific  geographical areas. The use of Traditional Knowledge in  medicine  is  very  common  in  the  developing  countries.  Now a days Traditional Knowledge is at the risk because  of the rapidly changing natural environments, fast growing  urbanisation,  new  technologies,  lack  of  awareness,  and  language  barriers. 
Over  the  past  decade,  traditional  knowledge  has  received increasing attention on the international agenda.  Factors  contributing  to  this  include  the  recognition  of  its  importance  in  the  lives  of  the  people  and  in  the  conservation of biodiversity; concerns about the rapid loss  of  Traditional  Knowledge  and  global  cultural  diversity;  concerns about unauthorised and inappropriate patenting  and use with no sharing of its benefits with the original  holders.  Many  countries  and  communities  worldwide  are  considering  this  issue  at  the  national,  regional,  and  international  levels.  
World  Intellectual  Property  Organisation  (WIPO)2 defines traditional knowledge as “Traditional knowledge  (TK)  is  knowledge,  know-how,  skills  and  practices  that  are developed, sustained and passed on from generation  
to generation within a community, often forming part of  its  cultural  or  spiritual  identity.” 
1.1 Types  of Traditional  Knowledge 
The traditional knowledge can be broadly divided into  two categories recorded knowledge and oral knowledge.  Those  categories  can  be  described  as: 
• Recorded  knowledge  -  This  is  often  referred  as  
codified  and  is  available  mainly  in  the  form  of  
ancient  text  and  manuscripts.  These  are  mainly  in  
those  languages  which  were  used  in  their  time  of  
origin.  
• Oral knowledge - This is referred as knowledge that  
is not recorded or codified anywhere. It is transferred  
only orally from generation to generation within the  
community. Oral knowledge needs more attention to  
identify and preserve as it is the basis of livelihood  
for  many  indigenous  communities. 
1.2  Challenges  in  Protecting Traditional  Knowledge 
A  patent  is  given  for  the  innovation  or  invention  that is invented by a person or an organisation. Whereas,  traditional knowledge is created and owned collectively  by communities and they transfer it from one generation  to  another  by  traditional  folk  and  customs. The  modern  intellectual  property  right  (IPR)  laws  don’t  have  any  mechanism  to  protect  the  public  domain  knowledge.  A  small  change  in  traditional  knowledge  or  practice  can  make  a  new  product  which  can  be  independently  patentable.  
Received 26 November 2015, revised 28 December 2015, online published 28 March 2016 

========1========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  2,  MARCH  2016 
The  corporate  and  multinational  companies  from  developed  countries  make  small  changes  in  traditional  knowledge of developing countries for their commercial  products.  They  patented  it  without  sharing  any  benefit  with the communities which hold the source of traditional  knowledge.  Thus,  the  present  patent  system  gives  the  entire economic benefit to those who have only slightly  modified the traditional knowledge and given nothing to  those who developed it over generations. Worst of all is  once  such  patents  are  granted,  the  laws  restrict  people  to  use  them  including  the  communities  that  developed  and  held  the  knowledge  for  generations.3 
Traditional  K  needs  to  be  protected  in  addition  of  preserving them. World Intellectual Property Organisation  (WIPO)  clearly  distinguishes  between  preservation  and  protection. Preservation means identification, documentation,  transmission,  revitalisation,  and  promotion  of  cultural  heritage to ensure its maintenance. Whereas, the protection  of  traditional  knowledge  means  the  protection  against  misuse and misappropriation such as copying, adaptation  or  use  by  unauthorised  third  parties.  
1.3  Importance  of Traditional  Medicinal  Knowledge 
Medical science has progressed very much in human  healthcare. Scientific innovations and development of new  medicines have played a major role in this achievement.  However, despite of these successes, it is estimated that  over  one-third  of  the  world’s  population  lack  to  afford  essential drugs. Modern medical treatment is not available  for  a  large  proportion  of  the  world’s  population.  Thus,  traditional  medicine  is  widely  available  even  in  remote  areas.  It  is  affordable  by  the  majority  of  people  living  in  developing  countries  due  to  its  local  availability  and  low  cost.  In  India,  according  to  the  Government,  70  %  of  the  population  uses  traditional  Indian  medicine. 
The  most  widely  used  traditional  medicine  and  alternative therapies are herbal medicines and acupuncture.  Today  traditional  medicine  and  complementary  and  alternative medicine play an increasingly important role  in  the  reform  of  the  health  sector  of  many  countries.4 
1.4  Traditional  Medicinal  Knowledge  in  India  and  
China 
India  and  China  have  rich  heritage  of  traditional  medicine system. Indian traditional medicine and traditional  chinese  medicine  have  many  similarities.  The  focus  of  both  the  systems  is  on  the  patient  rather  than  disease.  Both  systems  fundamentally  aim  to  promote  health  and  enhance the quality of life. Half of the botanical sources  used as medicines in both systems has similarities. Even  both  medical  systems  have  similar  philosophies  geared  towards  enabling  classification  of  individuals,  materials  and  diseases.  
The  TCM  considers  the  human  at  the  centre  of  the  universe  as  an  antenna  between  celestial  and  earthly  elements. Water, earth, metal, wood and fire are the five  elements  of  the  material  world.  The  world  is  a  single  
74 
unit  and  its  movement  gives  rise  to  ‘yin  and  yang’  the  two  main  antithetic  aspects.  The  actual  meaning  of  the  term  ‘yin  and  yang’  is  ‘opposites’,  such  as  the  positive  and  the  negative.  The  four  bodily  humors  (qi,  blood,  moisture  and  essence)  and  internal  organ  systems  (zang  fu) play an important role in balancing the yin and yang  in  the  human  body.  Proper  formation,  maintenance  and  circulation  of  these  energies  are  essential  for  health.  When  the  two  energies  fall  out  of  harmony,  diseases  develop.  The  physician  takes  into  account  this  concept  while treating patients. Drugs or herbs are used to correct  this  imbalance  of  ‘yin–yang’  in  the  human  body.5,6 
The  ITM  considers  that  the  universe  is  made  up  of  combinations of the five elements (pancha mahabhutas).  These are Akasha (ether or void), Vayu (air), Teja (fire),  Aap  or  Jala  (water)  and  Prithvi  or  Bhumi  (earth).  The  medical  system  coded  the  elements  into  three  forces,  which  govern  all  life  processes.  These  three  forces  (kapha,  pitta  and  vata)  are  known  as  the  three  doshas  or  simply  the  tridosha.  Each  of  the  doshas  is  composed  of  one  or  two  elements. Vata  is  composed  of  space  and  air,  Pitta  of  fire,  and  kapha  of  water  and  earth.  The  tridosha regulates every physiological and psychological  process  in  the  living  organism.  The  interplay  among  them  determines  the  qualities  and  conditions  of  the  individual.  A  harmonious  state  of  three  doshas  creates  balance  and  health.  An  imbalance  manifests  as  a  sign  or  symptom  of  disease.7 
1.5  Preservation  and  Protection  of  Traditional  
Medicinal  knowledge 
There are many bad patents granted over medicinal  and  food  plants  which  communities  have  been  using  for  thousand  of  years. The  patent  applications  for  these  have not acknowledged the prior knowledge and use by  indigenous  peoples  of  these  resources.  In  some  cases,  researchers intentionally took patent of some traditional  medicine  with  slightly  modifications. These  cases  made  developing  countries  aware  about  protection  of  their  traditional  knowledge.  The  initiatives  have  been  started  to  protect  and  preserve  traditional  knowledge  globally.  India and China are the countries which have a maximum  share  of  traditional  knowledge  in  the  world.  They  also  started  taking  initiatives  to  preserve  and  protect  their  traditional  knowledge. 
2. TRADITIonAL   Know LEDgE   D IgITAL 
LIbRARy  (TKDL) 
India  is  one  of  the  largest  traditional  knowledge  holding countries in the world. India’s effort on revocation  of patent on turmeric and neem led to the genesis of the  Traditional  Knowledge  Digital  Library  (TKDL)  (Fig.1).  It  is  a  knowledge  repository  on  the  Indian  traditional  system  of  medicine  which  includes  Ayurveda,  Siddha,  Unani  Siddha  and Yoga.  It  is  a  collaborative  project  of  the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR),  Ministry  of  Science  and  Technology  and  Department  of  AYUSH  (Ayurveda,  Yoga  and  Naturopathy,  Unani,  

========2========

ANSARI: EVALUATION OF ROLE OF TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DIGITAL LIBRARY AND TRADITIONAL CHINESE MEDICINE 
Figure  1.  Traditional  knowledge  digital  library  (TKDL)   
 homepage (www.tkdl.res.in/). 
Siddha, and Homeopathy), Ministry of Health and Family  Welfare. 
The TKDL project digitises the documents of various  Indian  traditional  medicine  systems  which  are  available  in  the  public  domain.  These  documents  are  in  the  form  of  ancient  literature  and  other  existing  literature  and  rarely understandable to the common people. The TKDL  targets Indian systems of medicine, viz., Ayurveda, Unani,  Siddha,  and  Yoga  available  in  public  domain.  This  is  being documented by sifting and collating the information  about  traditional  knowledge  from  the  literature  existing  in  local  languages  such  as  Sanskrit,  Persian,  Arabic,  Urdu,  and Tamil  in  digitised  format,  and  is  available  in  five international languages which are English, German,  Spanish,  French,  and  Japanese.  Information  comprising  about  2  lakh  formulations  have  been  transcribed  for  realising  the  objective  of  TKDL  project.  Each  Sloka  is  read  and  converted  into  a  structured  language  using  Traditional Knowledge Resource Classification (TKRC) by  subject  experts.  The  codes  are  then  filled  into  data  entry screen. The Slokas are also saved in the database.  The  translated  version  of  all  the  TKRC  codes  is  ported  in  the  database.  The  abstraction  is  done  by  the  subject  experts.  The  codes  once  saved  in  metadata  directory  are  converted  in  different  languages  based  on  unicode  technology. 
The  TKRC  is  innovative  structured  classification  system named for the purpose of systematic arrangement,  dissemination  and  retrieval.  It  has  been  evolved  for  about  25,000  subgroups  against  few  subgroups  that  were  available  in  earlier  versions  of  the  International  Patent  Classification  (IPC),  related  to  medicinal  plants,  minerals, animal resources, effects and diseases, methods  of preparations, modes of administration, etc. The TKDL  software with TKRC converts text in local languages into  multiple  languages.  It  may  be  noted  that  the  software  does  not  transliterate,  rather  it  does  a  knowledge-based  conversion, where data abstracted once is converted into  several languages by using unicode, metadata methodology.  
The  software  also  converts  traditional  terminology  into  modern terminology, for example, Jwar to fever, Turmeric  to  Curcuma  longa,  Mussorika  to  small  pox,  etc. 
With the help of TKDL, India is capable of protecting  more than 2,92,662 medicinal formulations. Thus, TKDL  gives defensive protection for India’s traditional medicinal  knowledge. Now it is estimated that there is as much as  a 44 % decline in patent claims filed on Indian systems  of medicine8. The TKDL made a huge impact around the  world and inspired many developing countries to protect  their traditional knowledge against wrongful exploitation,  primarily in the pharmaceutical sector. However, TKDL  is  limited  in  its  coverage  as  it  does  not  include  the  non-codified  or  oral  knowledge.  It  is  also  restricted  to  medicinal  knowledge. 
2.1 search Types  and search options  in TKDL 
TKDL includes a search interface providing full text  search and retrieval of traditional knowledge information  on IPC and keywords in multiple languages. The search  features include single or multiple word searches, complex  Boolean expression search, proximity search, field search,  phrase  search,  etc.,  in  the  form  of  simple  and  advanced  search  options.  Simple  search  lets  the  user  search  a  combination  of  keywords. This  is  a  searchable  database  which can be started by clicking on the Ayurveda, Unani  or Siddha icons on the homepage. Figure 2 shows TKDL  search  interface. 
Figure  2.  Traditional  knowledge  digital  library  (TKDL)  
 search window. 
2.1.1 Simple  Search 
Different search terms, including keywords, diseases  and IPC codes can be used with the operator ’OR’ (the use  of operator ’AND’ is not supported). The corresponding  menu  provides  all  the  search  terms  available  in  this  database and can be used to select the appropriate search  terms. The  features  of  Simple  Search  are: 
(a) Terms  to  be  searched  may  be  entered  or  selected  
from  corresponding  help  menu. 
(b) Single  or  multiple  search  terms  may  be  entered. (c) Multiple search terms may be searched using operator  
OR. 
(d) To  search  using  local  names  with  Keyword  Help,  
one  has  to  tick  the  check  box—'with  local  name'.  
75 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  2,  MARCH  2016 
2.1.2 Advanced  Search  
This  option  allows  a  search,  using  several  search  terms such as keywords, disease, IPC code, bibliography  and title, each individually specified. All these terms can  be  selected  from  appropriate  help  menu.  
Features  of Advance  Search 
(a) Terms to be searched may be entered into text boxes  
provided  or  selected  from  the  corresponding  help  
menu. 
(b) Single term can be searched but the text box on the  
top  should  not  be  left  empty 
(c) For  help  in  the  appropriate  keyword  search,  the  
Keyword Help may be used. It provides a complete  
list  of  the  keywords  used  in  the  representative  
database,  including  ingredients  of  plant,  animal  or  
mineral  origin.  Local  names  and  Sanskrit, Tamil  or  
Urdu  terms  as  they  appear  (in  diacritical)  may  be  
used  directly. 
(d) Disease Help provides a list of all the diseases that  
can  be  cured  by  the  formulations  in  the  database.  (e) Each  formulation  is  given  a  title.  This  may  also  
be  used  as  the  search  term.  Use  the  Title  Help  to  
select  the  title. 
(f) To  search  using  local  names  with  Keyword  Help,  
tick  the  check  box—'with  local  name'. 
(g) The  operator  OR  can  be  used  to  obtain  results  
containing  both  search  terms,  e.g.,  curcuma  OR  
cough  will  give  all  the  formulations  containing  
either  curcuma  or  cough. 
(h) The drop down menu of 'knowledge is known since'  
can be used to see the formulations on the basis of  
the time period. For example, 200 years will display  
all  instances  of  the  formulations,  which  fulfil  the  
search  criteria  and  are  200  years  old. 
(i) One  can  select  'along'  'with  summary'  or  'without  
summary',  for  viewing  the  results  accordingly. 
2.1.3 Additional  Search  Options 
(a) TKRC search:  TKRC is designed to classify Indian  
traditional  knowledge  documentation.  The  TKRC  
contains language independent symbols and is modeled  
on the IPC. The various terms have been put under  
different heads like plants, animals, diseases, actions,  
etc.  The  search  can  be  used  to  familiarise  oneself  
with this system of classification since the page also  
contains details of TKRC structure and allows search  
of  various TKRC  symbols  for  known  terms. (b) IPC search:  The International Patent Classification  
(IPC)  is  a  hierarchical  system  of  symbols  for  the  
classification of patents and utility models based on  
different  areas  of  technology  of  the  patents.  These  
symbols  are  language-independent  and  are  used  by  
more  than  100  patent  offices  and  regional  offices  
for  classification  of  their  patent  data.  Only  those  
76 
IPC  symbols  relevant  to  TKDL  are  used  and  are  from  the  8th  edition  of  the  IPC.  The  appropriate  IPC  symbols  may  be  selected  from  the  IPC  search  menu  provided.  The  IPC  search  allows  for  single  or  multiple  symbols  to  be  searched. 
3.   TRADITIonAL  Ch InEsE  M EDICInE DATAbAsE 
(TCM) 
China  has  a  rich  asset  of  traditional  knowledge.  The  most  important  type  of  traditional  knowledge  in  China  is  Chinese  traditional  medicine  (TCM)  which  is  derived  from  its  ancient  traditions.  The  traditional  Chinese  medicine  is  mostly  in  written  form.  China  has  its  traditional  knowledge  in  Chinese  language,  whereas  Indian traditional knowledge is written down in various  regional  languages. The  uniformity  in  language  made  it  widespread and highly accessible. The TCM is also used  in other Asian countries such as Korea and Japan. Hence  legal protection in one country becomes ineffective as it  can be freely used in other countries. Therefore, China’s  policies  focus  mainly  towards  positive  protection  of  traditional knowledge by promoting innovation based on  integration  of TCM  in  modern  western  knowledge. 
The TCM database was started by the Computational  and System Biology Laboratory, which started to integrate  TCM  and  western  technologies  in  2003. The  traditional  TCM  contains  three-dimensional  structural  information  of TCM constituents and is ready for molecular docking  simulation.The  TCM  database  is  currently  the  most  comprehensive  and  largest  non-commercial  medical  database  available  for  downloading  (Fig.  3). 
Figure 3. Traditional  Chinese  Medicine  Database@Taiwan  
(TCM) homepage (http://tcm.cmu.edu.tw/). 
The database contains approximately 20,000 ingredients  from 453 different herbs, animal products, and minerals  and is increasing rapidly. The TCM database is organised  by traditional actions of Chinese medicines. There are a  total  of  22  different  drug  classes  and  some  are  further  divided  into  subclasses  based  on  clinical  applications  recorded  in  TCM  monographs.  The  TCM  classification  is  based  on  traditional  Chinese  theories,  including  the  Yin-Yang, the human Meridan/Channel system, the Five  Elements  theory,  and  the  Zang  Fu  organ  theory.  The  TCM  lists  certain  classes,  such  as  parasite  elimination,  dampness  reduction  and  itchiness  relief,  medicinal  and  

========4========

ANSARI: EVALUATION OF ROLE OF TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DIGITAL LIBRARY AND TRADITIONAL CHINESE MEDICINE 
topical  application  medicinal,  contain  toxic  ingredients  and  are  no  longer  prescribed  in  clinics.  These  data  do  not imply endorsement for any clinical or private use of  the  toxic  TCM  compounds  nor  for  any  animal  products  present  in  the  database9.  
3.1 search Types  and search options  in TCM 
The TCM database is constructed to create the most  complete TCM library and to strengthen the TCM research  network  to  date.  In  addition,  this  web-based  database  is  implemented  with  virtual  screening  and  molecular  simulation functions. The TCM database can be browsed  by simple and advanced search options. It also provides  a  website  search  engine  is  available  at  top  the  page  for  users who prefer search by Chinese medicine names and  other TCM  information. 
3.1.1 
Figure 4. basic search interface in TCM database. 
Simple  Search 
can  also  specify  structure  types,  including  exact  search  and substructure search, whichever best describes users’  needs.  Both  of  the  advance  search  options  can  be  used  alone or in conjunction. The result will return molecule(s)  that  satisfy  the  input  specification  in  a  tabular  format  with  name  and  2D  representation9 
Following  additional  facilities  are  also  available  for  its  users; 
• Download interface— The TCM database organises  
ingredients  by  their  drug  action  classes  and  their  
original sources. Users can also download a specific  
drug  class  or  a  specific  TCM  or  the  whole  TCM  
database  from  the  download  page. 
• sharing  TCM  constituents— The  advancement  of  
new  technologies  made  easy  to  study  new  TCM  
ingredients.  The  new  ingredients  must  be  added  
for  avoiding  duplication  work.  The  TCM  database  
also  provides  an  upload  function  for  scientists  who  
are  interested  in  sharing  their  findings  on  Chinese  
medicines.  Users  may  upload  their  own  molecules  
to  the  TCM  database  server  in  mol2  format.  The  
uploaded  molecules  are  reviewed  and  incorporated  
into  the TCM  database. 
4.  ConCLusIons 
The  preservation  and  protection  of  traditional  knowledge  is  a  major  challenge  among  the  countries  that  hold  it.  A  variety  of  initiatives  are  being  made  across  the  world  to  protect  it.  India  and  China  are  the  
The  simple  search  option  enables  users  to  browse  most developing countries and they hold a large part of  the  website,  either  by  TCM  medicine  or  by  chemical  traditional knowlege of the world. They also have a rich  
composition  (Fig.  4).  Search  by  TCM  
heritage of the traditional medicine system. The bio-piracy  of  their  traditional  knowledge  made  them  aware  about  protection this knowledge. The TKDL and TCM database  
The  search  by  TCM-medicine  option  allows  users  are the initiatives taken by both countries for protection  to  select  the  intended  drug  action  group  and  then  the  of  from  bio-piracy.  The  traditional  knowledge  recorded  
desired  TCM  medicine.  Search  by  Chemical  Composition  
in  these  databases  become  public  domain  knowledge.  Thus,  these  cannot  be  considered  as  patentable.  These  records  are  easily  accessible  to  patent  offices  around  
The  search  by  TCM-chemical  composition  option  
the  world  and  no  one  can  apply  for  patent  them.  If  a  allows  users  to  find  possible TCM  sources  of  the  given  
person applies, patent examiners could easily check this  molecule.  This  search  result  is  directly  linked  to  the  
database and reject the application that might be a mere  TCM  compound  webpage  without  the  need  to  specify  
copy  of  traditional  knowledge.  It  helps  in  protecting  by  TCM  action  group.  The  result  is  organised  in  a  ‘TCM  
bio-piracy.  The  TKDL  and  TCM  are  rich  databases  of  profile’ for both search options. It provides the identified  
medical  information  and  are  very  helpful  for  research  TCM  compound(s)  and  the  associated  references.  The  
and  industry. 
compound’s 2D and 3D structures and molecular properties  
are open by clicking on a TCM compound in the profile.  
REFEREnCEs 
Users can download the structure of the molecule in cdx  
1. (2D)  or  mol2  (3D)  format  at  the  bottom  of  the  TCM  compound  web  page.  In  addition,  users  can  also  click  on  the  links  to  browse  other  Chinese  medicines  that  contains  the  selected TCM  compound. 
3.1.2 Advanced  Search  
The advance search option incorporates a molecular  
3. drawing interface (ChemAxon) for structure search. Users  
2. 
Koning, M. Biodiversity prospecting and the equitable  remuneration of ethnobiological knowledge: Reconciling  industry  &  indigenous  interests.  Intell.  Prop.  J., 1998. 
World Intellectual Property Organisation. Traditional  knowledge.  http://www.wipo.int/tk/en/tk/  (accessed  on  5  December  2014). 
Carlos,  M.  Protection  and  promotion  of  traditional  medicine—Implications for public health in developing  
77 

========5========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  2,  MARCH  2016 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
countries.  Essential  Medicines  and  Health  Products  Information Portal, 2002. http://apps.who.int/medicinedocs/ pdf/s4917e/s4917e.pdf,  (accessed  on  4  June  2012). Ansari,  M.S.  &  Chaubey,  A.K.  Preservation  and  protection  of  traditional  knowledge  in  medicine:  A  case  study  of  TKDL.  In   Information  resource  management in digital librarianship, edited by  M.K.  Verma & A. Shukla. Shree Publishers & Distributors,  New  Delhi,  2014,  pp.  141-51. 
Gibert, T.F. Reflections on traditional Chinese medicine  and  its  pharmacopoeia.  Annales  Pharmaceutiques  Francaises,  1998,  56(6). http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ pubmed/9872017  (accessed  on  5  December  2014). Cheng, J.T. Review: Drug therapy in Chinese traditional  medicine. J. of Clini. Pharma ., 2000, 40(5). http:// www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10806595  (accessed  on  5  December  2014). 
Lad, V. Ayurveda: The science of self-healing. Lotus  Press, Wilmot,  1985.  pp.  26-36. 
Jishnu, Latha. Safeguarding ancient wisdom. Down to  earth, 2012. http://www.downtoearth.org.in/coverage/ safeguarding-ancient-wisdom-39209  (accessed  on  5  February  2014). 
78 
9. 
Chen,  Calvin  Yu-Chian.  TCM  database@Taiwan:  The  world’s  largest  traditional  Chinese  medicine  database  for  drug  screening. In   Silico.  PLoS  ONE,  2011.  doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0015939  (accessed  on  5  February  2014). 
Contributor 
Mohd.  shoaib Ansari  is a Research Scholar in the Department  of  Library  &  information  Science,  Banaras  Hindu  University.  He  received  his  Masters  degree  in  Library  &  Information  Science  in  2013  and  Bachelors  degree  in  Economics  in  2011  from same university. He has qualified National Eligibility Test  (NET)  in  2012  and  recipient  of  Junior  Research  Fellowship  from  University  Grants  Commission,  India. 

========6========

