DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 36, No. 4, July 2016, pp. 199-204 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.36.4.9600 
 2016, DESIDOC 
Personalised Information Recommender Using Framework for Ontology  
Alignment Among Digital Libraries 
Anirban Chakrabarty* and Sudipta Roy** 
*Assam University, Silchar, India 
E-mail: chakrabarty.anirban@rediffmail.com 
**Computer Science and Engineering Department, Triguna Sen School of Technology,  
Assam Central University, Silchar, Assam 
E-mail: sudipta.it@gmail.com 
AbstRAct 
In the digital erantology is considered as one of the powerful tools for knowledge representation and effcient  information retrieval. Ontology alignment is a process that discovers mapping between source and target ontologies,  where each mapping is a relationship based on some similarity measure. This paper, has presented a new context  aware alignment approach that needs little human intervention and it can map multiple ontologies to generate  user interest dynamically. The objective is to design and develop an ontology alignment model that provides more  benefts to its stakeholders in sharing resources and searching across digital libraries based on priorities of users. The  experimental results evidently indicate signifcant improvement in search results when user profle and navigational  pattern ontologies are aligned with digital library ontology.  
Keywords: Digital library, ontology alignment, user interest, context similarity, information retrieval 
1. INtRODUctION 
Digital  library  is  a  structured  collection  of  digital  content  like  text,  video,  or  audio  developed  and  made  available  on  the  web  to  meet  the  information  need  of  end  users.  Digital  libraries  have  great  prospective  as  they  can  offer  a  wide  range  of  benefits  to  researchers,  academicians,  institutions  and  learners  worldwide1.  IEEE  Xplore  Digital  Library  is  an  example  of  research  library  where  journals,  research  articles  and  conference  proceedings are organised for people to access remotely2.  A  personalised  digital  environment  is  need  of  the  hour  where  users  can  organise  the  digital  space,  exchange  information  with  each  other,  build  communities  and  get  recommendations, particularly when digital preservation  of  electronic  resources  is  becoming  more  challenging3. 
Ontologies have come to the forefront of information  science  as  a  way  to  model  a  domain  using  a  set  of  concepts and the relationships among them4. Ontology can  be considered as a description of the elements it contains  and when combined with other ontologies it can help to  form a community of such elements5. Ontology alignment  or  ontology  mapping  is  a  useful  tool  for  organising  information  semantically  which  can  integrate  disparate  databases  so  that  they  can  be  accessed  concurrently  in  a  uniform  manner.  Several  communities  have  taken  mapping  initiatives  to  address  the  issue  of  searching  across multiple domains6. However, the effectiveness of  search  is  hampered  by  the  fact  that  individual  library  
resources are usually not interconnected to the web and  lacks  the  context.  
The following motivations led to this research: Firstly,  an ontology hierarchy within a digital library can enhance  the  access  process  by  enabling  ontological  search  using  the  context.  Secondly,  ontology  alignment  can  be  used  to  map  multiple  digital  libraries  simultaneously.  This  type of framework for a personalised digital library can  be  helpful  in  the  following  scenarios:  Faculty  members  can  navigate  among  the  content  of  digital  libraries  in  providing interactive e-learning sessions based on learner’s  preference  or  for  researchers  who  want  to  search  for  publications  under  a  specific  domain7.  Thirdly  with  ontology  mapping,  these  personalised  libraries  can  be  built from previous resources and new information added  after  observing  the  usage  pattern  of  library.  
The  challenging  task  is  that  one  can  rarely  find  two  different  ontologies  communicating  on  the  same  hierarchy and for heterogeneous ontologies interpretation  of elements becomes problematic. The major issue is to  determine the user’s profile, including navigational history  and  preferences.  This  information  should  help  users  to  improve  his  searches  on  multiple  digital  libraries.8 
2. RELAtED WORK 
Over  the  past  years  digital  libraries  (DL)  have  steadily  enhanced  their  services  to  conveniently  fulfill  information  need  of  diversified  users,  by  offering  them  
Received 12 January 2016, revised on 30 May 2016, online published 28 July 2016 

========1========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  4, JuLy  2016 
broader spectrum of services9. However, digital libraries  are  still  experiencing  difficulties  in  frequently  updating  cross-referenced  areas,  absence  of  shared  approach  on  how to synchronise different DL profiles and structures.  A  digital  library  should  not  only  adjust  to  the  specific  characteristics of each user profile, but also to the particular  necessities and preferences of each user combining both  library archives and profile level personalisation10. Luo11,  et  al.  introduced  concepts  related  to  user  browsing  history  and  proposed  a  hybrid  user  profile  model  and  a  personalised recommender system to utilise the semantic  information  between  the  items  and  user  profile  model  to  make  recommendations.  
Kruk12, et al.  highlighted that a semantic personalised  digital  library  should  enhance  information  extraction,  facilitate query refnement and also provide recommendation  services  using  community-aware  ontologies. 
Related  study  shows  that  ontologies  share  certain  components  that  are  important  to  their  alignment  like  concepts,  attributes,  instances  and  relations.  Typically,  concepts  represent  the  objects  in  a  domain  that  have  a  variety  of  attributes.  The  relations  between  different  concepts  can  be  expressed  using  a  concept  hierarchy  or  through  the  properties  that  connects  the  concepts13.  Khoo,14 et  al.  developed  a  disease  treatment  ontology  model that divides disease treatment information into five  classes—disease, treatment, condition, effect and evidence.  The  usage  of  sub-classes,  properties  and  instances  of  these  main  classes  were  illustrated  in  this  paper.  The  widely  used  language  to  model  ontologies  is  the  Web  Ontology  Language  (OWL),  which  is  a  form  of  RDF  and  is  written  using  a  subset  of  XML.  The  elements  in  OWL  ontology  are  defined  as  RDF  resources  and  are  recognised  by  uRI15.  The  use  of  ontology  alignment  in  a  digital  library  brings  the  possibility  of  predicting  user  requirements  in  advance  and  to  offer  personalised  services ahead of actual need. Several ontology alignment  algorithms have been developed over the past years were  attempts have been made to develop matchers that perform  large scale ontology alignments in the minimum amount  of  time16.  Patkar17   in  his  work  indicates  that  Ontology  is  one  of  the  latest  tools  for  information  retrieval  from  libraries  in  digital  age.  The  paper  discusses  advances  of  information  managing  tools  terminating  in  ontology  and  highlights  the  applications  of  ontology  among  the  different  fields.  
The related study reveals that ontologies have been  developed  in  different  areas  and  to  obtain  good  results,  we  need  to  find  the  relationships  between  terms  in  the  different  ontologies.  Presently,  there  exist  a  number  of  systems  that  support  users  in  aligning  ontologies,  but  there  is  a  need  for  mapping  heterogeneous  ontology  that  can  provide  personal  recommendations  to  users  based  on  interest  areas.  Most  digital  library  retrieval  services are oriented towards a generic user and provide  minimum support for mapping between libraries. The work  attempts  to  develop  an  ontology  alignment  technique  to  
200 
map  different  ontologies,  perform  advanced  search,  and  provide recommendations and share information amongst  heterogeneous  library  archives. 
3. AIM 
The  major  contributions  in  this  paper  are  to:  • Propose a methodology for ontology mapping between  
concepts  across  different  digital  libraries  by  using  
this mapping to develop user’s profile ontology. For  
this  purpose  web  application  is  used  to  study  the  
navigation  and  search  patterns  of  selected  users  on  
digital libraries maintained by some universities in  
India  and  which  is  publicly  accessible. 
• Suggest architecture for personalised digital library  
that allows individuals, institutions and associations  
to  share,  search  digital  content  amongst  libraries. • Develop of a personalised information recommender  
for searching in a digital library environment based  
on  user  profiles  and  search  patterns. 
4. MEtHODOLOGY 
Personalisation of services in digital libraries is need  of the hour but there are some critical issues which need  to  be  addressed  -  users  differ  in  their  personal  likings  and  work  modes,  and  libraries  usually  differ  in  the  ontology as they are built for different purposes. The use  of ontologies for describing the possible instances of use  in  a  digital  library  provides  the  prospect  of  forecasting  user requirements and to offer personalised services ahead  of actual need18.  The  paper  suggests  a  new  architecture  that  addresses  many  of  these  problems,  mentioned  as  personalised digital environment (PDE) is shown in Fig.  1.  It  is  a  system  that  provides  recommendations  using  the  knowledge  extracted  from  searching  and  browsing  profiles  of  users  and  also  from  knowledge  integrated  in  ontology  content  of  digital  libraries.  The  solution  has  been  evaluated  on  a  web  application  where  the  goal  was  not  to  build  an  ontology  for  describing  contents  of  a  digital  library  but  to  map  ontologies  based  on  users  search  patterns.  
5. ONtOLOGY ALIGNMENt 
The  objective  of  this  section  is  to  discuss  the  use  of  an  application  specific  ontology  to  search  for  library  resources  annotated  with  other  ontology.  To  overcome  such diversities an additional level of functionality among  ontologies  have  been  introduced  to  deploy  ontology  alignment to define how concepts from different ontologies  relate  each  other19   is  shown  in  Fig.  2.  This  mapping  is  modeled  on  the  type  of  match  used  to  interpret  user  preferences  by  ranking  the  similarity  scores. 
In  this  paper  ontology  is  defined  as  a  5-tuple:  O={C,P,Rc,Rp,I} where C and P are the set of concepts  and  properties  respectively.  Rc   defines  the  hierarchical  relationships  (ci,cj)  were  ci   is  the  sub  concept  of  c Similarly,  Rp  defines  the  hierarchical  relationships  
j.  

========2========

CHAKRABARTy  & RO y: A PERSONALISED INFORMATION RECOMMENDER uSING AN EFFICIENT FRAMEWORK  
Figure 1. A layered architecture of a personalized digital library.  
Figure 2. Ontology alignment for user profle generation. 
between  each  property  and  its  sub  properties,  I  is  a  set  of instances of concepts and properties. OWL uses owl:  Class  and  rdfs:  subClassOf  to  define  the  concepts  and  sub  concepts,  rdfs:  Property  and  rdfs:  subPropertyOf  to  define  property  and  sub  properties. 
Ontology  alignment  with  respect  to  the  concepts  accessed  by  user  is  defined  as:  
Align(O1,O2)  =  {  userid,  ci1,  rank  ci1,  ci2,  rank  ci2 ,  relationi   ,  score 
i 
  }  were  userid  is  a  unique  system  generated  id  for  each  user  accessing  the  library  ;c €  O1,  c 
i1 
i2 
  €  O2  ;  rank  of  concept  is  defined  as  the  ratio  of  count  of  access  made  by  a  user  to  the  total  access  for  the  concept;  relationi  €{exactmatch,  broad,  narrow,  conflict};  scorei   €[0..1]  here  score  provides  
the  alignment  score  of  two  concepts  in  the  ontology.  Each  tuple  in Align(O1,O2)  represents  that  concept  ci1  in  O1  is  mapped  to  concept  ci2   in  O2  with  scorei  and  the  alignment  type  relationi  while  the  rank  is  used  to  provide  recommendations  to  user.  
Each  Concept(c)  in  the  ontology  is  represented  as  5-tuple {Meta(c), Hier(c), Co-related(c), ,Inst(c),Count(c)}  were meta(c) gives the set of words describing metadata  of concept like labels, comments; Hier(c) is a vector that  provides the sub and super concepts of c; Co-related(c) is  a  vector  storing  words  that  indicate  synonym,  hyponym  of concept c; Count(c) gives no. of access made for the  concept  in  the  digital  library  (Table  1). 
201 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  4, JuLy  2016 
table 1.  Example of user profile generated from ontology  
p(c2)  |  ......  (1)  
alignment 
Here, p(c) denotes the property set of concept c and  User concepts Rank of  concepts ac- Rank of  Relation score 
|p(c)|  gives  the  no.  of  properties  belonging  to  concept  id accessed  concept  cessed in 02 concept  type 
c.  It  can  be  interpreted  that  more  the  properties  match  
in 01 in 01 in 02 in  two  concepts,  higher  the  similarity  score  of  two  u1 Journal 0.6 Research article 0.4 broader 0.75 
concepts.  
u2 Computer 0.7 Computer 0.6 Exact 1 
Step-2:  Subtree  Matching—For  concepts  falling  in  the  
uncertain  bucket  do  the  following:  
u3 Medical 0.2 Literature 0.3 Confict 0 
(a)  For  each  pair  of  concept  from  two  ontologies,  u4 Payment  0.8 Payment pro- 0.7 Exact 1 
mode cess 
compare their parent nodes to determine the parental  
similarity  and  use  it  to  increment  or  decrement  the  6. PROPOsED ALGORItHMs 
original  similarity  score  for  concepts. 
(b) For  each  pair  of  concept  compare  their  child  nodes  6.1 Ontology Alignment  
to determine the child similarity and use it to update  
The objective of aligning among different ontology-based  
the  original  similarity  score. 
digital libraries is to enable the use of ontology A to search  Step-3:  Match  refinement—Continue  matching  concepts  resources annotated with concepts from another library with  to  identify  type  of  match  and  compute  the  rank  of  ontology B. The user ontology hierarchy generated consists of  concepts  accessed  by  user.  Take  average  of  the  results  matched concepts from two ontologies along with their ranks.  from similarity_score calculated above from Eqn. 4 and  
rank  of  concepts  to  generate  the  user  profile  score. Step-1:  Contextual  Match—Perform  matching  between  
concepts  from  source  and  target  ontologies  using  Eqn.1  
6.2 Personal  Recommendation  based  on  Ontology  below.  Initially  the  pairs  are  sorted  into  three  buckets:  
Alignment 
above  the  upper  threshold  -  similar,  between  upper  and  When  a  user  navigates  from  one  digital  library  to  lower threshold – uncertain bucket and below the lower  another,  the  library  ontologies  are  aligned  first  to  see  threshold-conflicts.  The  threshold  is  selected  based  on  the matches and based on ranking of concepts, users are  experimentation.  provided  with  smart  recommendations  while  inputting  
Similarity_Score(c1,c2)=  |p(c1)∩p(c2)|  /  |p(c1)  U  
any  character  for  search  as  shown  in  Fig.  3. 
 Figure 3. Flow chart for personalised recommendation.  
202 

========4========

CHAKRABARTy  & RO y: A PERSONALISED INFORMATION RECOMMENDER uSING AN EFFICIENT FRAMEWORK  
7.  DAtA cOLLEctION 
7.1 Data set  
The  experimental  data  is  collected  from  publicly  available  digital  libraries  of  Central  universities  from  North  east  India,  namely,  Assam  Central  university,  Silchar and North Eastern Hill university, Shillong, India  for  study  purpose.  The  experiment  was  done  selecting  five  users  randomly  who  had  different  interest  areas.  The  software  used  for  this  work  is  JDK  1.7,  HTML,  Tomcat  8,  and  Protégé  4.1. 
7.2 Experimental  Metrics 
The experimental evaluation was designed to address  the  following: 
(a)  To  measure  the  effectiveness  of  personalised  
recommendation  in  ontology  alignment  F-measure  
values have been calculated and their variation with  
threshold changes has been studied. The F-measure20 
is a balanced mean of information retrieval between  
precision  and  recall  metrics  and  has  been  defined  
as  F=  2*P*R/(P+R 
(b) Comparison of ontology alignment based search has  
been studied using one, two and three keywords for  
top-n  documents  (Figs  4-6). 
Figure 5. Comparison of F-measure with varying threshold. 
7.3  Discussion  of  Experimental  Results  
The  comparison  of  F-measure  for  search  results  of  
five  users  in  different  digital  libraries  is  depicted  in  
Fig  3.  For  all  such  users  there  has  been  a  significant  
improvement  in  F-measure  values  in  case  of  ontology  
Alignment model when compared with individual libraries.  
Since the value of similarity depends to some extent on  
Figure 6.  Percentage of improvement in precision using ontology  the threshold considered in the algorithm, a variation of  
alignment for top-n search results. 
threshold  with  F-measure  for  different  libraries  and  our  
alignment  model  has  been  studied  for  same  set  of  five  
users.  The  highest  F-measure  value  was  reached  for  a  
threshold  of  0.6  in  the  ontology  model.  Figures  5  and  
6  provide  the  percentage  of  improvement  in  Precision  
and recall values for top-n search results using one, two  
and  three  keywords.  Both  results  show  that  there  is  a  
Figure 7. Percentage of improvement in recall using ontology  
alignment for top-n search results.  
significant rise in precision and recall values using single  keyword for ontology alignment approach when compared  with individual library results. The improvement, however,  decreases  as  the  user  provides  more  no.  of  keywords  for  search. 
Figure  4. comparison  of  F-measure  from  search  results  of  
fve users.  
8.   c ONcLUsIONs 
 The work demonstrates the use of ontology alignment  
203 

========5========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  4, JuLy  2016 
to  implement  and  transfer  the  concept  of  user  profle  and user navigational behaviour to other digital libraries  and  databases,  so  when  a  digital  library  user  switches  from  one  service  to  another,  the  user  profle  including  preferences  can  be  transferred  from  one  database  to  another effectively. The work uses contextual matching,  and  sub  tree  matching  to  accurately  identify  matches  and  supplements  them  with  rank  of  concepts  accessed  by  user  to  generate  profile  dynamically.  In  future,  the  work will be extended to identify threats from malicious  attacker  on  defence  websites  by  aligning  the  ontology  access  patterns  in  weblogs. 
REFERENcE s 
1.  Witten, I.H.; Bainbridge,D. & Nichols, D.M. How to  
build a digital library. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers,  
Burlington,  2010. 
2.  http://portal.acm.org/dl.cfm (accessed on 19 December  
2015) 
3.  Gaur,  Ramesh  C.  &  Tripathi,  Manorama.  Digital  
preservation of electronic resources.  DESIDOC J. of  
Lib. & Inf. Tech., 2012, 32(4), 293-301. doi: Http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.14429/djlit.32.4.2522 (accessed on 15  
December  2015). 
4.  Deshpande, Neela J. & Kumbhar, Rajendra. Construction  
and applications of ontology: Recent trends. DESIDOC  
J.  of  Lib.  &  Inf.  Tech.,  2011,  31(2).  http://dx.doi. 
org/10.14429/djlit.31.2.859 (accessed on 12 December  
2015). 
5.  Riano, David, et al. An ontology-based personalization  
of healthcare knowledge to support clinical decisions  
for  chronically  ill  patients. J.  of  Bioinf.,  2012, 45,  
429-46,  doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2011.12.008. 
6.  Juanzi, Li; Jie, Tang; yi, Li & Qiong, LuoRi MOM: A  
dynamic multistrategy ontology alignment framework.  
IEEE Trans. on Knowl. and Data Engg., 2009,  21(8),  
1218-32,  doi:  10.1109/TKDE.2008.202. 
7.  Joshi, Nikita. Semantic web-driven e-learning system.  
DESIDOC J. of Lib. & Inf. Tech., 2011,  31(4), 213- 
16. doi:http://publications.drdo.gov.in/ojs/index.php/ 
djlit/article/view/1098.  (accessed  on  25  November  
2015).  
8.  Towards  personalization  in  digital  libraries  through  
ontologies. Library Management, 2005, 26(4), 206- 
17,  doi:10.1108/01435120510596062.  (accessed  on  
17  November  2015). 
9.  Brahaj, A.; Razum, M. & Hoxha, J. Defining digital  
library research and advanced technology for digital  
libraries. Lecture Notes in Comp. Sci., 2013,  8092,  
23-8. 
10.  Southwick,  S.B.  A  guide  for  transforming  digital  
collections  metadata  into  linked  data  using  open  
source technologies. J. of Lib. Metadata, 2015, 15(1),  
1-35. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19386389.2015.1007 
009.  (accessed  on  21  December  2015). 
204 
11.   y .  Luo,  B.;  Xu,  H.  Cai  &  F.  Bu.  A  hybrid  user  
profile model for personalized recommender system  
with linked open data. Enterprise Systems Conference  
(ES), 2014, Shanghai, 2014, pp. 243-48, doi: 10.1109/ 
ES.2014.16. 
12.  Kruk, S.R. & Mc Daniel, B. Semantic digital libraries.  
Springer-Verlag,  Berlin  Heidelberg,  2009.  13. Volker, J.; Haase, P. & Hitzler, P. Learning expressive  
ontologies.  In   Ontology  learning  and  population:  
Bridging  the  gap  between  text  and  knowledge.  IOS  
Press,  2008,  pp.  45-69. 
14.  Christopher,S.G, et  al.  Developing  an  ontology  for  
encoding  disease  treatment  information  in  medical  
abstracts. DESIDOC  J.  of  Lib.  &  Inf.  Tech.,  2011,  
31(2),103-115.  http://publications.drdo.gov.in/ojs/ 
index.php/djlit/article/view/862.  (accessed  on  21  
October.  2015). 
15.  Ontology web language, 2008. http://www.w3.org/TR/ 
owl-features/  (accessed  on  18  December  2015). 16.  Ashraf, J.; Khadeer Hussain, O. & Khadeer Hussain,  
F.  A  framework  for  measuring  ontology  usage  on  
the  web.  Oxford university  Press,  2012. 17.  Patkar, Vivek. A passage to ontology tool for information  
organisation in the digital age. DESIDOC J. of Lib.  
&  Inf.  Tech.,   2011,  31(2).  http://publications.drdo. 
gov.in/ojs/index.php/djlit/article/view/861 (accessed  
on  25  November  2015). 
18.  Paulo, Cremonesi; yehuda, Koren & Roberto, Turrin.  
Performance  of  recommender  algorithms  on  top-n  
recommendation  tasks.  In   Proceedings  of  Fourth  
ACM  Conference  on  Recommender  Systems,  New  
york, uSA,  2010,  pp.  39-46. 
19.  Ehrig, M.; Staab, S. & Sure, y. Bootstrapping ontology  
alignment methods with APFEL. In   Proceedings  of  
International Conference Semantic Web (ISWC ’05),  
2005,  pp.  186-200. 
20.  Liu, yuan-chao; Wu, Chong & Liu, Ming. Research  
of  fast  SOM  clustering  for  text  information.  J.  of  
Expert  Sys.  with Appli.,  2011, 38,  9325-333. 
contributors 
Mr Anirban chakrabarty  is a Research Scholar in Computer  Science and Engineering Department, Assam Central university,  Silchar, India. He is MTech (IT), and MCA and is pursuing his  doctoral research in the area of Information Technology. He has  contributed several research papers in National and International  journals, conferences and has experience of teaching, industry  and research. His research areas include: Text mining, natural  language  processing,  data  analysis,  and  algorithms.  
Dr sudipta Roy  is Professor and Dean of Triguna Sen School  of Technology, Assam Central university, India. He has recently  been recognised as a Senior member, IEEE. He is PhD, MTech  and  has  extensively  contributed  to  reputed  journals,  seminars  and conferences both at national and international levels. His  areas  of  interests  include:  Image  processing,  networking,  and  data  mining.  

========6========

