DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 36, No. 2, March 2016, pp. 98-103  DOI: 10.14429/djlit.36.2.9714 
 2016, DESIDOC 
Creating Awareness of Publications through Marketing: Case Study  of DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology (DJLIT) 
Alka Bansal 
Defence Scientifc Information & Documentation Centre (DESIDOC), Metcalfe House, Delhi – 110 054 
E-mail: alka_bansal@desidoc.drdo.in 
AbStrACt 
Marketing  is  not  all  about  selling  or  making  profit.  It  is  a  mix  of  pricing,  promotion,  development  of  markets,  selling  as  well  as  distribution  and  one  most  important  term  that  has  been  added  in  recently  is  after  sales service and most successful marketing is considered to have a feedback mechanism. Feedback, not for the  sake of getting the feedback, but careful analysis of the requirements of the clients, analysis of the feedback and  then taking appropriate action on that. Marketing is all about creating awareness, making the customer delight  and  satisfaction  with  product/service.  It  is  true  for  all  be  it  design,  product  development,  or  service.  Defence  Scientifc Information & Documentation Centre (DESIDOC), on behalf of DRDO brings out a journal—DESIDOC  Journal of Library & Information Technology (DJLIT).  It  is  a  well  known  journal  in  the  feld  of  Library  &  Information Science. DESIDOC has taken certain initiatives for DJLIT  in terms of tools and techniques applied  for online and offine marketing of the Journal. The study points out the initiatives taken for marketing of the  Journal  for  its  all  stakeholders  and  plans  for  the  future. The  study  has  provided  some  recommendations  also.  The article will help the LIS professionals to explore various forums to market their products and services. 
Keywords: Marketing, journal, DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, marketing mix   
1.  INtrODUCtION 
Marketing is derived from the word ‘market’ which  refers  to  a  group  of  sellers  and  buyers  that  co-operate  to  exchange  goods  and  services.  A  market  consists  of  all  the  potential  customers  sharing  a  particular  need  or  want  who  might  be  willing  and  able  to  engage  in  exchange to satisfy that need or want. Marketing1  is the  management  process  which  identifies,  anticipates,  and  supplies customer requirements efficiently and profitably.  As  per  American  Marketing  Association:  “Marketing  Management  is  the  process  of  planning  and  executing  the  conception,  pricing,  promotion  and  distribution  of  ideas,  goods,  and  services  to  create  exchanges  that  satisfy individual and organizational objectives.” As per  Philip  Kotler,  “Satisfying  needs  and  wants  through  an  exchange  process  is  marketing”.  Marketing  aims  at:  (i)  identification of the client base; (ii) determination of the  needs,  wants,  and  demands  of  this  client  base;  and  (iii)  fulfilment of the same through designing and delivering  appropriate  products  and/or  services,  more  effectively  than  competitors2. 
The  ultimate  purpose  of  marketing  is  to  achieve  the  objectives  of  an  organisation.  The  objective  can  be  purely making profit, or promotion of products or services  without  keeping  the  profit  in  terms  of  money  in  mind.  It  could  be  to  gain  reputation,  image  building,  creating  awareness,  create  credibility,  etc. There  is  difference  in  marketing  and  selling.  Selling  is  a  promotional  effort  
which  focuses  mainly  on  the  sales  f  the  company.  It  is  more like pushing strategy for a product into the market.  It  focuses  on  the  needs  of  a  seller.  It  has  an  objective  of  profit.  The  customer  has  to  be  compelled  by  certain  strategies  to  buy  the  product.  Marketing  is  to  achieve  organisational  goals  by  being  more  effective  creating,  delivering and communicating customer value. It is pulling  strategy  where  the  product  is  sought  by  the  customer  himself.  It  focuses  on  the  needs  of  a  buyer.  
DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology  (DJLIT)3,  is  a  peer-reviewed,  open  access  journal.  It  is  a  bimonthly  journal  that  publishes  original  research  and  review  articles  related  to  IT  applied  to  library  activities,  services,  and  products  and  is  brought  out  by  Defence Scientific Information & Documentation Centre  (DESIDOC). It is meant for librarians, documentation and  information  professionals,  researchers,  students  and  all  others  interested  in  the  field.  It  was  formerly  known  as  'DESIDOC  Bulletin  of  Information  Technology  (DBIT)'.  It  was  started  in  1981. Year  2016  is  to  be  its  36th   year  of  continued  publishing. 
2.  LItErAtUrE  SUrVEY 
DeMers4   has  provided  top  seven  online  marketing  trends  that  will  dominate  2014  which  are:  (a)  content  marketing  will  be  bigger  than  ever.  He  mentioned  that  according to the Content Marketing Institute, the top B2B  content  marketing  strategies  are  social  media,  articles  on  a  business’s  website,  e-newsletters,  case  studies,  
Received 10 December 2015, revised 28 December 2015, online published 28 March 2016 

========1========

BANSAL: CREATING AWARENESS OF PUBLICATIONS THROUGH MARKETING: A CASE STUDY OF DJLIT  
videos and articles on other websites; (b) diverse social  media i.e., apart from the established social media sites  such  as  LinkedIn,  Facebook,  etc.,  other  new  emerging  social  media  sites  such  as  Pinterest,  Google+,  Tumblr  and  Instagram  can  be  explored  which  may  provide  more  options  and  features  to  be  used;  (c)  image-centric  content,  i.e.,  incorporating  images  is  beneficial  to  a  marketing campaign; (d) less will be more, i.e., consumer  preference  to  be  towards  simplistic  marketing  messages  instead of in-depth messages; (e) mobile-friendly content  i.e.,  due  to  the  widespread  (and  quickly  growing)  use  of smartphones and tablets, it’s necessary for companies  to  create  content  that’s  accessible  to  mobile  users;  (f)  advertisements  retargeting  will  grow  in  effectiveness,  i.e., to increase the overall conversion rate by reminding  consumers of the product or service they viewed; and (g)  New  marketing  avenues  can  be  explored  search  engine  optimisation (SEO) and social signals will become even  more  intertwined.  
Greg5  has given four printiples of marketing strategy in  the digital age which are: (a) Clarify business objectives—  most businesses can be adequately captured by evaluating  just  three  metrics: Awareness,  sales,  and  advocacy  (i.e.  customer referral); (b) use innovation teams to identify,  evaluate and activate emerging opportunities; (c) decouple  strategy and innovation; and (d) build open assets in the  marketplace,  i.e.,  participation  of  the  consumer  is  very  necessary so marketer should think in terms of application  programming  interfaces  and  software  development  kits.  According to an article on promotion of open access journal6,  promoting journals across and beyond the scholarly world  (scientists, prospective authors, journalists and wider public)  is  a  key  to  a  successful  launch  of  a  journal.  Content  is  king, many might say–but having the contents reach the  scientists poses a challenge in the increasingly scattered  scientific  publishing  landscape.  Some  suggested  tips  to  achieve it are: (a) Networking to encourage prospective  authors to publish in a chosen journal; (b) editors of the  journal  should  network  in  their  communities  to  attract  new  authors  and  to  endorse  publishing  in  open  access  in  general  (c)  direct  marketing  to  reach  the  scientists  with  the  message  about  call  for  papers;  (d)  building  a  database of researchers; (e) abstracting and indexing—This  services are the backbone of marketing for all scientific  journals; (f) online visibility or article level publicity to  educate public of these research findings in a direct and  timely  manner;  and  (g)  conference  and  event  marketing  to market journal in a very targeted way6. Green7  in her  article  gave  tips  for  SEO  and  journal  article  through  keywords.  She  has  given  clues  on  how  best  to  choose  keywords  for  SEO. 
3.  ObJECtIVES  
professionals,  academicians,  researchers,  and  students.  The  objective  of  this  paper  is  to  know  what  marketing  efforts are being initiated by the Journal management for  its  stakeholders  and  the  potential  areas  in  which  more  work  can  be  done.  Through  this  article  various  forums  have been explored where the LIS professionals can see a  journal’s presence and the various features against which  a  journal  can  be  evaluated  before  subscribing  it. 
4.  MEtHODOLOGY 
As per Zeithaml & Bitner8, the elements of marketing  programme are conceptualized in terms of 7 Ps–product,  place,  price,  promotion,  people,  physical  evidence,  and  process.  To  understand  the  marketing  activities  done  regarding DJLIT  in this area, the following approach has  been  taken:  (a) All  the  print  issues  of  the  Journal  were  scrutinised  to  understand  about  the  marketing  activities  adopted in last ten years, i.e., since 2005; (b) contents and  features available at the Journal site (http://publications. drdo.gov.in/ojs/index.php/djlit/)  and  (c)  Annaul  reports  of  DESIDOC  regarding  marketing  activities  of  DJLIT  are  studied.  The  study  was  done  along  the  lines  of  7Ps  mentioned by Zeithaml & Bitner. Systematic analysis of  the  case  study  is  done  and  presented. 
5. ANALYSIS AND  DISCUSSIONS 
If a product is produced, packaged and delivered at  the right time in the effective and efficient manner then  its  chance  to  be  successful  and  adopted  by  clients  will  definitely increase. Each element of marketing programme  as  described  by  Zeithaml  &  Bitner8   is  studied  and  the  measures taken against each of these elements for DJLIT are  analysed  and  are  presented  as  follows: 
5.1  Product  
The  product  include  physical  goods,  services,  features, accessories, warranty, brands, packages, design,  etc.2  The  DJLIT   publishes  original  research  and  review  articles  related  to  information  technology  as  applied  to  library activities, services and products covering trends,  development  and  issues.  It  is  a  bi-monthly  journal  and  six  issues  are  brought  out  each  year.  It  is  available  in  print  format  as  well  as  online.  To  maintain  the  quality  following  special  measures  have  been  taken: 
5.1.1  Theme-based  Issues 
Eminent professionals in the field of LIS are invited  to bring out special issues of DJLIT   to  have  an  overall  view  about  a  current  topic  or  to  know  about  the  trends  in  the  field.  The  guest  editors  invite  peers  in  the  field  and  highlight  about DJLIT.  The  full  text  of  all  special  issues is available on internet. A list is also provided on  the website and the list contains hyperlinks to respective  
It is essential for any organisation engaged in product  special  issues.  More  than  55  special  issues  have  been  development or service sector to use marketing to reach  brought  out  on  various  topics3.  Guest  editors  were  
its customers. The DJLIT  caters to large readership across  the  globe  which  includes  information  scientists,  LIS  
specially invited to bring out theme-based issues covering  topics like scientometrics, online exhibitions, knowledge  
99 

========2========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  2,  MARCH  2016 
organisation,  corporate  social  responsibility,  intellectual  property  rights,  digital  preservation  and  many  more. 5.1.2  Benefits  to Authors/Readers 
• All  authors  are  given  a  hardcopy  of  the  issue  in  
which  his/her  article  is  published. 
• Each  article  has  a  DOI  to  have  wider  availability  
of  their  articles. 
• Each  article  is  provided  with  a  metadata,  article's  
discipline,  subject,  coverage,  etc. 
• Impact  measurement  through  citations  received  by  
each article (Google Scholar) is available on Journal  
is  meant  to  disseminate  current  research  results  to  the  readers. The  annual  subscription  price  for  print  copy  of  DJLIT  is very nominal (Rs 100/- for individuals and Rs  450/-  for  institutions).  The  full  text  of  all  the  volumes  of DJLIT   is  available  free  of  cost  on  internet.  
5.4  Promotion 
Promotion  includes  advertising,  communication  channels, sale promotion, personal selling, and publicity2  of  prodcts/services.  For  development  of  any  industry  advertising is essential. For national and social development,  advertisements play extremely important role. They fulfill  
article,  published  in  the  Journal,  has  received. Readers  can  sign  up  for  e-mail  notification.  Readers  can  post  comments  on  articles  to  Editor Can make contact with the authors with open journal  system  managed  by DJLIT 
Indexing  is  adheres  to  the  OAI  Initiative  protocol  for  metadata  harvesting 
site.  Author  can  know  how  many  citations  his/her  
the  needs  and  desires  of  the  consumers  by  providing  
information  and  increase  competition.  Advertising9   is  
• • • 
• 
5.2  Place  
Place  include  channels,  reach,  storage,  logistics,  transportation, inventory, location of output2 of products/ services. The DJLIT   is  available  in  two  formats—Print  and  online.  The  bound  volumes  of  the  Journal  are  also  kept  in  DESIDOC.  
As  the  publishing  world  is  transforming  from  print  to digital and the readers are more engaged in e-reading,  hence  the  content  of  the  journal  should  be  digital  and  the  articles  should  be  provided  in  various  formats  (pdf,  html,  epub,  etc)  to  enable  the  readers  to  access  articles  in different format and through different media (desktop/ tablet/laptop/e-book reader/mobile, etc) and compatible at  all platforms. All the articles are available in pdf format  on internet 24X7 through DESIDOC servers. Backup of  all the issues are regularly updated and safely kept. From  2015  all  the  articles  are  available  in  html  and  e-pub  format  also.  To  make  the  contents  visible  across  the  globe,  the  Journal  is  registered  with  the  many  subject- related  indexing/abstracting/full-text  databases.  These  efforts provide greater visibility and reach to DJLIT.  It  also provides wider international publicity to the Journal  as  well  as  in  receiving  quality  papers  from  India  and  abroad. Some of them are: Scopus, LISA, LISTA, EBSCO  Abstracts/Full-text,  Library  Literature  and  Information  Science Index/Full-text, The Informed Librarian Online,  DOAJ,  OpenJ-Gate,  Indian  Science  Abstracts,  Indian  Citation  Index,  Full  text  Sources  Online,  WorldCat,  Proquest, Google Scholar, Ulrich's International Periodical  Directory,  Index  Copernicus,  and  OCLC. 
5.3  Price 
Price  means  consumer  price,  trade  price,  discount,  credit policy, payment policy, etc.,2 regarding the products  and services. The aim of DJLIT   is  not  profit  making.  It  
100 
done  with  following  aims: 
• Introduction—No product can gain visibility, recognition,  
acceptance of its existence without being introduced  
to  consumers.  Introduction  makes  a  base  for  initial  
foundation  of  any  idea,  product  or  subject.  • Draw Attraction—It draws attraction of masses and  
eventually generate curiosity to utilise the service or  
products. This is done by providing the suitable and  
catchy  title  (heading),  tagline,  colour,  photographs,  
expression,  context,  and  a  mix  of  all.  
• Create Interest—Qualities, characteristics and users are  
elaborated  in  extensive  manner  to  create  interest. • Faith Generation—Various product-related people such  
as doctors, actors, sports persons, etc., are engaged  
in the advertisements to give an impression that they  
are  using  these  products  and  getting  benefits. • Image Building—Increases brand value,  long standing,  
credibility, product utilisation, etc., of an organisation.  
It  helps  to  launch  even  other  new  products  of  
the  organisation  and  gain  easy  acceptance  in  the  
market. 
• Developing Need—Features of products and services  
are presented in such a way that the customer feels  
that  it  is  most  important  for  them  to  buy. 
• Sale Promotion—The ultimate objective of a business  
organisation  is  to  generate  and  increase  in  its  sale  
and  make  profits. 
For  promotion  of  DJLIT,  a  large  no.  of  steps  are  taken.  Some  of  them  are  highlighted  in  Fig.  1.  The  following  tools  and  techniques  are  used:  
5.4.1  Use  of  RSS  feeds 
The  DJLIT  has  syndicated  its  content  as  an  RSS  Feed  to  whoever  wants  it.  It  allows  readers  to  easily  stay  informed  by  retrieving  the  latest  content  from  the  site  and  saves  time  by  not  needing  to  visit  the  site. 5.4.2  Generate  Notification 
This  facility  is  provided  on  the  webpage  of  the  Journal.  One  can  subscribe  to  these  notifications.  It  shows  important  updates  associated  with  this  journal  such  as  new  issues  or  announcements.  

========3========

BANSAL: CREATING AWARENESS OF PUBLICATIONS THROUGH MARKETING: A CASE STUDY OF DJLIT  
5.4.3  Promotional  Material 
Various  brochures,  leaflets,  etc.,  are  created  for  DJLIT  and regularly distributed.  DJLIT  also is advertised  in  inhouse  journal,  and  newsletters,  etc. 
5.4.4  Paper  Presentation  in  Journals  and  Conferences 
Many authors have written articles regarding DJLIT  covering  its  impact  factor,  content  analysis,  citation  analysis,  bibliometric  study,  comparative  studies,  etc.,  in  various  national  as  well  as  international  journals  and  conferences  which  has  created  awareness  about  the  Journal.  Articles  in  Hindi  language  on  study  regarding  DJLIT   are  also  presented  and  published  at  various  conferences such as SIS conference, International Bilingual  conference,  etc. 
5.4.5  Call  for  Papers 
The  Call  for  Papers  is  a  regular  feature  of  DJLIT through  which  students,  academicians  and  professionals  in the field are made aware about the Journal and quality  articles  are  sought  through  it.  They  are  published  in  DJLIT  and on its website also. Papers are sought through   professional  forums  also. 
5.4.6 Announcements 
Regular announcements are created to communicate  with readers of DJLIT   and  keep  them  abreast  about  the  current  happenings  in  the  Journal,  publication  of  a  new  issue, forthcoming issues, new facilities created, etc. and  are  made  available  on  internet  site  of DJLIT. 5.4.7  Participation  in  Exhibitions/Conferences 
DESIDOC exhibits DRDO publications in various book  fairs,  and  Defence  exhibitions. The DJLIT   is  displayed  there  and  brochures  and  catalogues  are  distributed.  Subscription  for DJLIT   is  also  sought. 
5.4.8  FAQ 
A  list  of  Frequently  Asked  Questions  along  with  answers is provided on the DJLIT  site to enable potential  authors/readers/reviewers  to  know  about  the  policies  and  procedures  of  the  Journal  and  get  answers  to  their  
Figure 1. Facilities available at DJLIT website. 
queries.  For  more  queries,  they  can  contact  the  Editor  of  the  Journal. 
5.4.9  Complimentary  Copies 
The  Journal  is  available  in  open  access  domain.  Print copies of the journal are provided as complimentary  subscription to DRDO labs, members of Editorial Board,  I&A  agencies,  authors,  and  many  others.  
5.4.10  Image  Building  Tools 
Annual  Report  is  an  important  tool  to  publicise  an  organisation.  It  is  annually  brought  out  by  DESIDOC  covering  the  activities  and  achievements  of  DESIDOC  during  last  one  year.  Publishing  about  DJLIT   and  its  yearly  achievements  is  a  regular  feature. 
5.4.11  Exchange Agreements 
The  DJLIT   has  exchange  agreements  with  other  publishers  in  the  LIS  field  as  well  as  allied  field  also. 5.4.12  Related Articles 
If a reader is interested in an article of the Journal,  mechanism  should  be  provided  that  all  possible  related  topics articles be made simultaneously available. Keeping  this  in  view a  ‘Related  Articles’  service  is  added  with  each article so that every reader of the journal can have  the  feeling  that  the  content  is  being  created  keeping  in  mind  his/her  needs.  
5.4.13  Most  Downloads  of  the  Month 
The  DJLIT  provides  monthly  feature  like  ‘Most  Downloads  of  the  Month’.  Monthwise  statistics  of  the  downloads  of  the  articles  in  a  month  is  analysed  and  the metadata of top 50 articles which received maximum  downloads  in    that  month  is  provided.  As  per  data  of  DJLIT   OJS,  more  than  1.5  Lakh  downloads  of  articles  published  in  DJLIT   per  year  by  authors  are  recorded.  The  data  is  increasing  every  year. 
5.5  People 
People encompass employees, recruitment, selection,  training,  culture,  and  attitudes.  DESIDOC  is  in  regular  communication with the readers, reviewers, and authors.   The  people  working  for  the  Journal  are  competent  in  the  subject  as  well  as  publishing  field  and  have  large  experience.  They  are  regularly  trained  about  the  new  technologies in publishing field as well as soft skills. The  Journal has an Editorial Board with eminent professionals  of  the  LIS  field. The  Journal  has  a  database  of  eminent  reviewers  in  diverse  areas  of  library  and  information  science.  It  has  registration  of  more  than  200  reviewers.  While assigning a submission to a reviewer, the database  is regularly consulted. There are more than 3000 registered  readers  of DJLIT. 
5.6  Physical  Evidence 
Physical evidence includes interior design, equipments,  aesthetics, functionality, and layout, etc. As DJLIT   is  a  
101 

========4========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  2,  MARCH  2016 
scholarly journal so its layout is conventional. It follows  a journal format and strictly adheres to it. The authors are  required  to  follow  the  journal’s  guidelines.  The  Journal  follows strict format and style in all its published articles.  Standardisation  is  maintained  throughout  the  issue  and  volumes. The  cover  design  of  the  journal  is  changed  in  regular intervals to make the issue more attractive. Each  issue is printed on high quality article. The online issue  is  published  in  the  scheduled  month. 
5.7  Processes 
Processes cover procedures, activity flow, consumer  involvement,  etc.  It  is  said  that  a  chain  is  as  strong  as  its  weakest  link.  It  is  important  that  all  the  components  and  their  connections  of  a  system  are  strong,  and  are  connected rightly. DJLIT  has strong view towards quality  control of its processes and content. It has implemented  the  following  processes: 
5.7.1 Adoption  of  Quality  System 
DESIDOC  is  an  ISO  9001:  2008  certified  estab- lishment  and  has  documented  and  established  a  Quality  Management  System  (QMS)  as  per  ISO  9001:2008  and  is  implementing  and  maintaining  the  same  since  2011.  DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology is also certified under this. For this, the sequence of the  processes and their interaction has been identified. This  has been further supplemented by organisation structure.  All methods and criteria have been determined and docu- mented  under  respective  clauses  for  effective  operation  and control. Quality objectives have been defined. Nec- essary  resources  and  documents  containing  information  are  provided  for  proper  operation.  Systems  have  been  established for monitoring, measuring and analysing the  processes. All actions required to achieve planned results  and  enhancing  the  effectiveness  of  all  processes  have  been  taken.  Steps  are  taken  for  effective  and  continual  improvement  of  the  system.  It  has  led  to  significant  improvement  in  the  publishing  of  the  Journal. 5.7.2  Editorial  Board 
An  Editorial  Board  of  the  Journal  directs  journal’s  progress through suitable advice; review the progress of  the journal and to suggest necessary steps for its healthy  progress;  identify  the  gaps,  in  the  areas  to  be  covered  by  the  Journal  and  also  authors  for  approaching  them  for  obtaining  the  articles;  and  commissioning  state-of  the-art  articles  and  identifies  referees  for  various  areas.  The  first  Editorial  Board  was  constituted  in  1997.  The  last  Editorial  Board  was  constituted  in  2013.  There  are  11  members  in  the  present  Editorial  Board. 
5.7.3  Pre  press  Services 
No  journal  can  survive  if  authors  don’t  submit  their research finding to a journal. They are to be made  comfortable  with  the  publishing  system  and  encourage  more and more submissions from them. Following steps  are  taken  for  benefits  to  authors: 
102 
• Authors have to submit only word file of manuscripts,  
figures,  and  appendices. All  the  formatting,  editing  
and  final  setting  is  done  by  DESIDOC. 
• They can track the progress of their article throughout  
editorial  process. 
• Strict reviewing process for each article is followed  
to  ensure  best  quality. 
• Final proofs are sent to authors for clearance before  
sending  for  printing 
5.7.4  Reviewing  Process 
The  manuscripts  submitted  to DJLIT   are  reviewed  for possible publication with the understanding that they  are  being  submitted  to  one  journal  at  a  time  and  have  not been published, simultaneously submitted, or already  accepted  for  publication  elsewhere.  The  Editor  reviews  all  submitted  manuscripts  initially.  Manuscripts  with  insufficient  originality,  serious  scientific  flaws,  absence  of  importance  of  message,  weak  analysis,  or  problems  in presentation are rejected. The Journal follows double  blind  reviewing  policy.  The  primary  aim  of  the  peer  review  process  is  to  maintain  quality  control. 
5.7.5  Feedback  from  Users 
Regular feedback is sought from readers to improve  the  quality  of  the  content  and  form  (print  and  digital) through  its  website,  e-mails  and  in  print. 
6.  DISCUSSIONS AND   SUGGES t IONS 
A  journal  publishing  is  successful  if  its  contents’  reach  is  global  so  that  all  the  research  community  get  benefit  of  it.  Receiving  large  citations  is  one  of  the  mechanisms for a journal to measure the impact. Authors  like  to  publish  in  journals  with  high  impact  factor.  It  is  now  a  trend  for  journals  to  provide  value  addition  to  articles  published  in  the  journal  and  provide  maximum  support  to  the  readers  as  well  as  potential  authors.  • DJLIT   is  keeping  track  on  various  metrics  about  it  
through  google  citations,  google  analytics,  science  
citation  index,  Scopus,  Publish  or  perish  and  many  
more. Statistics including altmetrics regarding articles  
such as ‘abstract views’, ‘full-text views’, usage of  
articles, ‘likes’, ‘share’, ‘citations received measured  
by  various  agencies’  can  be  made  available. 
• More  venues  and  innovative  ways  can  be  explored  
to  reach  to  wider  readership.  More  print,  e-media  
as  well  as  direct  contacts  can  be  used  to  create  
awareness  about  the  Journal.  
• Quality content should always be the focus. Current  
areas  of  research  should  be  explored  and  more  
specialists should be invited to write invited articles  
or  bring  special  issues.  
• The Editorial Board members, special issues’ editors,  
authors, readers, and editorial and production teams  
are  contributing  towards  creating  awareness  about  
the  journal.  More  efforts  are  to  be  done  to  bring  

========5========

BANSAL: CREATING AWARENESS OF PUBLICATIONS THROUGH MARKETING: A CASE STUDY OF DJLIT  
• 
the  Journal  to  the  notice  of  all  in  their  contacts  in  the  field. 
Authors can also help in promoting and increase the  
those needs. Value addition is required as per the desire  of reader. For marketing of a journal, all the stakeholders  have  to  work  together  and  make  its  presence  felt  and  
visibility  of  their  articles  published  in  the  Journal  
available  across  the  globe.  such  as  adding  article  in  reading  list,  essential  
rEFErENCES 
readings;  department  website  or  personal  webpage,  
discussion lists; through own blogs; recommendation  1. 
• 
• 
to  library;  etc.  
Authors  can  use  social  media  such  as  Twitter  and  Facebook (metadata and link to the site); professional  as  well  as  academic  social  networking  sites 
Reference management application as well as online  social network such as CiteULike and Mendelay can  
Narantuya, Tuul. Basic concepts of marketing. http:// 
www.slideshare.net/tuulbna/basic-conceptsofmarketing  
(accessed  on  1  October  2015). 
2.    Raina, Roshan. Marketing in the library & information  
context. DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology,  
1998, 18(3). http://publications.drdo.gov.in/ojs/index. 
php/djlit/article/view/3394 
be  used  by  authors  to  add  articles  and  also  share  3.    DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology.  
• 
• 
with  others,  which  helps  them  discover  literature  which  is  relevant  to  their  field 
Articles of the back issues can be made available in  digital  format  so  that  they  can  be  accessed  through  various  platforms.  
It  is  essential  that  the  authors  remain  connected  to  a  journal  and  efforts  should  be  done  to  engage  
http://publications.drdo.gov.in/ojs/index.php/djlit   
(accessed  on  1  October  2015). 
4.  DeMers, Jayson.The Top 7 Online Marketing Trends  
That Will Dominate 2014. http://www.forbes.com/sites/ 
jaysondemers/2013/09/17/the-top-7-online-marketing- 
trends-that-will-dominate-2014/2/#4955428174d2   
(accessed  on  1  January  2016) 
them  for  improvement.  Regular  feedback  is  a  must  5.  Satell,  Greg.  4  Principles  of  Marketing  Strategy  
for  improving  any  journal.  So  it  should  be  taken  from  all  readers,  authors,  reviewers  and  others. 
7.  CONCLUSIONS 
In marketing, the focus should be on customer needs  and  wants.  It  is  not  one  time  process;  it  is  continuous  and  ever  evolving.  Now  with  such  a  rapid  generation  of  information  and  innovations  in  IT,  mere  publishing  a  journal  is  not  enough.  Marketing  of  a  journal  is  important  to  create  awareness  about  the  content,  ways  to  access  them  in  variety  of  formats  and  understand  readers’  expectations.  DESIDOC  Journal  of  Library  &  Information Technology, that has 35 years of long standing,  is  continuously  working  towards  its  marketing  in  terms  of creating awareness and increasing the visibility. Over  the  years  many  tools  have  been  adopted  for  making  its  content  available  across  the  globe  as  well  as  seeking  international  and  national  quality  contributions  in  the  field  of  LIS.  
Quality improvement has been done in timely publishing,  improved layout and designing, and availability at different  platforms  in  different  formats  and  by  proving  various  additional features in the Journal’s website smeeting the  international trends. Reviewers, guest editors and authors  all  have  played  highly  significant  role  in  bringing  out  the  Journal  effectively.  Publishing  is  dynamic  in  nature  so  still  continuous  efforts  are  needed  to  be  done  by  the  Journal management to bridge the gap between the ever  changing  needs  of  the  readers  and  the  satisfaction  of  
In  The  Digital  Age.  http://www.forbes.com/sites/ 
gregsatell/2013/04/16/4-principles-of-marketing-strategy- 
in-the-digital-age/#5404d5c7495c  (accessed  on  1  
January  2016) 
6.    To promote an open access journal. http://openscience. 
com/how-to-promote-an-open-access-journal-2/ 7.    Anne-Marie  Green.  More  on  SEO  for  publishing:  
trying  on  keywords  and  Lady  Gaga’s  sunglasses.  
http://exchanges.wiley.com/blog/2013/10/29/seo-part- 
ii-keywords-and-lady-gagas-sunglasses/ 
8. Zeithaml,  V.A.  &  Bitner,  M.J.  Services  marketing.  
McGraw-Hill,  New York,  NY.  1996. 
9.    Narwal,  Kavita;  Gupta,  Shivali  &  Bansal,  Alka.  
Application of information technology for advertising:  
Case  study  of  DESIDOC. In   Bilingual  Intenational  
Conference on Information Technology: Yesterday, Today  
and  Tomorrow,  19-21  February  2015,  Delhi.  
Contributors 
Mrs Alka bansal  obtained her MSc (Mathematics) from University  of Delhi. She obtained her BLIS and MLIS both from Dept. of  Library & Information Science, University of Delhi. Presently, she  is working as Scientist ‘E’, DESIDOC, Delhi. She is UGC-Net  qualified. She has many papers published in various journals/ conference  proceedings  to  her  credit.  Her  areas  of  interests  include: Editing and publishing, digital libraries development,  web-base applications, library automation, information management  and  dissemination,  multimedia  development,  etc. 
103 

========6========

