DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 36, No. 3, May 2016, pp. 143-147  DOI: 10.14429/djlit.36.3.9755 
  2016, DESIDOC 
Marketing and Building Relations in Digital Academic Library: Overview of  
Central Library, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi 
Shiva Kanaujia Sukula* and Parveen Babbar**  Central Library, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi- 110 067  E-mail: *Shivasukula25@gmail.com, **parveenbabbar@gmail.com 
ABstRACt 
Though the concepts of marketing and public relations are interrelated yet the example of Jawaharlal Nehru  University (JNU) Central Library refects how these have been walking hand-in-hand together to maximise the  usage of library collections and keep the users well-informed. The paper discusses about the various practices  taking place at Central Library which have been customised and functioning as tools of marketing. The in-depth  analysis of these practices and services has been showing the endeavors in the direction of building relations with  user community to achieve optimum use of library resources, specially the digital kinds. 
Keywords: Marketing, digital collection, public relations, Jawaharlal Nehru University Central Library, service  
automation 
1.  iNtRODUCtiON 
The  building  of  a  digital  library  takes  place  after  much  planning  and  considerations  such  as  academic  requirements, budget provisions, technological infrastructure  and  the  library  manpower  as  well,  the  once  planned  techniques are meant forever. The innovative technologies  and advancements are there to be chased once the digital  library  is  complete.  It  is  difficult  to  find  out  the  best  platform  and  mechanisms  to  build  the  best  and  most  advanced  digital  library  at  any  point  of  time  due  to  certain limitations. What is the most significant component  of  a  digital  library?  The  collections  or  resources  part  which  is  to  be  used  by  the  user  community  make  the  most  vital  component  in  running  of  a  digital  library.  The  libraries  tend  to  maximise  the  usage  of  digital  resources by applying the marketing skills. The pointing  of methods and understanding the requirements of users  generate  the  right  appeals  to  direct  the  users  towards  the digital resources. The movement of library planning  towards specific needs depends on identification of needs  and  resources.  The  trends  in  libraries  have  been  quite  amusing  as  well  as  thought  provoking  if  these  efforts  have  been  effective1. 
2. LiteRAtURe Review  
The methods of marketing for library and information  services  and  products  have  been  through  transition  due  to increased role of digital environment. The concept of  relationship through marketing has come handy when there  are various means and methods to develop relationships  with  library  users.  The  effective  marketing  brings  the  digital  resources  and  users  closer  to  each  other  with  
Received 19 February 2016, online published 26 April 2016 
the  help  of  relations  created  through  effective  services,  social  media  and  feedback.  Though  the  techniques  are  altered because of changed scenarios in libraries yet the  applications  remain  same.  The  practices  of  marketing  confer  better  results  if  applied  in  thorough  manner. 
While  Henderson2   discussed  about  the  marketing  strategies,  the  ‘relationship’  with  users  highlighted  the  ‘digital  directions’.  Though  the  then  digital  libraries  were  not  this  much  advanced  as  one  sees  today.  The  digital  libraries  create  a  niche  of  complex  yet  complete  information  environment  in  which  the  users’  categories  are benefited. These users may be academicians, scholars,  or  any  other  kinds  of  users. The  interfaces  for  kinds  of  users  may  not  be  easy  to  pick  or  design  but  there  are  certain  conditions  which  reflect  the  need  of  different  interfaces.  The  question  arises  if  it  is  feasible  to  have  multiple  interfaces  for  digital  libraries  for  different  kinds  of  users. The  inclusion  of  various  collections  and  services requires attention for classification of webpages,  etc.  The  use  of  blog,  giving  demonstrations,  writing  articles and using social media have been suggested and  used  actively. The  promotion  of  collection,  specifically,  provides opportunity to reach to collection specific users  in better way. Lepczyk3  advised for actively publication  of  the  collection.  
The  marketing  of  digital  libraries  has  embarked  on  a  journey  which  is  continuous  in  nature  and  striving  for new successes so far. As per Ohio Library Council4, while the marketing makes the librarians understand their  users and library is for them4,  it  is  always  felt  that  the  main reason for library’s existence are the users. Misra5  elaborated  that  the  concept  of  ‘customer’  and  building  

========1========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  3,  MAy  2016 
‘relationships’  have  tremendous  effects  on  making  the  marketing user-centric as the emphasis has always been  concerned  with  their  needs.  Somehow  the  concept  and  processes of marketing are directly related to the actions  taken  to  achieve  the  objectives  of  library. 
According  to  Soroya  &  Ameen6,  the  marketing  plan  and  processes  involve  the  entire  library  staff  as  team  and  their  coordination  towards  single  objective  of  users’  satisfaction.  The  marketing  of  digital  libraries  brings  the  users  closer  in  digital  world.  The  intrinsic  aspects  such  as  user  satisfaction  and  libraries’  services  are  related  with  marketing.  The  necessity  of  marketing  is  in  the  area  of  usage  of  resources.  As  said,  “Schools  and  libraries  in  all  forms  are  transitioning  their  spends  from  providing  physical  items  that  are  being  stored  on  shelves and branches to digital items—the fastest portion  of  their  growth,” 
3.  MARKetiNg  Of  DigitAL   Li BRAR y  By  JNU 
The  JNU  Central  Library  understands  the  value  of  visibility  in  the  marketing  of  information  sources.  The  following  services  reflect  the  visibility  of  library  in  various  forms: 
(a)  Significance  of  ‘MAy   I  HELP  yOU’ 
At Central Library, JNU, the library staff is responsible  for  informing  the  general  guidance  and  queries  to  the  newcomers  and  other  users.  The  provision  of  ‘MAy   I  HELP yOU’  desk  has  been  a  clear  visibility  of  library  staff assistance to the users. The availability and efforts  of  library  staff  to  help  the  users  is  very  significant  in  the  perspectives  of  building  relationships  with  library  users. The staff, interacting through this service, market  the  available  resources  and  services  to  the  users.  (b) New Arrivals 
The spread of information through the ‘New Arrivals’  is  visible  on  library  website.  The  users  are  informed  in  a  manner  that  is  comfortable  as  well  as  fast  changing.  The  acquisition  of  books  of  users’  needs  is  the  primary  job of any library and these books are supposed to reach  to  them.  Though  it  takes  time  to  be  in  hands  of  users,  the  display  of  new  arrivals  on  library  website  as  well  as physical display in the entrance area of library gives  an  opportunity  to  catch  the  eye.  The  alerts  can  also  be  used for the information of new arrivals by informing the  users  about  the  latest  and  recent  additions.  The  library  plans to inform users by sending e-mails along with the  scanned  pages  of  content  pages  of  journals.  
3.1 Changing spaces  and services:  Building  
Relations  
(a) Technology  Spaces 
The technology spaces are must haves in the times of  digital learning and library services. The Central Library  JNU has technology spaces in the form of ‘Cyberlibrary’  and technology supported ‘reading halls’. The location of  Cyberlibrary and reading halls is significant to serve the  
144 
users  at  the  point  of  entering  of  them  into  the  library.  The  availability  of  big  number  of  computers,  laptop  chargers, scanning facilities are few of the features that  are  supported  by  the  library  and  staff.  The  access  to  millions of e-resources is facilitated by these technology  spaces. The users have access to e-journals, e-thesis, and  e-books apart from other digitised information materials.  The access is controlled and available to authentic users  of  the  University  library  due  to  provisions  of  internet  id  and  password  given  to  users. The  users  can  get  their  internet  id  and  password  from  the  concerned  staff. 
3.2  User services  
(a)  Imaging  Services 
Various kinds of imaging services are being provided  to  users  in  the  following  formats: 
• Photocopy  Facility—This  facility  is  available  to  
users  and  is  offered  by  a  private  operator  against  
payment. 
• Scanning  Facility—This  service  is  given  to  the  
visually-challenged  students.  
(b) Interlibrary  Loans 
The  interlibrary  loan  supports  library  when  the  books  and  other  information  sources  are  unavailable  and  needs  to  be  found  for  the  readers. The  requests  are  ranging  from  entire  books  to  an  article  of  a  journal  or  book.  The  library  staff  keeps  record  and  endeavours  to  serve  at  the  earliest.  The  users  interact  with  the  staff  of  circulation  section.  
(c) Information  Desk 
The  information  desk  provides  kinds  of  services  to  the  casual  entrants  and  serious  members  of  the  library.  Being  located  on  the  ground  floor,  it  is  easy  to  located  and  in  reach  of  the  users.  It  provides  help  in  aspects  such  as:  
• Referral service which is beyond the casual queries  
such  as  ‘Directional  assistance’.  This  service  is  
provided through website and the queries are solved  
on  telephone,  on  site  and  over  the  telephone. • Readers’ queries about the library holdings, locations,  
verifying  the  ILL  stage  etc. 
• Information  related  to  library  services,  access  to  
e-resources,  etc. 
For the convenience of users, the access to information  desk and the concerned staff, is available through library  website  as  well  as  telephone. 
(d) Downloading  ‘Interaction’  Forms  
The members are provided the facility of downloading  various kinds of forms in pdf format that are useful for the  development  of  relation  with  the  library  as  members:  • Membership  form  for  students  (Hindi)  
• Membership form for guest faculty/special members  
(Hindi)  
• Library  clearance  form  for  students  (Hindi)  

========2========

SUKULA & BABBAR: MARKETING AND BUILDING RELATIONS IN DIGITAL ACADEMIC LIBRARy 
• • • 
Library  clearance  form  for  faculty/staff  (Hindi)  Library  consultation  form  (Hindi)  
Library  rules  (Hindi)  
3.3  visibility, Access  and  interfaces 
• Library  Catalogue/OPAC 
The library catalogue and OPAC (Online Public Access  Catalogue) are the access points for the users towards the  desired document in the library. The approaches provided  in  the  catalogue  are  enhanced  by  the  OPAC  and  their  features. The library catalogue and OPAC are the strong  tools  to  interact  and  access  the  library  resources.  • Single Window  Search 
The  single  window  search  has  made  the  library  resources  and  their  access  popular.  Various  features  extend marketing of resources by the following methods  and  access  to:  (a)  Search  All;  (b)  Articles;  (c)  Books  &  E-books;  (d) A  to  Z  Search;  (e)  JNU  Catalogue;  (f) E-Thesis  to  ETD;  and  (f)  Newspaper  Clippings. 
The  users  are  facilitated  to  search  every  kind  of  resources available through the library website. The search  box lead the users to full-text, scholarly resources as well  as the resources listed in catalogue. The ‘Discovery Service’  supports  searching  across  the  databases  and  different  formats  of  information  resources.To  support  the  users  about  ‘how  to  access’  and  use  the  ‘discovery  service’,  few links are given which publicise the methods as well  as  the  tools  employed  for  discovering  the  information  hidden  in  thousands  of  information  resources.  Few  of  these tools can be downloaded on personal devices also.  These  ‘Search  Guides’  are  as  following:  
• Discovery  Service  Search  Guide 
• EDS  Result  List  Guide 
• Create  Search Alert  Guide  
• EBSCO  eBooks  Search  Guide 
• EBSCO  eBooks  Downloading  Guide  • EBSCO  eBooks  iPad  Download 
3.4  trial  Digital  Resources 
The  information  sources  available  through  the  trial  access  require  thorough  marketing.  Users  need  to  be  informed  for  wider  and  deeper  access.  The  information  spread through newsletters, e-mails, circulars and notices  on  website  are  very  helpful  in  creating  awareness  of  this  kind  of  resources.  The  role  of  marketing  comes  into  picture  as  these  resources  are  not  available  forever  but  for  a  limited  period  of  time.  To  inform  users  in  a  very  short  time  is  the  challenge  yet  the  JNU  library  has  taken  steps  time  to  time.  The  users  review  these  resources  hence  their  close  interaction,  time-spending  and  in-depth  searching  take  place.  
3.5  Digital services’  Marketing  through  Library  
Portal 
The  library  website  informs  about  various  digital  
resources and the library website providing well-framed  marketing  services.  The  presentation  and  linking  of  various  kinds  of  information  sources  such  as  online  catalogue,  single  window  search,  electronic  resources,  remote access, data portal, institutional repository, subject  gateway,  open  access,  ETDs  and  press  clippings  are  given  in  a  ‘menu-driven’  manner.  The  e-resources  are  further classified as online databases, e-journals, e-books,  etc.  The  remote  access  is  provided  by  ‘EZProxy’.  The  users may login and access various resources which are  accessible  through  secured  access.  The  users  have  their  ‘cyberid’ to access the resources. Another remote access  method  is  ‘OpenAthens’.  
(a) Data  Portal 
Data portal is another way to attract and invite library  users to library website and provide them specific kind of  information and access to these sources. The provisions of  this data portal envisage the access to data sets, reports  which  may  be  free  or  subscribed  in  nature.  
(b)   s howcasing institutional  Research 
The  Institutional  Repository  (IR)  of  Jawaharlal  Nehru  University  has  been  instrumental  in  providing  organisational research output. The interface of IR markets  the  research  output  of  the  academic  community.  The  IR  provides  links  to  various  subjects  such  as:Arts  &  Aesthetics; Biotechnology; Computational & Integrative  Sciences;  Computer  &  System  Sciences,  Environmental  Sciences; International Studies; Language, Literature and  Cultural Studies; Life Sciences; Physical Sciences; Social  Sciences;  Molecular  Medicine;  Nanoscience;  Sanskrit  Studies;  Law  and  Governance;  and Administration. 
The IR also provides links to publications of affiliated  institutions  and  Central  Library.  
(c) Open Access 
The  open  access  movement  has  affected  the  library  resources usage patterns. The libraries have altered their  methods related to marketing practices of their services,  interactive  platforms,  etc. The  provision  of  open  access  sources  through  library  portal  is  one  of  the  method  to  connect  to  library  users.  The  connection  established  with  the  users  by  the  means  of  open  access  facility  is  directed  towards  the  inclusion  of  sources  which  are  beyond the library subscription yet in the reach of users.  The  website  provides  access  to  open  access  resources  such  as  journals,  e-books,  institutional  repositories,  e-databases,  audio  e-book,  Directory  of  Open  Access  Journals,  computational  linguistics,  etc.  
(d)   et Ds 
The availability of electronic theses and dissertations  (ETDs) supports the marketing of information products of  JNU Library. The accessibility to theses and dissertations  in  digital  format.  Increased  use  and  that  informs  about  the  success  of  marketing.  
145 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  3,  MAy  2016 
(e) Press  Clippings 
Reading  the  related  news  on  digital  platform  is  a  different  experience  for  the  readers  in  a  technological  environment. The digitisation of news items is significant  for the preservation too. To popularise and maximise the  press  clippings  service,  the  library  portal  supports  the  users  in  accessing  the  same.  This  service  is  available  through  library  software  and  database. The  library  staff  also  supports  the  press/newspaper  clippings  service  and  markets  the  same. 
3.6 News  and events 
The news spreading regarding the various activities  and events organised by Central Library JNU have been  functioning  actively  as  a  tool  of  marketing.  The  wide  coverage and information on library website, notices, etc.,  also  take  shape  of  awareness  functionaries.  The  details  covered by different media help the library in informing  the readers about the steps taken and programmes organised  by the library. These programmes provide learning sessions  and  modern  means  of  interaction  with  the  library.  The  involvement  of  library  users  with  the  learning  sessions,  workshops,  etc.,  is  advertised  thus  proving  a  effective  marketing  technique.  The  following  methods  are  being  used  as  advertising  and  marketing  techniques:  • Library  News 
• Seminars/conferences 
• Training  Programme 
• Workshop 
• Book  Release 
• Lecture  Series 
• Exhibition 
• JNU  Forum  for  Mutual  Learning 
• Other  events 
4.  MARKetiNg At vARiOUs  LeveLs 
Marketing of digital library and information services  is needed to give a platform to users for increased access  and usage. Different levels of interactive sessions, creation  of awareness and display of digital information products  have  been  instrumental  in  creating  the  buzz  around  the  users  about  the  digital  library.  
(a) Latest News:  The ‘Latest News’ on library website  
gives the glimpse into the current and future activities,  
programmes,  additions,  etc. This  serves  as  a  strong  
marketing tool as it is accessible to readers far away  
too.  
(b)   s eminar/Conferences: The organisation of seminar  
and  conferences  involving  library  staff  and  user  
community at JNU has been spreading the message  
of library as a ‘happening place’ and ‘active place’.  
For  example,  the  awareness  of  ETD  has  been  done  
at  great  level  by  the  means  of  conference.  
146 
(c)   t raining Programme:  The library has been active in  
organising training programmes which involve the user  
community  very  well.  The  training  programmes  on  
scholarly writing skills, tools for digital information  
searching,  using  software/databases  for  academic  
research,  etc.,  have  been  very  popular.  
(d)   w orkshops:  The  workshops  have  taken  the  role  as  
teacher by the efforts of library. The range of topics/ 
concepts and activities declares about the need of such  
workshops which function as marketing tool leading  
towards  better  utilisation  of  digital  resources.  (e) Book  Release:   The  book  release  programme  have  
been  instrumental  in  bringing  the  user  community  
for understanding the role of library as an academic  
enhancer. The library creates opportunities for more  
interaction and providing the library space for further  
academic  activities.  The  users  relate  to  library  in  
better  and  path-breaking  ways.  
(f) Lecture  series:  The  lecture  series  held  by  JNU  
Library have been active in informing and marketing  
the  informative  academic  role  of  library  among  the  
student  community.  
5.  My  LiBRARy:  UNiqUe OPPORtUNity  fOR 
ACADeMiC   Use Rs 
Few  services  have  been  designed  keeping  in  view  the needs of research scholars and other students. These  services  are  handful  yet  able  to  serve  the  users  at  individual  level  thus  functioning  as  marketing  tools  which  are  small  in  size  yet  impressive.  
(i) My  Library  Record 
(ii) Renew  Book  Procedure 
(iii) Reserve  a  Book 
(iv) Articles  of  My  Interest 
(v) Can't  Find  book  of your  Choice 
This  service  has  been  intended  to  support  users  in  finding  the  books  on  interlibrary  loan.  
(a) Research tools: The research tools help in creating  
understanding of research related activities, resources  
and  digital  libraries  available  for  the  users.  (b)   s uggest  book(s):   The  users  are  given  opportunity  
for  suggesting  books/titles  for  acquisition  related  
to  their  coursework/research  work  etc.  This  kind  
of interaction provides the users direct access to be  
part  of  collection  development  process.  The  users  
place their requests by recommending in prescribed  
forms  available  through  library  website.  (c) Document Delivery service: When the users do not  
know  where  they  can  locate  or  find  the  book,  the  
document delivery service has been very significant.  
Helping the users by the document delivery service  
has  been  an  effective  marketing  tool. 

========4========

SUKULA & BABBAR: MARKETING AND BUILDING RELATIONS IN DIGITAL ACADEMIC LIBRARy 
6.  ReseARCh sUPPORt  fOR  A UgMeNteD 
iNvOLveMeNt Of ACADeMiC   Use Rs • JNU  e-Thesis  Submission  Guidelines 
• Shodhganga  
• Research  and  Plagiarism Awareness 
The  library  organises  training  programs  as  well  as  workshops to educate about plagiarism issues and supports  the  research  ethics  among  user  community  at  JNU. The  library  has  been  busy  in  tutoring  the  use  of  software  such  as  Turnitin,  IThenticate,  and  Urkund.  
Library advertises and showcases about the research  publications of the faculty members of JNU. The link to  ‘Scopus’, development of an institutional repository and  highlighting  books  have  been  few  aspects  of  marketing  of  digital  presence  of  faculty  and  their  publications.  
7.  CONCLUsiONs 
The  marketing  of  library  and  information  services,  digital  information  products  and  creating  relations  with  user  community  is  not  a  simple  job  but  the  task  to  be  accomplished  in  a  continuous  manner.  The  ongoing  marketing  processes  and  building  public  relations  with  the academic users’ community is the significant aspect  of  routine  jobs  of  libraries.  In  academic  library,  the  marketing aspect is very much required due to the varied  nature  of  information  sources  and  diversity  in  subjects  as  well  as  user  community.  The  concept  of  marketing,  though  old  is  yet  intricately  woven  with  the  library  activities  and  services.  
RefeReNCes 
1. Are  digital  libraries:  A  'winner-takes-all'  market?  
overdrive  hopes  so.  http://www.forbes.com/sites/ 
avaseave/2013/11/18/are-digital-libraries-a-winner- 
takes-all-market-overdrive-hopes-so/#325e613b4a43. 18  
November  2013  (accessed  on  27  January  2016). 2. Henderson,  Kay.  Marketing  strategies  for  digital  
library services: Digital directions. Library Review, 
2005, 54(6),  342-45. 
3. Lepczyk, Timothy A. Marketing and market research  
for digital library collections. http://www.eduhacker. 
net/libraries/digital-library-marketing-market-research. 
html  (accessed  on  27  January  2016). 
4. Ohio  Library  Council.  Marketing  the  library.  June  
2008. http://www.olc.org/marketing/1intro.html (accessed  
on  27  January  2016). 
5. 
6. 
Mishra, C. Marketing library and information services  on the green road of Web 2.0: The library perspective.  7th Convention PLANNER - 2010, Tezpur University,  Assam,  2010,  398-405.  
Soroya, S.H. & Ameen, K. LIS marketing approach  in  libraries:  A  selected  literature  review.  Pakistan  Lib.  &  Inf.  Sci.  J., 2013, 44(4),  4-18. 
Contributors 
Dr  Archana  shukla   is  a  Assistant  Professor  (Sr.  Scale)  in  the  Faculty  of  Library  and  Information  Science.  She  has  MA  (English), Masters and PhD in Library and Information Science  from  Bundelkhand  University,  Jhansi.  Her  areas  of  interest  include:  Management  of  library  and  information  centres,  information  consolidation  and  repackaging,  academic  library  system, classification and cataloguing. She has many research  papers and articles to her credit. She has ten years of teaching  experience and two years of administrative experience in library,  as Assistant  Librarian. 
Dr Parveen Babbar is presently working as Deputy Librarian  at  Jawaharlal  Nehru  University.  Prior  to  this  he  has  been  Assistant  Librarian  in  Library  &  Documentation  Division  at  Indira  Gandhi  National  Open  University  in  New  Delhi.  He  holds  PhD  from  University  of  Rajasthan,  MPhil  (Library  &  Information Science), MLISc, Masters of Computer Application  and  Masters  of  Business  Administration.  He  had  been  Gold  Medalist in MLISc from Delhi University, India. He had been  Junior  Research  Fellow  and  has  cleared  JRF-NET  exam  from  UGC, India. He has taken many projects of Library Automation  &  Digitization  like  CALPI  Library  Setup  for  Swiss  Agency.  He has about 40 papers published in National and International  Journals  and  Conferences  to  his  credit.  He  had  been  Invited  Speaker  at  International  M-Libraries  Conference  2012  at The  Open  University,  Milton  Keynes,  UK.  He  is  a  member  of  Special Libraries Association (SLA), USA and had held various  positions in SLA Asian Chapter. He had also been the Webmaster  in  the  Board  of  Asian  Chapter,  SLA.  He  has  received  many  awards  and  scholarships—2013 Bonnie  Hilditch  International  Librarian Award from SLA; Young Information Scientist Award  2012  by  SIS,  India; and  SLA  Asian  Librarian  Award  at  SLA  2010  Annual  Conference  in  New  Orleans,  USA.  He  received  the  scholarship  from  Shastri  Indo-Canadian  Institute,  2009  and  IFLA  grant  for  the  assignment  in  2010.  He  is  associated  with  several  professional  associations  in  various  capacities  in  India  and  abroad  including  SLA,  USA;  Society  for  Library  Professionals,  India;  Society  for  Information  Science,  India. 
147 

========5========

