DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 36, No. 3, May 2016, pp. 148-152 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.36.3.9793 
 2016, DESIDOC 
Marketing LIS Education through Departmental (DLIS) Blog: A Proposal to  
Build Relationship with Public and Professionals 
 M.R. Murali Prasad 
 Centre for Economic and Social Studies, Begumpet, Hyderabad–500 010 
E-mail: mrmp2k8@yahoo.com 
ABStRAct 
 This paper describes the need of exclusive blog for Department of Library and Information Science (DLIS) in  a university to visualise the courses and their syllabi, to showcase the strength of the faculty, to disseminate the LIS  research, and to create an online platform to interact with the department authorities, with embedding Web 2.0 tools  into their respective blogs. Also, the paper describes the different strategies to develop and sustain a blog for DLIS  in a university. Over all this concept of a blog is to create an interactive platform to publicise the LIS education  and research to the existing and prospective LIS professionals in the world and particularly in India. 
Keywords: Weblog, blog, DLIS, LIS education, LIS research, departmental blog 
1.  IntRoDuctIon  
Now-a-days,  Library  and  Information  Science  (LIS) education is constantly evolving with information  communication  technologies  (ICTs).  As  ICTs  are  more  and  more  embedded  in  LIS  education  and  research,  LIS  Departments  must  provide  these  technologies  to  their  students/scholars  with  relevant  and  contemporary  experiences,  which  prepare  them  for  practical  life  after  their  course  work.  With  the  advent  of  ICTs,  the  LIS  professionals have to learn how to do a lot with a little,  in order to promote awareness of their programmes and  services  in  their  libraries  due  to  shrinking  budget.  It  is  no  surprise  to  see  that  LIS  professionals  are  stepping  up to the new Web 2.0 technologies and spreading their  world online through blogs. Techno savvy librarians have  already identified that the blog is one of the mediums to  market  library  services  to  their  users  round  the  clock.  
A blog is a short form of weblog or web log, which  is  a  website  where  information  is  frequently  updated  and  arranged  in  a  reversed  chronological  order1.  The  information  can  be  posted  by  a  blog  owner  or  a  group  of  owners,  or  gleaned  from  other  websites  or  sources.  Starting a blog is not complicated and it does not require  a programming language and also no need to pay money.  Only thing is that one should have working knowledge of  computer  and  fundamentals  of  internet  and  its  usage.  
1.1.  LIS  Education  in  India  
In  105  years  of  LIS  education  in  India,  the  first  stone  was  laid  by  William  Alanson  Borden,  through  
Received 2 March 2016, online published 26 April 2016 
a  training  programme  in  Library  Science  under  the  patronage of Maharaja Sayaji Rao Gaekwad II at Baroda  in  1911.  In  1915,  Asa  Don  Dickinson,  a  disciple  of  Melvil  Dewey,  laid  second  stone  through  a  three-month  training programme at Punjab University, Lahore (now in  Pakistan)2. In 1920, a school was set up by Andhra Desa  Library Association to deliver lectures on various topics  like  history,  literature  and  culture  of  Andhra  Pradesh  besides the Library movement. In 1929, Madras Library  Association (MALA) started a School of Library Science  and  introduced  a  3  months  training  course  for  college  and  school  librarians  under  the  auspicious  directorship  of  Prof.  Shiyali  Ramamrutha  Ranganathan,  who  is  the  father  of  Library  Science  in  India.  In  1931,  the  school  was taken over by the University of Madras and in July  1938  the  certificate  course  was  replaced  by  one-year  full-time  postgraduate  course.  In  1935,  Bengal  Library  Association  started  a  training  course,  later  this  coursed  upgraded  to  a  certificate  course  in  1937.  The  Banaras  Hindu University, the Bombay University, the University  of Calcutta, and the University of Delhi started one-year  postgraduate diploma course in Library science in 1941,  1943, 1945, and 1947 respectively3. After independence,  lots of societies, associations, schools, colleges, universities  and  institutes  started  LIS  courses.  
After  1950,  a  large  number  of  departments  were  established  in  universities  to  offer  different  levels  of  LIS  courses,  like  Diploma  in  Library  Science,  BLISc,  MLISc,  two-year  integrated  MLISc,  MPhil  and  PhD  programme. There are two national institutes, namely, the  Documentation  Research  and  Training  Centre  (DRTC),  

========1========

MURALI PRASAD: MARKETING LIS EDUCATION THROUGH DEPARTMENTAL (DLIS) BLOG 
Bangalore and National Institute of Science Communication  and Information Resources (NISCAIR), formerly Indian  National  Scientific  Documentation  Centre  (INSDOC),  New  Delhi  that  are  offering  two  year  LIS  programmes.  In  addition  to  this,  a  number  of  distance  education  programmes  in  LIS  are  being  offered  by  national  and  state  level  open  universities  in  India4. 
Major  stakeholders  in  LIS  education  and  research  in  India  are  universities.  According  to  a  recent  study  in  20145,  the  following  are  the  details  of  Library  and  Information Science courses offered by various universities  under  University  Grants  Commission  (UGC)  in  India. •  181  universities  are  offering  library  science  
courses 
•  131  are  offering  BLISc  course  (one  year) 
• 136  are  offering  MLISc  course  (one  year) 
• 41  (out  of  136)  are  offering  two-year  integrated 
MLISc  course 
• 21  are  offering  MPhil  degree 
• 93  university  departments  are  offering  PhD  
degree. 
2.  nEED   of  c REA tIng  BLog 
At  present,  the  webpages  of  Department  of  Library  and Information Science (DLIS) are embedded with their  respective schools on the university websites. But, those  webpages are providing little information about courses,  faculty, research and activities or obsolescent information  due to different reasons like space limits, permission from  higher authorities, technical problems, etc. There are lots  of differences in LIS courses and their syllabus, duration  of  courses,  announcements  of  programmes,  etc.,  among  universities.They  offer  very  little  information  about  the  department  and  its  research.  Also  there  is  a  question  mark  about  the  standard  procedure,  format,  rules  and  regulations, etc., to update the departmental information  from  time  to  time  in  the  university  websites. 
The  exclusive  blog  created  for  the  department,  by  the  department,  will  fill  these  gaps  and  this  type  of  blog  will  gear  up  to  bring  a  change  in  LIS  education  and research. These blogs help the existing professionals  to  know  the  updated  scenario  of  the  LIS  education  and  these  are  useful  to  prospective  professionals  to  pursue  their  degrees,  and  also  create  interest  in  public  about  LIS  profession. 
3. oBjEctIvES   of  c REAtIng BLog  
The  main  objectives  to  create  a  blog  for  DLIS  are  to: 
(a) Publicise  the  history  and  courses  offered  by  the  
Departments 
(b) Disclose the research topics of PhD and MPhil which  
were  awarded  and  registered  from  time  to  time (c) Visualise the contributions, research and strength of  
the  faculty 
(d) Engage  the  scholars/students  to  learn  Lib  2.0  
technologies 
(e) Connect  LIS  alumni  with  the  new  students (f) Build an active online platform among LIS professionals  
and  prospective  professionals. 
4. ADvAntAgES   of  DEPARtMEntAL BLog 
Following  are  some  advantages  of  departmental  blog: 
• It  is  very  easy  to  host  blog,  that  also  without  any  
financial  compliance  for  domain,  space,  use,  and  
maintenance. 
• It  is  very  easy  to  disseminate  information  about  
department  to  the  world  without  any  time  delay  • It  helps  to  avoid  the  duplication  of  research  in  LIS  
when  departments  update  their  research  topics  in  
the  blog  from  time  to  time  
• It helps to control the syllabus anomalies across the  
universities 
• All the prospective students get up to date information  
easily  to  pursue  new  courses 
• It  is  easy  to  store  (upload)  and  get  retrospective  
information  about  department  activities,  events,  
programmes,  research,  etc.,  whenever  they  require  
like  a  logbook  
• Through the alumni (old students association) meets  
and contacts, departments can explore new avenues  
like  jobs,  industry  demand  about  course,  etc.  • It  is  easy  to  showcase  department  track  record  to  
others,especially,  at  the  time  of  NAAC  visits. • It is useful to know the achievements and activities  
of DLIS of other universities, which will encourage  
and  motivate  others  to  do  the  same. 
• This type of blog helps to maintain a standardisation  
in  education  and  research  in  LIS  programmes 
5.  cHALLE ngES  of  DEPARtMEntAL BLog 
Some  of  the  challenges  to  host  a  blog  for  DLIS  are: 
(a) Primary  challenge  is  the  strong  determination  
required  from  the  faculty  to  host  a  blog  for  their  
department. 
(b) The  faculty  should  be  acquainted  with  the Web  2.0  
technologies  to  teach  and  train  the  students (c) The  department  should  take  permission  from  the  
university  authorities  to  disclose  the  department  
information  to  the  public,  if  any.  
(d) It  requires  a  computer  with  good  configuration  and  
an  internet  connection. 
4.  DISADv AntAgES   of  DEPARtMEntAL BLog 
One major disadvantage is that the website URL will  have  a  suffix  with  the  blog  sponsor’s  name,  in  addition  
149 

========2========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  3,  MAy  2016 
to our chosen name for blog. For example www.dlisou. wordpress.com,  or  www.dlissvu.blogger.com,  etc. 
5.  MEtHoDoLogy AnD AnAL ySIS 
To  initiate  a  blog  for  DLIS,  the  following  are  the  different  strategies  to  maintain  and  sustain  a  blog  for  life  time. 
5.1 Hardware  and  Software  Requirements 
One  computer  with  office  suite  installation  (good  configuration),  internet  connection. 
5.2   c ommittee 
The DLIS should constitute a committee to manage  the  blog  and  its  content  from  time  to  time. This  should  be selected by the whole Department and the committee  may  consist  of: 
• Chairman  of  the  committee  may  be  the  Head  of  
the  Department  by  default.  (Blog  owner) 
• A  Vice-chairman  of  the  committee  may  be  one  
of  the  faculty  members  nominated  by  Chairman  
(one  year/two  years  term) 
• Two bloggers: one from Scholars community and  
the other from students community (one year/two  
years  term)  who  are  techno  savvy. 
5.3   c ontent  of  the  Blog 
The committee should take care of the blog content  like  history  of  the  department,  courses,  faculty,  PhD  and MPhil research, activities, events, photographs, etc.,  since  the  inception  of  the  department.  The  committee  should  decide  about  the  static  and  dynamic  content  on  the  blog.  The  committee  should  make  a  plan  for  content  collection,  sources  of  content,  hosting  content,  updating  blog,  etc.,  before  and  after  initiating  a  blog  for  department,  as,  starting  a  work  is  very  easy  but  sustaining  it  is  very  difficult.  
5.4 Structure  of  Blog 
A  blog  is  nothing  but  a  web  site.  It  consists  of  dynamic  and  static  web  pages  (and  also  links  to  other  interlinked  pages).  While  creating  an  interface  of  blog,  the  committee  should  do  the  following: 
5.4.1  Blog  Name 
The  name  of  the  blog  or  domain  name  should  be  DLIS  followed  by  university  name  to  recognise  easily,  for  e.g.  DLIS-SVU,  means  Department  of  Library  and  Information Science, SV University. It will automatically  be  followed  by  the  blog  sponsor’s  name,  e.g.  www. dlissvu.wordpress.com.  This  is  tentative  strategy  to  choose  blog  name,  however,  it  may  change  according  to  the  availability  or  choice. 
5.4.2  Blog  Sponsor/blog  Platform 
There are many blog sponsors or blog sites available  online  free  of  cost.  The  committee  should  choose  the  
150 
appropriate one according to their feasibility. The following  are  the  some  top  blogging  toolkits  to  choose  from  to  create  a  blog  for  department: 
(a) www.wordpress.com 
(b) www.blogger.com 
(c) www.tumblr.com 
(d) www.livejournal.com 
(e) www.weebly.com 
5.4.3  Static  Pages  on  Blog  
These  static  pages  should  be  kept  under  different  Tabs,  which  can  be  edited  whenever  required.  The  committee  should  take  care  that  the  content  should  be  from the inception of the department. The following are  some  important  tabs: 
(i) About:  About  the  Department 
(ii) Courses:  Courses  offered  by  the  department  and  
admission  procedure  of  those  courses  
(iii) Faculty: About Faculty with full details like contributions,  
research, specialisations, etc., in two categories like:  
(1)  Present  faculty  and  (2)  Previous  faculty 
(iv) Research  (since  the  inception  of  Department) 
(a) Projects  completed  and  ongoing  with  details  
(b) PhD  topics  completed  and  ongoing  with  
details 
(c) MPhil  topics  completed  and  ongoing  with  
details 
(d) Titles  of  dissertations  of  MLISc  students  (v) Alumni—Under this tab, the committee should track  
the  passed  out  professionals  and  their  job  details,  
communication  details,  etc.  from  time  to  time.  It  
requires  continuous  updating  and  the  committee  
should  maintain  relations  with  alumni  members  
through  conducting  alumni  meets,  get-to-gathers,  
etc.,  on  timely  basis. 
(vi) Programmes:  Memories  and  achievements  with  
photographs  either  by  faculty  or  students/scholars (vii)Useful  links  to  LIS  resources 
5.4.4 Dynamic  Page 
This  dynamic  page  gives  the  day  to  day  activities  of  the  department  and  also  will  be  arranged  in  reverse  chronological order by the blog site automatically. Only  thing required is that the bloggers update their activities  with photos frequently or whenever any activity happens  in  their  departments  like  seminars,  lectures,  PhD  viva- voce,  workshops,  any  fest  details,  etc.  
5.4.5 Social  Networking  Tools 
The blog should be tagged with all the possible social  networking  tools  like  Facebook,  RSS  feeds,  Linkedin,  Twitter,  etc. 
5.4.6 Interactive  Mechanism 
The  committee  or  blog  owner  should  allow  the  viewers  to  leave  their  feedback,  queries,  suggestions  

========3========

MURALI PRASAD: MARKETING LIS EDUCATION THROUGH DEPARTMENTAL (DLIS) BLOG 
regarding  courses  and  activities  of  the  department.  The  blog owner has to keep entire control on this mechanism  as  to  what  to  disclose  or  not  disclose,  etc.  Because  this  is  very  important  to  the  phenomena  of  interaction  with  existing  and  prospective  professionals,  and  also  with  the  public. 
5.5 Support  from  faculty 
The basic need to create Department blog requires a  proper dedication and determination from the Department  faculty.  All  the  faculty  members  should  co-ordinate  and  co-operate  with  each  other  to  show  case  their  own  department strength to the world. This will give credibility  to the Department and also to their faculty and students.  This,  in  turn,  brings  high  impact  on  contributions  of  faculty, scholars and students of the department through  the  blog. 
figure  2.  Screenshot  of  Digital  Library  Blog  of  Standord  
unversity Libraries. 
6.  Sugg EStED   gu IDELInES 
Before  starting  a  blog,  the  committee  has  to  chalk  out  some  guidelines  with  the  following  information: (a) Departmental committee has to keep ready the whole  
content  which  they  want  to  post  on  blog  under  
different  tabs  the  first  time. 
(b) Frequency of further updates and content which has  
to  be  posted  on  blog  at  regular  intervals  (c) Before posting the content it requires to be reviewed,  
because  it  shows  the  strength  of  department (d) Selection of blogging website and themes are playing  
a  key  role  to  attract  the  users  and  to  look  world  
class. 
(d) It  is  always  better  to  keep  an  instruction  manual  
that  documents  who  should  do  what  and  when  to  
post,  committee  meetings  durations,  etc. (e) The successors must be trained by the predecessors;  
otherwise  its  continuation  will  be  affected.  
Some  screen  shots  of  library  blogs  for  reference  
Figures  1-5  are  some  of  the  screen  shots  of  library  blogs,  and  other  LIS-related  blogs  for  reference6,7. 
figure 3. Screenshot of Library Soup. 
figure 4.  Screenshot of centre for Economic and Social Studies  
(cESS) Library. 
figure 1. Screenshot of Wellcome Library. 
figure 5.  Screenshot of university of Edinburgh Library &  
univesity collection. 
151 

========4========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  3,  MAy  2016 
7. concLuSIonS 
The  LIS  professionals  always  offer  value-added  services  to  their  users  at  their  working  places  after  their  course  work.  The  department  blog  is  started  at  the  department  level  to  provide  value-added  service  to  visualise the department’s credibility to their existing and  prospective  professionals,  and  also  to  the  public.  This  initiation requires proper commitment, determination and  collective co-operation at department level. This type of  initiatives will take LIS education and research to great  heights  and  will  make  it  reach  world  class  level.  For  this  all  the  LIS  associations,  faculty  and  LIS  fraternity  should  provide  their  support  and  encouragement  to  the  LIS  schools/departments  in  India. 
REfEREncES 
1. Murali,  Prasad  M.R. Weblogs  to  exploit  the  library  
and information services. In  CALIBER–2004: Road  
map  to  new  generation  of  libraries  using  emerging  
technologies, edited by  Murthy T.A.V., et al., Paper  
presented at the Second International Conference on  
Convention on Automation of Libraries in Education  
and  Research  Institutions,  11-13  February  2004,  
New Delhi. Information and Library Network Centre  
(INFLIBNET), Ahmedabad,  2004.  pp.  568-73 2. Kumar,    Krishan  &  Sharma,  Jaideep.  Library  and  
information science education in India: A historical  
perspective.  DESIDOC  Bull.  of  Inf.  Tech.,  2010,  
30(5),  3-8.  
152 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
Ramesha & Babu, B. Ramesh. Trends, challenges and  future  of  library  and  information  science  education  in India. DESIDOC Bull. of Inf. Tech. , 2007, 27(5),  17-26. 
Ganaie,  Shabir  Ahmad.  Library  and  information  science  education  in  India:  A  critical  assessment.  LIS  Links  Newsletter,  2015,  1(2),  2-9. 
Singh,  Shashi  Prabha  &  Babbar,  Parveen.  Doctoral  research in library and information science in India:  Trends  and  issues.  DESIDOC  Bull.  of  Inf.  Tech.,  2014, 34(2),  170-80. 
www.librarycess.wordpress.com  (accessed  on  24 February  2016) 
http://www.dearblogger.org (accessed on 24February 2016) 
contributor 
Dr  M.R.  Murali  Prasad   obtained  his  PhD  in  Library  and  Information  from  S.V.  University,  Tirupati.  He  is  associated  with  Centre  for  Economic  and  Social  Studies,  Hyderabad  as  a  Librarian.  He  is  a  UK  Commonwealth  Fellow  for  2011-12.  He  has  published  a  book  (International  Publication)  and  more  than 40 research papers in national and international journals,  conference  proceedings  and  books.  He  is  a  BOS  member  for  DLIS at Osmania University, Hyderabad and Resource Person  for many universities like Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Open University,  IGNOU,  Osmania,  etc.  His  areas  of  interest  are:  Information  literacy,  library  automation,  digital  libraries,  and  knowledge  management.  

========5========

