DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 36, No. 3, May 2016, pp. 153-157  DOI: 10.14429/djlit.36.3.9810 
  2016, DESIDOC 
Social Media and Library Marketing: Experiences of KN Raj Library 
V. Sriram 
Centre for Development Studies, Thiruvananthapuram-695 001 
E-mail: vsrirams@gmail.com 
AbStRAct 
Marketing  is  essential  for  attracting  potential  customers  and  retaining  existing  customers.  Libraries  and  information centres are also increasingly entering into the foray of library marketing and public relations using  all available means. The various Web 2.0 and social media tools are very convenient for the libraries to market  their resources and services. The paper explains various popular social media tools and argues for their extensive  use in libraries for marketing and publicity. How these social media tools can be effectively put to use in libraries  for marketing its resources and services are explained by illustrating services in the KN Raj Library of Centre for  
Development Studies, Thiruvananthapuram. 
Keywords: KN Raj Library, library and information centre, library marketing, social media, Web 2.0 
1.  INtRoductIoN 
Libraries are treasure houses of knowledge, information  and data. In any society, the libraries play an important  part  in  the  growth  and  development  of  the  population  as  a  whole.  All  libraries,  irrespective  of  whether  they  are public, academic, or special, are community libraries  which service a specific community. Library professionals  in  these  libraries  have  always  striven  hard  to  create  awareness about their institutions, resources, and services  among the users and potential users through all possible  means  of  communication.  
The  researchers  and  library  users  are  extensively  using  the  internet  resources  on  regular  basis.  The  web-based resources and services have altered the information  seeking behaviour of people. A typical information user  in today’s digital world can access information resources  and  services  through  a  variety  of  channels.1   Libraries  are  also  adapting  to  these  changing  environments. They  are  developing  and  using  various  special  tools  and  are  devising  alternate  ways  to  reach  and  remind  the  users  about  their  presence.  
According  to  Kotler2,   Marketing  “is  the  analysis,  planning,  implementation,  and  control  of    carefully  formulated  programs  designed  to  bring  about  voluntary  exchanges of values with target markets for the purpose  of achieving organizational objectives”. Marketing relates  to  promotion,  advertisement,  personal  selling,  public  relations,  and  so  on.  The  activities  of  an  organisation  pertaining  to  relations  with  various  markets  and  public  are marketing. As posed by Hill3, marketing drives social  responsibilities  associated  with  various  stake  holders,  and  the  role  of  marketing  is  much  broader  than  many  
Received 3 March 2016, online published  26 April 2016 
people anticipate. But most of the libraries do not market  themselves effectively. Shontz4,  et  al  believe  that  many  librarians may lack knowledge about marketing, may not  think marketing is important, or may actually have negative  attitudes  about  marketing.  Also,  some  librarians  have  apprehension about whether marketing is an appropriate  activity for them. This is because traditionally marketing  is viewed as activity for profit making businesses. When  a  library  professional  reads  further  about  marketing  management, it dawns on him/her that like in any other  field, in libraries also, marketing has the capacity to get  underneath  wants  and  needs  of  generations  of  people  across  places,  cultures  and  product  categories.  It  helps  to  understand  consumers  from  their  point  of  view.  It  is  also  clear  that  to  be  effective  in  assessing  their  users’  needs and trying to fulfill them; librarians need to adopt  the  total  marketing  function.5 
1.1  Social  Media 
In 2005, O’Reilly 
6 
    proposed  the  Web  2.0  concept.  This was a revolutionary development going way beyond  the limits of the dot com (.com) technology. Social media  is defined as a group of internet-based applications that  build  on  Web  2.0.  It  facilitates  generation  and  sharing  of  user-generated  content.  Social  media  uses  modern  ICT  systems  to  provide  avenues  through  which  people  can share, and manage content generated by themselves.  The  term  ‘social  media’  is  used  broadly  to  denote  all  types of social networking and communication tools and  applications  that  help  us  to  remain  in  touch  with  each  other  (Fig.  1).  
According to Mayfield7,   social  media  is  a  group  of  new kinds of online media which share the characteristics  

========1========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  3,  MAy  2016 
Source: The Blog Herald (http://www.blogherald.com) 
Figure 1. Social media image. 
such as (a) participation, (b) openness, (c) conversation,  (d) community, and (e) connectedness. He further identified  basic  kinds  of  social  media  as  (i)  social  Networks,  (ii)  blogs, (iii) wikis, (iv) podcasts, (v) forums, (vi) content  communities,  and  (vii)  microblogging. 
Social media, therefore, broadly denotes the different  types  of  online  tools  and  services  such  as  blogs,  wikis,  social networking sites, photo and video sharing communities  and other applications provided by new generation ICT  systems.  They  provide  several  ways  for  the  effective  use  by  libraries  to  market  their  resources  and  services.  Social media is about participating, sharing and creating  content,  and  all  the  features  are  of  great  value.8 
2.  KN  RAJ  LIbRARY  
The  Centre  for  Development  Studies  (CDS),  Thiruvananthapuram was established in 19719. Its library  is considered one of the foremost research and reference  libraries in the country in social sciences. It has over the  last  40  years  acquired  a  large  and  vibrant  collection  of  books, periodicals, other research institutes’ publications  (national and international) and government publications in  social sciences. Its digital repository has been populated  with  more  than  10,000  items.    In  fond  remembrance  of  its founder, late Professor KN Raj, the CDS Library was  renamed  as  KN  Raj  Library10   with  effect  from  9 
th 
  July  2010. It has acquired an enormous number of titles in print  and digital form. Its vision is to provide and share these  resources  with  as  many  interested  persons  as  possible.  To  attain  this  objective,  KN  Raj  Library  promotes  and  publicises  about  its  resources  and  services  through  the  different  social  media  tools  and  the  response  that  it  has  received  in  the  past  five  years  has  been  tremendous. 
3.  SocIAL  MEdIA tooLS 
3.1 blogs 
Weblogs or Blogs as they are popularly known, are  spaces  for  sharing  ideas,  views  and  thoughts.  It  also  provides facility for discussion and feedback (also known as  comments) on matters presented. It also facilitates linking  to other blogs and websites. Blogs can be subscribed to  using  RSS  feeds.  www.blogger.com,  www.weebly.com,  
154 
www.wordpress.com,  and  www.yola.com  are  some  of  the  most  popular  tools  for  creating  blogs.  
The blog-based information services in KN Raj Library  was  launched  in August  2010  and  officially  announced  as  open  to  all  users  in  February  2011.  The  service  was  named  as  ‘KN  Raj  Library  Information  Updates’.  It  was  available  in  urls  cds.ac.in/lib  and  lib.cds.ac.in. The  Wordpress.org  blog  template  found  suitable  was  used  by  installing  the  same  in  the  CDS  server.  In  2012,  this  service  was  shifted  to  Wordpress.com  site  taking  into  account the increased usage, and the facility to link and  share  with  other  social  media  tools.  The  service  was  renamed as ‘KN Raj Library Content Alerts’. At present  the  services  is  available  in  the  url  https://knrajlibrary. wordpress.com  (Fig.  2). 
Figure 2. content Alerts. 
3.2  Facebook 
The massively popular and most widely used social  networking site, Facebook11, is free social networking site  launched in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg. It allows building  online  communities  for  sharing  information.Libraries  can  create  pages  and  groups  of  interested  community  members  and  use  it  as  an  effective  channel  for  sharing  information. The libraries participation in Facebook groups  and discussion will help to build powerful communication  between  the  users  and  library.12   The  likes,  shares  and  comments  from  the  facebook  users  will  automatically  publicise  the  library  page  among  their  friends  thereby  giving  more  visibility  to  the  library.  It  is  also  a  best  and  effective  platform  for  providing  ready  reference  service.  The  Facebook  page  of  KN  Raj  Library  (Fig.  3)  was  launched  in  December  2012  and  is  accessible  at  
Figure 3. KN Raj Library on Facebook. 

========2========

SRIRAM: SOCIAL MEDIA AND LIBRARy  MARKETING 
https://www.facebook.com/knrajlibrary. All the posts in the  “Contents Alerts”  blog  is  automatically  shared  with  the  facebook  page  also. Apart  from  this,  information  about  special events conducted in the library, photo albums of  events, news items about the centre and other important  information pertaining to the library users are also posted  in  this  page.  This  facebook  page  is  available  for  all  general public. Quick reference service is also provided  to  the  users  through  this  page,  at  their  request.  
3.3 twitter 
Twitter13   is  an  online  social  networking  service.  Registered  users  can  send  and  read  short  140-character  messages  called  "tweets".  Libraries  can  create  accounts  in  Twitter  and  use  it  for  tweeting  excerpts  about  posts  in  blogs  and  web-sites.  It  is  also  a  very  useful  medium  for  quick  and  brief  information  sharing. 
Twitter page of KN Raj Library (https://twitter.com/ knrajlibrary) was launched in September 2013. This service  is  named  as  ‘Updates  from  KN  Raj  Library’.  Through  sharing option in “Contents Alerts” blog, all posts in the  blog  are  automatically  shared  in  the  twitter  page  also.  Many  library  users  re-tweet  from  the  @KNRajLibrary  the  items  that  they  find  interesting.  (Fig.  4) 
Figure 4.  @KNRajLibrary. 
3.4  LinkedIn 
  Registered  users  in  LinkedIn 
14 
  can  create  and  manage their profile which will help to engage with their  professional  network.  Libraries  can  use  this  medium  to  share knowledge, insights and opportunities and effectively  network  with  the  library  users  for  their  benefit. 
The KN Raj Library started an account in LinkedIn  in 2014 and can be accessed at the url http://in.linkedin. com/in/knrajlibrary. All posts from the “Content Alerts”  are automatically shared with the LinkedIn account also  for  wider  viewership.  Primarily  meant  for  business  and  career  based  networking,  LinkedIn  is  very  useful  for  the  networking  of  students  with  the  alumni  and  general  public. This enables the library page to act as a platform  between  different  categories  of  users,  at  the  same  time  informs them about the latest developments in their area  of  research  interest.  (Fig.  5) 
3.5  ScoopIt 
 ScoopIt 
15 
  was  launched  as  a  free  internet  curation  tool.  This  is  the  best  solution  currently  available  for  
Figure 5. KN Raj Library on LinkedIn. 
creating online magazines, bulletins, newsletters, pamphlets  and  other  current  awareness  publications.  Libraries  can  use  ScoopIt  to  create  online  magazines  and  newsletters  for  the  benefit  of  the  user  community.  This  is  the  best  medium  for  creating  image  based  information  service,  that  is  more  colorful  and  appealing  to  the  library  user.  ScoopIt  has  provision  for  the  users  to  rescoop  these  posts, in their ScoopIt account as well as in other social  media  of  their  choice.  Thus,  contents,  get  scooped  and  rescooped  multiple  times,  increasing  its  visibility,  and  in  turn,  the  libraries  image. 
The  KN  Raj  Library  started  using  ScoopIt  from  October 2013. This service is available at the url http:// www.scoop.it/t/infoknrl.  This  social  media  is  primarily  to  publicise  non-scholarly  information  emanating  from  different sources, which will be of interest to the library  users. News paper clippings, job / career advertisements,  scholarships information, seminar / workshop announcements,  new  innovations  and  advancement,  and  so  on  that  are  of  immense  use  to  the  user  community  are  brought  to  their  attention  via  ScoopIT  (Fig.  6). 
Figure 6. InfoKNRL. 
3.6 other tools 
 Apart  from  the  Blog,  Facebook,  Twitter,  Linkedin  and  ScoopIt,  the  following  tools  are  also  becoming  popular  among  librarians: 
3.6.1  Flickr 
 Flickr 
16 
 is perhaps the best online photo management  and  sharing  application.  Flickr  can  be  used  to  upload,  
155 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  3,  MAy  2016 
maintain and share photo albums of events and programmes  conducted by the libraries. Institutions organize different  events  throughout  the  year.  All  the  photographs  taken  during these occasions usually get lost or unmanageable.  Flickr  provides  an  effective  solution  to  organise  these  photos  and  images  properly  and  gives  them  maximum  visibility  on  the  internet. 
3.6.2  Pinterest  
 Pinterest 
17 
 allows its members to collect and organize  web-based  resources.  It  allows  users  to  capture  items  found  on  the  internet  to  a  ‘pinboard’.  The  boards  are  accessible  to  users  with  login.  This  tool  is  extremely  useful for sharing information to visual learners. Libraries  can  very  quickly  and  easily  keep  the  pinboard  updated  with  latest  resources  and  information. 
3.6.3  Wikipedia  
Wikis18 are  open  webpages  available  online.  It  has  surpassed  the  traditional  print  encyclopedia  in  coverage  and  usage.  They  are  created  by  community  efforts.  Information  can  be  created  in  text,  audio,  video  and  animation  formats  in  wiki.  This  media  can  be  used  to  create and maintain description about the library and the  parent institution, for historical purposes. Short biography  of  leading  and  prominent  persons  who  established  the  institution can also be created for public awareness. The  visibility  that  wikipedia  creates  in  Internet  is  enormous  and  the  wiki  contents  are  highly  beneficial  for  the  user  community. 
3.6.4  WhatsApp  
For  smartphone  users  WhatsApp19   is  a  very  useful  application that helps in sending messages instantly. This  tool  uses  the  Internet  to  send  text  messages,  images,  video, user location and audio media messages. For faster  and easier networking; it allows creation of groups. The  librarian  can  create  various  groups  based  on  different  criteria, and share with the users the important information,  new  additions,  photos  of  events  and  so  on.  The  smart  phone  proliferation  across  all  nations  is  increasing  at  a  tremendous  rate.  The  avenue  of  marketing  library  resources  and  services  through  WhatsApp  is  enormous.  Lots  of  librarians  are  effectively  using  this  tool  for  information  dissemination.  However,  due  to  its  innate  privacy, general public is not aware about the existence  of  such  groups. 
3.6.5  You  Tube 
you Tube20  is the most popular place to host, share  and  watch  original  videos.  It  currently  hosts  more  than  50  lakhs  videos.  you  Tube  can  be  used  to  host  the  important events conducted by the institutions. Moreover,  library,  can your  Tube  to  gather  and  host  videos  about  resources and instructions to use them. Video of ‘Know  your Library’ can also be hosted in you Tube for greater  visibility  and  convenience.    
156 
4.  SuGGEStIoNS 
Libraries can launch social media based services to  inform  their  members  about  the  following: 
•	 Library 	 new 	 additions, 	 timings, 	 holidays, 	 announcements/ 
notices 
•	 Information 	 about 	 membership 	 and 	 services. 
•	 Information 	 about 	 Book 	 discussions, 	 reviews, 	 new 	 
publications 
•	 Create 	 and 	 maintain 	 links 	 to 	 prominent 	 online 	 
resources 
•	 Information 	 about 	 new 	 developments 
•	 Share 	 images 	 / 	 videos 	 about 	 library, 	 events, 	 library 	 
staff  etc. 
•	 Share 	 information 	 about 	 institution’s 	 publications, 	 
reports  etc. 
•	 Network 	 with 	 users 	 and 	 provide 	 information 	 via 	 
messaging  services. 
It  is  evident  that  libraries  are  using  several  Social  Media tools. However, more effective intervention among  the  user  community  is  possible  through  the  use  of  following  tools: 
•	 Website/Blog 	 of 	 every 	 library 	 should 	 be 	 able 	 to 	 
provide  all  basic  information  about  the  history,  
events,  activities,  contact  details.  The  URLs  of  all  
the other social media platforms should be provided  
in  the  website.  This  should  be  primary  location  
for  all  the  information  needs.  Simple  tools  such  as  
Drupal,  Jhoomla,  Wordpress  etc,  are  now  available  
for  web-site  development. 
•	 Blog 	 should 	 be 	 the 	 primary 	 platform 	 for 	 posting 	 
the  messages.  It  should  be  connected  to  Facebook,  
LinkedIn and Twitter so that every post in the blog  
will  be  shared  directly  in  these  applications.  •	 Videos 	 of 	 important 	 events 	 and 	 activities 	 should 	 be 	 
recorded  and  hosted  in youTube  and  its  url  with  a  
brief  description  should  be  posted  in  the  Blog.  •	 Photographs 	 should 	 be 	 hosted 	 in 	 Flickr 	 as 	 albums 	 
and its URL with brief description should be posted  
in  the  Blog.  
•	 A 	 general 	 description 	 of 	 every 	 institution, 	 and 	 important 	 
personalities  connected  with  it  should  be  hosted  in  
Wikipedia  in  English,  and  the  regional  language.   
This  is  very  important  for  historical  purposes.  •	 Twitter 	 and 	 WhatsApp 	 should 	 be 	 information 	 alert 	 
tools pointing to blogs and websites. This will reduce  
the  data  handled  in  them. 
•	 The 	 event 	 digests 	 should 	 be 	 compiled 	 in 	 ScoopIt 	 
and  provided  to  all  the  members. 
5. coNcLuSIoNS 
Information  technology  has  developed  very  rapidly  in  the  new  millennium.  In  area  of  Internet,  computers  

========4========

SRIRAM: SOCIAL MEDIA AND LIBRARy  MARKETING 
and communication this has induced tremendous changes.  Librarians manage their day-to-day activity in a sophisticated  cutting  edge  environment.  Two  decades  back  a  website  was a great asset for a library.21  Similarly today, modern  social  media  tools  are  great  assets,  because  it  provides  access  to  the  library  and  information  centre  throughout  the day and all days a week. They allow the contents to  be  edited,  modified  and  always  kept  updated. A  library  can thoroughly improve its image and visibility with the  help  of  online  marketing.  This  will  result  in  attracting  more  users  to  utilise  its  materials  and  services.  
Information  is  getting  generated  and  disseminated  through  multiple  channels,  and  these  pose  new  hurdles  for  individuals  in  assessing  and  comprehending  it.  The  society  is  facing  grave  danger  from  the  uncertain  quality and exponential growth of information.22 Without  competent library professionals and awareness provided  by  them  through  social  media  about  proper  availability  of information, creating and developing a more informed  and  efficient  society  will  not  be  possible. 
REFERENcES 
1.  Chowdhury,  G.G.  &  Chowdhury,  S.  Organizing  
information:  From  the  shelf  to  the  web.  Facet  
Publishing,  London,  2007.  
2.  Kotler, P. Marketing for nonprofit organizations. Ed.  
2.  Prentice-Hall  of  India,  New  Delhi,  1985.  3.  Hill, R.P. & Langan, R. (Ed.). Handbook of Research  
on  Marketing  and  Corporate  Social  Responsibility.  
Edward  Elgar,  Cheltenham,  2014.  
4.  Shontz,  M.L.;  Parker,  J.C.  &  Parker,  R.  What  do  
librarians think about marketing? a survey of public  
librarians’ attitudes toward the marketing of library  
services.  Library  Q uarterly,  2004,  74(1).  http:// 
www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/380854  (accessed  on  
5  February  2016). 
5.  Sharma, A.K. & Bhardwaj, S. Marketing and promotion  
of  library  services. In   International  Conference  on  
Academic Libraries. http://crl.du.ac.in/ical09/papers/ 
index_files/ical-79_73_172_2_RV.pdf (accessed on 5  
February  2016). 
6.  O’Reilly,  T.  What  Is  Web  2.0.  O’Reilly  Media,  
New york, 2005. http://www.oreilly.com/pub/a/web2/ 
archive/what-is-web-20.html (accessed on 6 February  
2016). 
7.  Mayfield  A.  What  is  social  media?  iCrossing,  
London,  2008.  http://www.icrossing.com/uk/sites/ 
default/files_uk/insight_pdf_files/What%20is%20 
Social%20Media_iCrossing_ebook.pdf (accessed on  
6  February  2016). 
8.  Gupta,  P.  Importance  of  social  media  in  higher  
education. EdTechReview,   New  Delhi,  2015.  http:// 
edtechreview.in/trends-insights/insights/2041-social- 
media-in-higher-education  (accessed  on  6  February  
2016). 
9. Centre  For  Development  Studies.    http://www.cds. 
edu/.  (accessed  on  8  February  2016). 
10. K.N. Raj Library. http://cds.edu/support/kn-raj-library/.  
(accessed  on  6  February  2016). 
11. Facebook.  https://www.facebook.com  (accessed  on  
6  February  2016). 
12. Xia, Z.D. Marketing library services through Facebook  
groups.  Library  Management,  2009,  30(6/7),  469- 
78.  
13.  Twitter. https://twitter.com/ (accessed on 7 February  
2016). 
14.  LinkedIn. https://www.linkedin.com/ (accessed on 7  
February  2016). 
15.  Scoop.it. http://www.scoop.it (accessed on 7 February  
2016). 
16.  Flickr. https://www.flickr.com/ (accessed on 7 February  
2016). 
17.  Dudenhoffer C. Pin it! Pinterest as a library marketing  
and information literacy tool. Coll. Res. Lib. News ,  
2012, 73(6),  328–32.  
18.  Wikipedia.  https://www.wikipedia.org/  (accessed  on  
7  February  2016). 
19. WhatsApp. https://www.whatsapp.com/ (accessed on  
7  February  2016). 
20. youTube.  https://www.youtube.com/  (accessed  on  8  
February  2016). 
21.  Pantry,  S.  &  Griffiths,  P.  Setting  up  a  library  and  
information  service  from  scratch.  Facet  Publishing,  
London,  2005.  
22.  Information  Literacy  Competency  Standards  for  
Higher  Education.  Association  of  College  &  
Research  Libraries,  Chicago,  2000.  16  p.  www. 
ala.org/acrl/sites/ala.org.acrl/files/content/standards/ 
standards.pdf  (accessed  on  5  February  2016). 
contributor 
Mr V. Sriram  has obtained BA in English Language and Literature,  MLISc  and  qualified  UGC-NET  in  Library  and  Information  Science. Presently, he is working as Chief Librarian of KN Raj   Library, Centre for Development Studies, Thiruvananthapuram,  Kerala.  During  2004-2008,  he  has  worked  in  British  Library,  Thiruvananthapuram  as  Assistant  Librarian.  He  was  also  engaged  by  LibSys  Ltd.  as  Technical  Service  Executive.  He  had been Library Consultant for FISAT, Angamaly (2002) and  Trinity  College  of  Engineering,  Thiruvananthapuram  (2010)  and  established  their  libraries. 
157 

========5========

