DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 36, No. 3, May 2016, pp.158-163  DOI: 10.14429/djlit.36.3.9813 
 2016, DESIDOC 
Marketing of Library Resources, Services and Products: A Case Study of IIT Delhi 
Vanita Khanchandani* and  Nabi Hasan**  Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi-110 016 
E-mail: *vanita@library.iitd.ac.in;**hasan@library.iitd.ac.in 
AbSTRACT 
 Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi is one of the premier institutes of India and was established in 1961.  To  cater  the  research  and  the  teaching  needs  of  the  institute,  Central  Library,  IIT  Delhi  is  providing  different  resources, services and products to the faculty and the students. To maximise the usage and for increasing the  importance, libraries in the present era around the world are adopting the different marketing strategies. Marketing  besides providing sustainability, also helps in realising the goals of libraries.This paper provides a comprehensive  overview on different marketing strategies adopted by libraries with special reference to Central Library, IIT Delhi  for reaching to its users and to increase the outreach. The paper is intended to help professionals and the library  users in knowing the various resources, services and products provided by the Central Library,  IIT Delhi as a model  to be explored and followed by other libraries and their administrators.  
Keywords:  Library marketing, library products and services, library outreach, information literacy. Central Library,  
IIT Delhi 
1.  InTRoDuCTIon 
Information  has  become  an  essential  nutrient  of  life.  Without  information,  no  one  can  survive.  In  the  present  scenario,  information  is  growing  at  a  fast  pace  and  is  made  available  in  various  formats.  To  preserve  and  disseminate  growing  information,the  libraries  and  information  centres  have  transposed  unprecedentedly.  Libraries are facing new challenges due to huge amount  of  information,  changing  media  of  information,  budget  crunch,  and  staff  shortage,  etc.  To  overcome  all  these  challenges,  marketing  of  library  resources,  services  and  products  can  prove  to  be  a  strategic  tool1. 
Marketing  in  libraries  is  not  a  new  phenomenon.  Marketing  is  applicable  both  for  profit  generating  and  non-profit  organisations.  Marketing  calls  for  different  activities  from  promotion  to  selling  products  and  services  to  the  customers  that  have  value  for  them.  Chartered Institute of Marketing, UK defined marketing  as,  "Marketing  is  the  management  process  responsible  for  identifying,  anticipating  and  satisfying  customer  requirements  profitably".  Library  marketing  involves  identifying user information needs, matching these needs  with  appropriate  information  resources  and  satisfying  customer requirements proactively. While profit-making  is  the  main  goal  of  any  business  marketing,  providing  improved  services  to  library  users  is  the  hallmark  of  library  and  information  marketing2. 
1.1  Reasons  to  Market  Library  Resources,  Services  
and  Products 
Marketing in libraries is vital for their sustainability.  
Received 5 March 2016  Online Published 26 April 2016 
Information  has  already  been  recognised  as  a  sellable  commodity.  It  can  be  used  and  distributed  by  the  users  like other commodities. Marketing can help the libraries  in  gaining  sustainability  in  the  following  ways.1 (a) Providing  solution  to  dwindling  budgets; (b) Promotion  of  products  and  services; 
(c) Help  in  gaining  self-  sufficiency; 
(d) Improves  library  image; 
(e) Create  the  perception  of  information  need  in  the 
user; 
(f) Save  from  devaluation  and  providing  sustainability  
to  library  profession; 
(g) Increase  readership  in  the  library;  
(h) User  education;  
(i) Implication  of  five  laws  of  library  science  and (j) Solution  for  growing  information. 
1.2  Central  Library,  IIT  Delhi 
IIT Delhi is one of the institutes of national importance.  It  was  opened  in  1961.  The  IIT  Delhi  Library  System  comprises  of  a  Central  Library  and  18  departmental  libraries  that  collectively  cater  the  needs  of  teaching,  research and extension programmes of the Institute. The  Central  Library  houses  a  total  collection  of  over  three  lakh  documents  comprising  of  books,  theses,  journals,  e-resources  video  cassettes  and  compact  discs  in  the  field  of  science,  engineering,  humanities,  literature  and  management.  The  faculty,  students  and  staff  of  the  

========1========

KHANCHANDANI & HASAN: MARKETING OF LIBRARY RESOURCES, SERVICES AND PRODUCTS 
institute are the members of it apart from corporate and  alumni3.  Presently,  IIT  Delhi  has  become  the  member  of  e-Shodh  Sindhu  Consortium,  formed  after  merging  of UGC-INFONET Digital Library Consortium, N-LIST  and  INDEST-AICTE  Consortium4. 
report regarding these. Circular mails to faculty and  students  are  sent  by  the  library  staff  pertaining  to  any  new  subscription.  
2.  MARKeTIng  STRATegIeS   fo R 
PRoMoTIng  LIbRARy  ReSouRCeS,  
SeRvICeS AnD   P RoDuCTS AT   IIT  De LhI 
Marketing involves different activities such as marketing  plan, marketing research, marketing segmentation, marketing  strategy,  marketing  mix  and  evaluation  of  products  and  services.  Marketing  strategies  help  in  the  realization  of  the  objectives  of  an  organization.  There  are  various  market strategies adopted by the central library IIT Delhi  to  promote  its  products  and  services  amongst  its  users.  Some  of  them  are:  
(a)  Library  Website:   Library  website  (Fig.1)  is  the  
most  effective  tool  for  marketing  its  products  and  
services. All the activities carried out by the library  
can  be  described  in  it.  It  provides  audio-visual  and  
text  medium  to  the  user  for  proper  interaction  and  
communication. Central library IIT Delhi maintains  
and timely updates its website to provide information  
to  its  users. 
(b) User Orientation:  Orientation to users is provided at  
the starting of their session. In orientation programme,  
a  brief  presentation  is  followed  by  library  tour.  
Library also runs a PPT at its circulation counter and  
a  video  is  available  on  the  site  for  the  purpose. 
figure. 2.  e-resources subscribed by Central Library. 
figure 3.    e -resources subscribed for IIT Delhi through e-Shodh  
Sindhu (www.infibnet.ac.in/ess/). 
figure 1. Website of central library, IIT Delhi (http://library. 
iitd.ac.in/). 
(c) E-Resources:  Different  e-resources  are  subscribed  
by  the  Central  Library  in  the  form  of  databases,  
standards and e-books (Fig. 2). The details of these  
have  been  given  in  the  library  website  in  the  user  
friendly manner. Being a member of e-Shodh Sindhu,  
the  library  has  access  to  nearly  24  databases  (Fig.  
3). Library also subscribes three important standards,  
(Fig. 4)—ASTM standards, Indian standards and IEC  
standards  and  35  e-text  books  (Fig.  5)  to  cater  the  
needs of specific students. For maximising their usage,  
library  is  taking  usage  from  publishers  every  year,  
have put signage board regarding their subscription  
in the library, made posters and also compile annual  
figure 4.  e-books subscribed by Central Library. 
figure 5.  Standards subscribed by Central Library. 
159 

========2========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  3,  MAY  2016 
(d) WebOPAC:   Library  holdings  are  searchable  through  
WebOPAC.  The  online  catalogue  is  available  on  
intranet at http://10.217.116.5:8080/jopacv11/html/ and  
on  internet  at  http://libcat.iitd.ac.in:8080/jopacv11/ 
html/.  To  enhance  search  facility,  a  good  number  
of  computers  for  WebOPACs  have  been  installed  
in  the  library  (Fig.  6). 
figure 6.  WeboPAC area in the Central Library. (e) Discovery Services:  To have relvancy in search and  
to  increase  usage  specially  of  e-resources,  central  
library  has  recently  subscribed  to  Ebsco  Discovery  
Service (Fig. 7). This service is having unified index  
to webOPAC, institutional respository, i.e., e-prints@ 
IITD, e-resources in the form of databases, e-journals,  
figure 7.  ebsco discovery service at Central Library. 
e-books, standards etc. This unified index  provides  
a  single  search  window  facility  to  the  users. (f) Video Library Service:  Central library provides video  
library service to its users. These video lectures are  
delivered by the eminent professors of IIT Delhi and  
are  recorded  in  CDs  by  the  professionals  (Fig.  8).  (g) Inter Library Loan service: As a member of DELNET,  
the  unavailable  books  and  research  papers  for  the  
figure 8.  List of available videos in Library. 
160 
users  on  inter  library  loan  request  basis  are  made  available by searching through their union catalogue  (Fig.  9). 
figure 9.  Snapshot of DeLneT interface. (h) List  of  New  Arrivals:   List  of  new  arrivals  is  sent  
through circular web mails to all the library members  
(Fig.  10).  They  can  view  the  list  by  clicking  the  
link.  List  of  New  Arrivals  (Fig.  11)  can  also  be  
viewed through new additions interface available in  
the  WebOPAC  (Fig.  12)  and  books  are  physically  
displayed  for  15  days  in  the  library  before  placing  
them  on  shelves.  
figure 10.  Circular web mail showing new arrivals. 
figure 11. List of new Arrivals. 
figure 12.  List of new Arrivals available through WeboPAC. 

========3========

KHANCHANDANI & HASAN: MARKETING OF LIBRARY RESOURCES, SERVICES AND PRODUCTS 
(i) Book Bank Service:   Book  Bank  service  is  provided  
to  all  BTech  students.  Upto  6  books  are  issued  to  
every student for the whole semester on free of rental  
and  on  first-cum-first  serve  basis  on  notified  dates  
only.  It  has  a  syllabus-related  dedicated  collection  
of  over  6,000  books  which  is  regularly  updated.  
Book Bank notice along with the updated list is sent  
through  circular  web  mail  to  all  BTech  students,  a  
week  prior  to  notified  dates. Announcement  notice  
regarding book bank is put on the IIT Delhi internal  
web  as  well  as  on  the  library  website.  Notices  are  
also  put  on  different  places  in  the  campus,  hostels  
and  in  the  library  for  having  proper  publicity  of  
book  bank  service  (Fig.  13). 
figure 13. Circular mail showing book bank notice. 
(j) Technical  Talks  regarding  Subscribed  Databases: 
For  making  users  aware  and  maximising  the  usage  
of  e-resources,  regular  technical  workshops  are  
organised  as  part  of  reaching  to  its  users  by  the  
resource  persons.  Notice  regarding  the  content  of  
technical  talk  and  reminder  is  sent  to  all  members  
through  circular  web  mail  (Fig.  14).  It  is  also  put  
in  announcement  area  (Fig.  15)  on  library  website  
and  posters  are  displayed  in  important  areas. 
figure 14.  Circular mail showing notice of Technical Talk on   
Ieee  Xplore (Workshop/Information Literacy). 
figure 15.  notices/Announcements on the library website. 
(k) Library  Brochure:   The  library  provides  printed  as  
well as downloadable copy of its brochure comprising  
of  different  services,  rules,  subscribed  e-resources  
and  collections.  It  is  downloadable  from  the  link  
http://library.iitd.ac.in/pdf/LibraryGuide.pdf. (l) Doctoral  Theses:   Doctoral  theses  are  important  
output  of  any  research  institution.  To  make  this  
research  accessible  to  all,  all  the  theses  have  been  
digitizied. Anyone can get the bibliographic details of  
these through PHP-based database (Fig. 16) and the  
extended  abstracts  of  the  same  can  be  downloaded  
from WebOPAC or from the institutional repository,  
i.e.,  EPrints  @IITD5 (Fig.  17). 
figure 16.  PhP-based interface for doctoral theses. 
figure 17.  ePrints@IITD (DSpace-based IR). 
(m) Remote Access  Facility:   This  facility  for  accessing  
the  e-resources  has  been  provided  through  VPN.  
figure 18.  vPn  facility at IIT Delhi for accessing the resources  
 remotely by the faculty. 
(n) Newspaper and Magazine Clipping Service: Newspaper  
(Fig.  19)  and  Magazine  Clipping  Service  (Fig.  20)  
is  a  personalised  current  awareness  service  (CAS)  
provided to very senior functionaries of the institute  
in digital form through daily e-mail. The purpose of  
this  service  is  to  make  them  aware  about  the  daily  
happenings  and  coverage  in  media  on  the  basis  of  
pre-decided  keywords.  
161 

========4========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  3,  MAY  2016 
figure 19.  enewspaper clips at IIT Delhi. 
figure 20.  eMagazine clips at IIT Delhi. 
(o) Institute eNewsletter:  The Central Library compiles  
and  publishes  the  bimonthly  institute  eNewsletter,  
named  ‘Between  the  Lines’ (Fig.  21)   which  cover  
a  large  number  of  institute  matters. 
figure 21.  Institute enewsletter hosted at internal website. 
(p)  Atmospherics: To  provide  best  reading  facilities  to  
the  users,  library  has  installed  RFID  facility  for  an  
easy lending of books. The users can self-check-out  
through kiosk or can self-check-in using book drop  
(Fig.  22)    box  on  24x7  basis  alongwith  the  reading  
facilities. Good furniture, lighting along with proper  
signage has been provided to increase readership in  
the  library  (Fig.  23). 
3.  ConCL uSIonS 
Libraries are going through a period of paradigm shift.  To save libraries from devaluation and for sustainability,  
162 
figure 22.  Self-check kiosk and book drop box. 
figure 23.  view of reading hall with printed journals display  
  area. 
marketing  of  library  resources,  services  and  products  is  the  only  solution.  Central  library  IIT  Delhi  is  offering  different products and services to its users and adopting  different marketing strategies to reach them. Librarians/ information  professionals  have  to  analyse  the  mission,  vision and objectives of the library and the institution for  effectively implementing the marketing strategies and also  need to fix/avoid bottlenecks and gaps. Commitment towards  careful planning and proper execution of marketing plan  will  certainly  make  library  reachable  to  more  users  and  would  further  strengthen  its  products  and  services. 
RefeRenCeS 
1. Madhusudhan, M. Marketing of library and information  
services and products in university libraries: A case  
study  of  Goa  University  library.   Lib.  Phil.  and  
Pract., 2008, Paper 175. http://digitalcommons.unl. 
edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1178&context=libp 
hilprac  (accessed  on  10  February  2016). 
2. Jotwani,  Daulat.  Marketing  of  electronic  resources  
at IIT Libraries. DESIDOC J. of Lib. & Inf. Tech., 
2014,  34(2),  162-69.  http://dx.doi.org/10.14429/ 
djlit.34.5517  (accessed  on  10  February  2016). 3. http://library.iitd.ac.in/  (accessed  on  18  February  
2016). 
4. http://www.inflibnet.ac.in/ess/ (accessed on 18 February  
2016). 
5. Hasan,  N.;  Khanchandani, Vanita;  Sharma,  Kumud;  
Sharma,  Saurabh;  Gupta,  Simran  &  Shukla,  Vinod.  
Digitization and access management: A case study of  
IIT Delhi. In  ETD 2015: Evolving Genre of Electronic  
Theses and Dissertations for Knowledge Discovery,  

========5========

KHANCHANDANI & HASAN: MARKETING OF LIBRARY RESOURCES, SERVICES AND PRODUCTS 
edited  by  Ramesh  Gaur,   et  al.   Paper  presented  at  18th International Symposium on Electronic Theses  and  Dissertations,  4-6  November  2015,  New  Delhi.  Excel  India,  New  Delhi,  2015.  pp.423-31. 
Contributors 
Ms vanita Khanchandani  is working as Assistant Librarian at  Central Library, IIT Delhi. Prior to joining IIT Delhi, she worked  as STA 'B' at Defence Institute of Psychological Research (DIPR),  DRDO,  Ministry  of  Defence,  Delhi.  She  has  qualified  UGC- JRF (LIS) examination. She holds Bachelor degree in Science  (Botany  Honours),  B.Ed.,  Bachelor  of  Library  &  Information  Science & Master of Library & Information Science and MPhil  degree. She is recipient of Gopala Krishan Award and Prof. S  Dasgupta Memorial Gold Medal for being topper in BLibSc and  MLISc,  respectively.  She  has  also  achieved  Six  Sigma  White  Belt Certificate from ABI, Ohio, USA. Her areas of interest are:  Marketing of LIS products and services, open access and e-learning. 
Dr nabi hasan is working as Deputy Librarian at IIT Delhi.  He  has  a  professional  experience  of  over  21  years  and  has  published  11  Books  and  110  papers.  He  did  his  Borlaug  Fellowship in ‘Electronic Library Resources Managemen’ from  Cornell  University,  New  York,  USA.  He  is  on  the  Editorial  Board of many journals of Library and Information Science and  has organised 36 national & international events, delivered 100  invited talks and has been associated with 9 projects. Currently,  he is Director, SLA-Asian Chapter (2016-17) and Member of  Online Content Advisory Council (2016) of SLA (USA); Joint  Secretary—Asian Library Association; Secretary—Delhi Library  Association;  and  Governing  Board  Member  of  IASLIC.  He  has  implemented  several  library-related  projects  on  Library  automation  systems,  institutional  repositories,  RFID,  ISO  certification, digitisation, etc., including those funded through  World  Bank. 
163 

========6========

