DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 36, No. 4, July 2016, pp. 235-239 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.36.4.9870 
 2016, DESIDOC 
Migration to Viable Platform for Effective Library Operations: Millennium  
Experiences of Two Academic Libraries in Nigeria 
Mercy Ariomerebi Iroaganachi*, Oluwole Durodolu** and Tosan J. Omatseye* 
Covenant University Ota,1023 Ota Ogun State, Nigeria  
**University of Lagos Akoka, Lagos Library, Nigeria 
E-mail: *mercy.iroaganachi@covenantuniversity.edu.ng  
ABSTRACT 
The study assessed migration of digital content and provision of viable platform for effective library operations;  the Millennium experiences of two academic libraries in Nigeria. This was with a view to providing valuable  information for stakeholders to guide them in software subscription and development. The descriptive survey, method  was adopted for the study. eighteen librarians/ 5 para-librarians from Covenant University and 20 Librarians/ 8  para-librarians from University of Lagos constitute the target population. The purposive sampling technique was  adopted. Instruments of data collection were interview, focus group discussion (FGD) and Questionnaire. The study  revealed that migration experience to Millenium software was not so smooth and easy. Respondents preferred  it however because it is web-based and has wide range of operations and upgrade options to suit any emerging  demand in the future etc. The challenges faced by the librarians include: Subscription to individual right to access  (pot) in Millenium, vendor/host controlled actual content with Millenium, absence of in-depth feasibility study and  testing the product before embarking on the migration exercise. The study recommended that subscription to any  software should not be based on individual pot or module as with Millenium software but be open and integrated  
among others.  
Keywords: Migration,  library  software,  library  operations,  technology  advancement,  academic  libraries,  
 Millennium 
1. INTROduCTION 
The  role  of  any  university  library  in  supporting  teaching,  learning,  research,  and  community  services  of  the parent body cannot be overemphasised. However, only  a  viable  library  with  a  robust  collection  can  enhance  academic  activities  of  an  institution.  Thus,  the  Library  is  the  heart  and  sustainer  of  all  academic  activities  in  the  University.  In  view  of  this,  libraries  must  meet  the  world  class  standard  in  physical  environment,  financial  and  material  resources,  availability  and  accessibility  of  quality  information  resources,  to  achieve  their  unique  purpose. 
The trend in library operations has tilted to provision  of  more  electronic  information  resources  therefore;  the  library of the 21st  century holds a combination of virtual  and  print  resources.  This  is  geared  toward  achieving  the  main  goal  of  the  library  which  is  to  give  users  access  to  more  and  improved  information  with  easier  and  speedy  approach  that  is  anchored  on  availability  of  effective  information  and  communication  technology  (ICT).  The  ICT  has  changed  the  work  of  libraries  and  information  centers  and  more  than  ever,  libraries  of  the  21st  century need this new technology. A greater number  of users, demand for more library materials, proliferation  of  published  materials,  novel  electronic  platforms  and  
Received 18 May 2016, online published  28 July 2016 
sources, the production of latest and low-priced computers  and the advent of a global information society constitute  various  reasons  for  the  increased  need  for  ICTs  in  libraries.  However,  libraries  in  the  developing  nations,  especially Nigeria have not made much improvement in  this regard. Therefore, library patrons, librarians, library  supporters  and  other  stakeholders  must  lend  a  hand  in  the  development  of  ICT-based  libraries  to  meet  up  the  new  demands  of  the  users. 
In  Library Automation,  the  software  to  be  adopted  is  the  most  important  decision  to  make  apart  from  the  hardware. It is tantamount to database management in every  sphere of information management. However, the challenge  in automation used to be, selecting the software first, and  then  the  selection  of  the  hardware  would  be  narrowed  to  the  computers  on  which  the  software  could  operate  but with the advent of library software in Nigeria which  dates back to the 1970s, came the challenge of acquiring  and maintaining software packages because of cost. Many  potential  users  view  these  systems  as  competitive,  and  find  themselves  in  a  dilemma  not  knowing  which  one  to  adopt.  Nevertheless,  a  commitment  to  any  software  system  that  is  comprehensive,  no  matter  how  tentative,  would  involve  efforts  in  choosing,  acquiring,  installing,  and  considerably  increased  effort  in  learning  how  to  

========1========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  4, JULy  2016 
employ it. Thus basically investigating the effectiveness  and  efficiency  of  a  software  requires  a  lot  of  work.  Also  considering  the  investment  required  for  creating  new  collections,  digitising  existing  ones  and  migrating  to  new  software,  can  be  a  herculean  task.  It  is  on  these  bases  that  this  study  on  is  to  be  carried  out. 
1.1  Library  Software  and Academic  Libraries  in  
Nigeria 
With  the  advent  of  library  software  in  Nigeria  which  dates  back  to  the  1970s,  came  the  challenge  of  acquiring and maintaining software packages because of  cost. Even with the variety of library software available  in  the  ICT  market,  which  came  either  as  integrated  or  modular  package,  Nigerian  libraries  did  not  adopt  any  until  1984  when  International  Institute  of  Tropical  Agriculture  (IITA),  Library  in  Ibadan  replaced  her  card  catalogue  with  a  fully  computerised  integrated  software  called,  Battelle  Automated  Search  Information  Systems  (BASIS).7 
Academic libraries in Nigeria were not in the scene  of library software usage until the National Universities  Commission  (NUC)  acquired  TINLIB  for  only  federal  University libraries and UNESCO introduced CDS/ISIS.  After  these  two,  different  software  came  into  market  and  Nigerian  universities  have  acquired  based  on  their  affordability and the result is different software in different  universities. This inconsistency and lack of uniformity in  the  use  of  library  software  is  one  major  problem  in  the  academic  environment  which  militates  against  effective  resource sharing and cooperation.5 Some library software  packages available in the Nigerian academic environment  are:  MASTERLIB,  TINLIB,  ALICE,  GLAS,  X-LIB,  CDS/ISIS,  LIBERTy3,  MILLENIUM,  ALEZANDRA,  KARLMARK,  KOHA,  SLAM,  and  VTLS  to  mention  a  few. 
1.2  Preparing  for  Migration  Exercise 
A  successful  migration  certainly  would  begin  with  a feasibility study to consider all factors associated with  the  project,  and  ascertain  if  the  investment  of  time  and  other  resources  will  yield  the  desired  result.  When  a  library  is  considering  the  launch  of  a  new  product  or  new  operation,  the  feasibility  study  is  a  reasonable  tool  to  utilize  before  any  resource  is  committed  to  the  new  project. One of the most important aspects of such study  therefore,  is  to  ensure  that  the  total  resources  needed  for  completion  is  considered.  Often,  this  will  include  addressing  components  such  as  hardware,  software  and  structure.6 
Also for any transformation to occur in any library,  the  existing  information  system  must  be  restructured.  According to Nguyen4  a library functioning manually and  planning to computerise its operation, would require the  development  of  a  new  information  system  that  must  be  born  out  of  a  systems’  analysis.  System  analysis  is  the  process of investigating a system, identifying problems,  
236 
and  using  the  information  to  propose  improvements  to  the  system.  System  design  is  the  process  of  planning  a  new approach to system or one to replace or complement  an existing system. This stage is very important for any  establishment  desirous  of  transitioning  from  a  window  application  to  a  web  application.  Roxanne8   opined  that  implementing  a  new  system  is  an  important  decision  that  takes  a  lot  of  energy  and  requires  you  to  do  a  lot  of  testing.  
2.  OBjECTIVES 
The  specific  objectives  of  this  study  includes: •	 Ascertain  the  migration  experiences  of  the  
librarians 
•	 Determining  the  current  pace  of  work  with  the  
deployment  both  software 
•	 Ascertaining  the  challenges  faced  with  the  use  of  
any  of  both  software 
•	 Ascertaining  the  possible  solutions  to  these  
challenges 
3. RESEARCh  METhOd 
The  survey,  method  was  adopted  for  this  study;  the  reason  is  that  it  is  a  study  of  two  social  units,  University  of  Lagos  Library,  Akoka,  Lagos  Nigeria  and  Covenant  University  Ota,  Ogun  State  Nigeria.  The  academic  librarians  and  para-librarians  who  use  the  software  for  their  daily  routine  in  both  libraries  form  the  population  of  the  study.  Eighteen  librarians/5  para- librarians from Covenant University and 20 Librarians/8  Para-librarians  from  University  of  Lagos  constitute  the  target  population.  The  variant  in  study  populations  is  dependent on the size and staffing of both libraries. The  purposive  sampling  technique  was  adopted. 
Instrument  of  data  collection  are  interview,  Focus  Group Discussion (FGD) and questionnaire with structured  and  open-ended  questions.  The  questionnaire  questions  included  the  likert  scale  type  and  some  closed-ended  questions which was personally administered and retrieved  over  a  period  of  two  weeks;  the  descriptive  statistical  method of analysis was used for the study. The descriptive  statistical tools used were mean, standard deviation and  simple  percentage.  
Issues  of  versatility  and  idealness  of  the  software  were  derived  from  evaluation  of  open  source  software  checklist  by  Goh, et  al.2,3 
4. FINdINGS 
Table 1 revealed that majority of respondents with a  mean of 3.2 at a variance of 0.2 in Covenant University  found the training materials and encounter for Millenium  during migration, easy to understand and work with. This  was  not  quite  same  for  respondents  in  the  University  of  Lagos  library  rather  the  experience  of  majority  with  a  mean  of  3.3  at  a  variance  of  0.3  was  that  the  time  allotted  for  training  was  too  short  coupled  with  the  

========2========

IROAGANACHI, DURODOLU & OMATSEyE: MIGRATION AND PROVISION OF VIABLE PLATFORM FOR EFFECTIVE LIBRARy  OPERATIONS 
Table 1.  Migration experience for the librarians 
S. No.    Statements  
1. 
It was an easy transition exercise that lasted for a very short period of time. 
2. 3. 4. 
There is nothing different from the previous software. 
Work is faster with Millenium than my library’s previous software. 
      Covenant  university Mean Sd Ranking 
2.5 -1.5 4 
    university  of  Lagos Mean Sd Ranking 
2.2 -2.3 6 
5. 6. 
The time allotted for training in preparation for the migration was too short. The training materials for Millenium were easy to understand and practice. Conversion from the previous format to MARC format was a challenge. Necessity is laid on every cataloguer to do a more perfect entry because it is  
in the global domain. 
fact  that  materials  were  not  that  easy  to  understand.  In  essence,  the  job  was  being  done  under  some  form  of  compulsion and struggle not because it was enjoyable this  was  clearly  evident  in  the  FGD  where  the  respondents  claimed  that  the  situation  was  the  reason  they  had  to  understudy Covenant University’s operations on Millenium.  Thus,  respondents  in  Covenant  University  seemed  to  be  more  comfortable  using  Millennium.  Librarians  in  University  of  Lagos  library  said  it  was  not  easy  using  the software. Roxanne8 confirmed this when she affirmed  that  Millennium  was  not  open  and  flexible  enough  thus  her  library’s  migration  to  Sierra.  
Both  universities  acknowledged  that  the  transition  exercise  took  more  time  than  they  envisaged.  When  asked  during  the  interview,  they  affirmed  that  their  anticipation  was  for  it  to  last  for  three  or  four  days.  However,  it  was  more  problematic  for  University  of  Lagos librarians to have their records converted to MARC  format  as  claimed  in  the  FGD.  According  to  them,  the  library  was  still  faced  with  the  challenge  of  having  all  its  bibliographic  record  converted  to  MARC  format,  meaning  that,  they  were  still  in  process  of  migration  while  Covenant  University  had  long  stabilised  from  the  migration  shock  as  it  was  discovered  from  the  focus  group  discussion  that  Covenant  University  library  staff  had  a  more  ICT  favourable  environment  including  all  other  necessary  facilities  than  those  of  University  of  Lagos. Since both groups’ of librarians had their trainings  for  same  period  of  time  (one  week)  and  after  one  year  University  of  lagos  is  not  yet  operating  fully  on  the  
1.4 3.1 2.3 3.2 2.1 3.0 
-5.7 -0.1 -2 0.2 2.7 -0.4 
7 2 5 1 6 3 
1.9 2.6 3.1 2.4 3.2 3.3 
-3.2 -1.3 -0.1 -1.7 0.1 0.3 
7 4 3 5 2 1 
software  such  that  they  had  to  visit Covenant  University to  understudy  the  system..  
Table 2 revealed that 13 (65 %) of Covenant University respondents  rated  pace  of  work  on  Millenniun  as  good  while 2 (10 %) rated it as excellent and 5 (25 %) rated it  as  fair.  16  (80  %)  rated  pace  of  work  on ALICE  as  fair  and 4 (20 %) rated it as good while majority 21 (81 %)  of University of Lagos respondents rated Glass as good  while 19 (73 %) rated Millenniun fair , 7 (27 %) rated it  as good and 5 (19 %) rated GLASS as fair. The indication  is  that  respondents  from  the  University  of  Lagos  were  more  comfortable  with  their  previous  software  (Glass)  than  Milennium,  while  those  from  Covenant  University were  more  comfortable  with  Milllennium.  
Table 3 above revealed that majority of the respondents  from the two universities identified cost of the software  and  subscription  to  individual  right  to  access  (pot)  in  Millenium which basically limits the number of staff who  can  have  access  to  any  of  the  modules  and  work  at  the  same time, thereby limiting the volume of work per time  as the most serious challenges. Also, frequent loss of data  because of irregular backup activities with ALICE/GLASS  software ranked next in order of seriousness, followed by  the backup system that makes it impossible for subscribers  to  have  total  control  and  be  able  to  verify  the  actual  content  of  their  database  per  time  with  millennium.  In  addition, (80 %) of the respondents admitted to the fact  that  there  was  not  in-depth  feasibility  study  and  testing  the  product  before  embarking  on  the  migration  exercise  thus  forming  part  of  the  challenges.  
Table 2. Pace of work of the previous software in library and Millennium 
Work effectiveness                 Covenant  university 
          ALICE     Millennium 
Frequency % Frequency Excellent 2 
Good 4 20 13 Fair 16 80 5 
Poor - - - 
Very poor - - - 
Total 20 100 20 
% 10 65 25 - - 100 
                   university of Lagos 
            GLASS       Millennium Frequency % Frequency 
% 
5 21 - - 26 
19 81 - - 100 
7 19 - - 26 
27 73 - - 100 
237 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  4, JULy  2016 
Table 3. Challenges faced by librarians with the use of any of both software  
Statements/challenges 
Virus attack on ALICE/GLASS software keeps the databases under perpetual threat  
of loss of bibliographic record. 
SA 22 (48 %) 
A 14 (30.4 %) 
Sd 4 (9 %) 
d 6 (13 %) 
u - 
There is frequent loss of data because of absence of automatic backup with ALICE/ 
GLASS software 
24 (52 %) 
17 (37 %) 
3 (7 %) 
2 (4.3 %) 
- 
Restricted authorisation for different operations slow down the pace at which some  
basic changes are made with Millenium. 
15 (32.6 %) 
19 (41.3 %) 
5 (10.9 %) 7 (15.2 %) 
- 
The subscription to individual pot in Millenium limits access to the different modules 
 of the software.   
26 (57 %) 
17 (37 %) 
- 
3 (7 %) 
- 
The subscription to individual pot in Millenium limits the number of staff who  
can work at a time, thereby limiting the volume of work per time.   
31 (67.3 %) 
13 (28.2 %) 
- 
2 (4.3 %) 
- 
The backup system makes it impossible for subscribers to verify the actual content of  21 (47 %) 
their database per time. 
Millenium is more expensive to subscribe to and maintain. 
17 (37 %) 
3 (7 %) 
5 (10.9 %) 
- 
31 (67.3 %) 
There was not in-depth feasibility study and testing the product before embarking on  27 (56.6 %) 
the migration exercise.   
15 (32.6 %) 11 (24 %) 
- 2 (4 %) 
- 6 (13 %) 
- - 
Table 4. Strategies for proffering solutions to the challenges experienced by the librarians  
Solutions to challenges 
SA 
All library management system software should be well protected from perpetual threat of loss  27 (59 %) 
of bibliographic record 
A Sd 19 (41 %) - 
d - 
u - 
All software should of a necessity have automatic backup to prevent frequent loss of data 
Authentication should be discretional and role-based access controlled. 
Subscription to any software should not be based on individual pot in Millenium  
All library software should be easy to navigate and utilize. 
Exclusive control over database concerning daily routines and reports should reside with the  
subscribing Library. 
All library software should be affordable to subscribe to and maintain. 
30 (65 %) 22 (48 %) 34 (73 %) 37 (80 %) 25 (54 %) 
16 (35 %) - 19 (41 %) - 12 (26 %) - 9 (19 %) - 17 (37 %) - 
- - - - - 
- 5 (10.8 %) - - 4 (9 %) 
- 
- 
There should be extensive feasibility study and testing the product before embarking on any   
migration exercise.  
Virus  attack  on  ALICE/GLASS  software  keep  the  databases under perpetual threat of loses of bibliographic  record.  These  indicate  that  respondents  are  very  much  concerned with access to the various module of operation,  thus  free  access  to  same  is  required  to  allow  as  many  staff  as  would  need  to  carry  out  any  assignment  do  so.  Respondents  from  the  two  universities  expressed  their  opinions  in  the  FGD  that  if  a  thousand  patrons  can  access  the  catalogue  interface  at  same  time,  all  other  modules  should  be  accessed  by  those  inputting  data  without  limitations  as  it  is  with  their  previous  software.  According  to  them,  input  determines  output.  Table  4  reveales  that  there  is  need  for  solutions  to  varied  challenges  encountered  with  the  employment  of  the software. Apart from authentication and subscriber’s  control  issues,  all  respondents  agreed  that  all  library  management  system  software  should  be  well  protected  from  perpetual  threat  of  loss  of  bibliographic  record.  Also,  that  all  software  should  have  automatic  backup  to  prevent  frequent  loss  of  data,  subscription  to  be  free  access  to  all  modules  for  as  many  people  as  possible  per  time  and  library  software  should  be  affordable  to  subscribe  to,  maintain  and  easy  to  navigate  and  utilise.  
238 
38 (83 %) 37 (80 %) 
8 (17 %) 9 (19 %) 
Lastly,  the  respondents  agreed  that  there  should  be  extensive feasibility study and testing the product before  embarking  on  any  migration  exercise.  
5. CONCLuSIONS ANd  RECOMMENdATIONS 
It can be concluded from the findings of the study of  the two academic libraries that their migration experiences  to  Millenium  software  was  not  so  smooth  and  easy.  Also,  Millenium  is  an  ideal  library  software  because  of  its wide range of operations and upgrade options to suit  any emerging demand in the future, its protection against  Virus  attacks,  degree  of  compliance  with  Library  2.0  and web presence. ALICE/GLAS were easier to employ,  considering  the  pace  of  work  effectiveness  (speed).  
The  study  recommends  that  subscription  to  any  software should not be based on individual right to access  (pot).  Authentication  for  different  operations  should  be  discretional  and  role-based  access  control  as  supported  by  Danah  &  Ellison,1   while  libraries  should  be  given  the  privilege  of  having  the  actual  record  their  holdings  especially  for  accreditation  purposes.  Backup  should  be  automatic.  Also,  all  software  should  be  well  protected  from  virus  attacks  thereby  eliminating  the  nightmare.  

========4========

IROAGANACHI, DURODOLU & OMATSEyE: MIGRATION AND PROVISION OF VIABLE PLATFORM FOR EFFECTIVE LIBRARy  OPERATIONS 
More so, there should be extensive feasibility study and  testing  the  product  before  embarking  on  any  migration  exercise this is highly necessary for libraries all over the  world. Finally, libraries worldwide and Nigeria especially  should subscribe only to web-based software as it is the  zeitgeist  of  the  time  so  as  to  maximize  access  to  their  resources.  Finally,  Government  and  stakeholders  should  provide the enabling environment for all academic libraries  to  implement  a  sustainable  migration.  
REFERENCES 
1.  Danah  M.B.  &  Ellison  N.B.  Social  network  sites:  
Definition, history, and scholarship. J. of Computer- 
Med.  Comm.,   2007  13(1),  210-30. 
2.  Goh, D.H.; Chua, A.; Khoo, D.; Khoo E.; Mak, B.,  
&  Ng  M.W. A  checklist  for  evaluating  open  source  
digital library software. Online Inf. Rev.,  2006, 30(4),  
360–79. 
3.    Goh,  D.;  Luyt,  B.;  Chua,  A.;  See-yong,  y.;  Kia- 
Ngoh,  P.,  &  How-yeu,  N.  Evaluating  open  source  
portals. J. of Lib. and Inf. Sci . http://lis.sagepub.com/ 
content/40/2/81  (accessed  on12  November  2015). 4. 	 	 Nguyễn, 	 K.Đ. 	 System 	 analysis 	 and 	 design 	 complete 	 
8.  Roxanne  M.  Innovative  case  study  migrating  from  
Millennium  to  Sierra  at  The  Australian  National  
University Library. 2015, https://www.iii.com/sites/ 
default/files/CaseStudy-ANU-0814_0.pdf  (accessed  
on  19  November  2015). 
9.  Sabitri,  D.S.  Library  automation  software  packages  
used in academic libraries of Nepal: A comparative  
study. A dissertation submitted in partial fulfillment for  
associateship in information science (2005-07) to National  
Institute of Sience Communication and Information  
Resources, CSIR14, Satsang Vihar marg, New Delhi- 
110067, 2007, http://eprints.rclis.org/22581/1/Sabitri  
%20final %20thesis.pdf (accessed on 22 August 2015). 
Contributors 
Ms Mercy Ariomerebi Iroaganachi is Readers’ Services Librarian,  Covenant University Library (Center for Learning Resources).  She holds BA (Hons) in Communication and Language Arts and  Masters Degree in Library and Information Science (MLIS) from  the University of Ibadan respectively. She is a Principal Librarian  in  Covenant  University  Ota,  Ogun  State  Nigeria,  a  Certified  Librarian of Nigeria (CLN) by the Librarian Registration Council  of Nigeria (LRCN) and a Member Nigerian Library Association.  
http://nguyenkimduc.files.wordpress.com/2009/10/ 
system-analysis-and-design_giao-trinh.pdf. 5.  Obajemu,  A.S.;  Osagie  J.H.;  Akinade  H.  &  Ekere  
F.  Library  software  products  in  Nigeria:  A  survey  
of  uses  and  assessment.   Academic  Journals ,  2013,  
5(5),  113-125.  http://www.academicjournals.org/ 
article/article1379697220_Obajemu  %20et  %20al. 
pdf  (accessed  on  2  December  2015). 
6.  OECD. Assessment of higher education learning outcomes.  
AHELO feasibility study report on data analysis and  
national experiences. 2013, 2. http://www.oecd.org/ 
education/skills-beyond-school/AHELOFSReportVolume2. 
pdf  (accessed  on12  November  2015). 
7.  Oyiloye,  A.M.  Software  packages  for  libraries  in  
Nigeria, edited by E. Madu. Technology for information  
management  and  service:  Modern  libraries  and  
information  centers  in  developing  countries.  Evi- 
Colman  Ibadan,  2004,  pp.  40-51. 
introductory tutorial for software Engineering, 2011,  
Mr Oluwole durodolu is a Systems Librarian at University of  
Lagos Akoka, Lagos Library. He holds BA (Hons.) in Philosophy  and Masters Degree in Library and Information Science (MLIS)  from  the  University  of  Ibadan  respectively.  He  is  a  Certified  Librarian of Nigeria (CLN) by the Librarian Registration Council  of Nigeria (LRCN) and a Member Nigerian Library Association.  
Ms  Tosan  j.  Omatseye  is  a  Library  Officer  in  Covenant  University  Library  (Center  for  Learning  Resources).  She  holds a Bachelors Degree in Library and Information Science  (BLIS)  from  Tai-Solarin  University  of  Education  Ijebu-Ode,  Ogun  state,  Nigeria.  
239 

========5========

