DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 36, No. 3, May 2016, pp. 126-130  DOI: 10.14429/djlit.36.3.9888 
 2016, DESIDOC 
Everything is Marketing: An Analysis of Functional Relationships  
of Marketing and Libraries  
Dinesh K. Gupta 
Vardhman Mahaveer Open University, Kota-324 021 
E-mail: dineshkumargupta@vmou.ac.in  
AbstRAct 
The scope of marketing in libraries is unlimited but has not been fully explored. To understand it more precisely,  the scope of marketing by way of its function needs to be understood. The functions of marketing include: Buying,  selling, transporting, storing, standardisation and grading, fnancing, risk taking and market information functions.   A relationship between marketing functions and library operations has been established. It is found that the scope  of marketing is greater than envisaged in professional literature and most of the library functions can be covered  in marketing gamut. Looking at library functions from marketing angle offers greater scope of library marketing 
Keywords: Marketing, marketing functions, library operations 
1.  IntRoductIon 
While looking back, one sees that formal connotation  of libraries and marketing started after Kotler propagated  the  idea  of  not-for-profit  marketing1.  But  in  recent  literature,  scope  of  marketing  is  much  widened  and  characterised  as:  ‘Marketing  is  marketing-everywhere2,  which  suggests  strongly  that  marketing  is  universal  in  nature; ‘Marketing is marketing-may be!3, irrespective of  the product or market place; ‘Marketing is everything4-5’ indicates  marketing  is  not  a  function  it  is  a  way  of  doing  business.  These  approaches  to  marketing  signify  that  marketing  is  essential  not  only  for  manufacturing  units  but  also  service  sector  to  the  extent  that  equally  applicable  to  the  social  enterprises  and  governmental  agencies.  Such  marketing  approaches  also  indicate  about  the  changing  role  of  marketing  from  a  limited  view  to  a  broader  view  and  to  the  extent  everything  is  marketing. The marketing functions which are universally  accepted  include:  Buying,  selling,  transporting,  storing,  standardisation  and  grading,  financing,  risk  taking  and  market  information. While  relating  these  functions  with  the functions of libraries, one can easily understand that  libraries perform all such functions which are performed  in  marketing  in  other  organisations.  
Marketing,  in  case  of  libraries,  is  necessary  for  many  reasons  and  some  could  be  to:  Offer  benefits  to  users  want,  reduce  barriers  to  use  and  access,  persuade  and  inform  the  users  about  the  services  library  offer,  and  carefully  plan  to  satisfy  users  need  exceedingly.  It  is  rightly  pointed  out  that  ‘Marketing  is  so  basic  that  it  cannot  be  considered  a  separate  function  within  the  library.  Marketing  is  a  central  dimension  of  the  entire  
Received 11 February 2016, online published 26 April 2016 
library.  It  is  the  entirety  of  the  library's  operations  and  services  seen  from  a  point  of  view  of  its  final  result,  that  is,  from  the  customer's  point  of  view6 
2. AgREEMEnt And dIsAgREEMEnts  on  
MARKEtIng 
Marketing  has  developed  and  changed  over  the  years. It must have been observed by students of library  science  while  studying  at  library  school  that  the  term  ‘marketing’  before  30  years  from  now  was  not  quite  prevalent;  the  professors  were  emphasising  more  on  technical  works  and  service  part  of  the  librarianship.  It  took  some  time  to  understand  the  value  of  ‘profession’  and being working in open and distance learning system  my motivation was that: libraries are an important force  that underpins lifelong learning, has tremendous scope to  social cohesion, and is a catalyst for providing knowledge  and information to all communities. But, such value has  still  not  been  established  in  the  society.  The  role  and  value  of  both  libraries  and  distance  education  needs  to  clearly be spelt out and understood in the communities,  fund  providers,  stakeholders,  and  top  management.  
To  begin  with,  in  a  national  level  conference  of  academic librarians, I made a presentation on ‘Mobilising  Resources  for  Academic  Libraries’,  in  1996  wherein  marketing  of  library  services  was  an  important  issue.  During  the  discussion  there  were  clear  division  on  the  floor, some supported the idea of marketing for libraries  whereas  others  opposed  it.  Even,  those  who  supported  had  different  opinion  about  its  concept  and  application.  Those who supported were also worried of the economic  scenario changing in the country because of liberalisation  

========1========

GUPTA: EVERYTHING IS MARKETING: AN ANALYSIS OF FUNCTIONAL RELATIONSHIPS 
of  the  economic  policies  of  the  country  just  started  in  1991  aiming  at  improving  efficiency,  productivity,  and  competitiveness,  so  that  the  economy  might  attain  its  full  growth  and  integrate  with  the  world  economy.  The  people were worried about its outcome and in the initial  process  results  started  coming  gloomy.  But,  they  were  hoping  brighter  scope  through  marketing.  Many  diverse  opinion  existed  in  regard  marketing.  Some  equated  marketing with the promotion whereas others considered  marketing as wider concept; some supported pricing tag  for information services; some of them were not sure of  the  what  to  include  in  marketing  and  what  not  and  so  on. Those who opposed levied many charges as: it would  be  an  additional  responsibility  for  librarians  who  were  already over burdened; requiring additional finances while  library budgets were being curtailed; libraries need not to  market  themselves  because  of  its  business  connotations  and which was against of free philosophy of librarianship.  Library  professionals  hesitated  to  compare  themselves  to  the  corporate  world  and  disliked  the  idea  of  ‘selling  and buying’ which was the central focus of the exchange  process  in  marketing  context.  They  believed  marketing  unwarranted for libraries which were in service without  much  concern  of  money  or  profit  or  even  use.  
3. scopE   o F   M ARKEtIng  
Diverse opinion further enhanced the general interest  in marketing; within a couple of years we could understand  that  marketing  is  ingredient  to  libraries  and  that  led  to  bring another paper ‘Marketing in libraries and information  context:  Myths  and  realities7,  in  1998.  Further,  the  paper  ‘Broadening  the  concept  of  LIS  marketing8’  in  2006  covered  many  aspects  which  delimit  the  scope  of  marketing  in  library  and  information  services.  
We believe or not, marketing concept has its existence  in  libraries  since  the  day  our  ancestors  started  thinking  and offering a little services in facilitating use of libraries  keeping  in  mind  the  convenience  of  users,  beginning  with  choosing  central  location  of  library  in  the  town/ parental body, extended opening hours of use, user-library  relations,  mobile  library  services,  and  so  on.  On  daily  basis  lot  of  marketing  daily  is  done  daily  in  routine  works    
of  unawareness  or  negligence  of  marketing  even  if  it -some  positive  and/or  some  negative  on  account  is  existed.  Over  the  years,  we  could  understand  that  marketing  of  library  services  is  not  by  accident  but  by  instinct, i.e., by virtue of being libraries and information  centre managers, they have for centuries exhibited their  sensitivity, responsiveness, flexibility and freedom to the  users  in  the  varied  activities  of  librarianship.  Thereby  marketing  becomes  a  natural  tendency  which  has  been  performed by the library and information professionals in  some way or the other without recognising its existence  or  without  any  logical  beginning  or  even  when  formal  training  in  marketing  did  not  existed.  
A cluster of marketing and related subjects covered in  the bibliographical literature clearly indicates the growing  
and  diverse  range  of  marketing  activities  in  libraries9.  To understand more precisely, other reviews10-13. describe  the  areas  covered  in  library  and  information  marketing  in  different  times  which  indicate  the  changing  nature,  terminologies,  scope  and  of  marketing  over  a  period  of  time.  It’s  necessary  to  understand  the  functions  of  marketing  and  relate  them  with  the  library  operations  and activities to bring qualitative change in the services  offered  by  the  library  and  information  centres.  
4.  FunctIons  oF   M ARKEtIng 
No  doubt  marketing  to  libraries  is  important  and  LIS  marketing  has  become  an  area  of  education  and  research in the present day time. But, the understanding  of functions of marketing in relation with the functions of  librarianship may lead to better understanding to library  marketing and once such understanding is developed one  can  play  more  vital  marketing  role  in  his/her  library.  The  functions  of  marketing  include  buying,  selling,  transporting, storing, standardisation and grading, financing,  risk taking and market information. These functions are  demonstrated  in  Fig.  1. 
The  analysis  of  library’s  function  in  relation  with  the  functions  of  marketing  will  enhance  understanding  about  marketing.  
Figure 1. Functions of marketing. 
4.1 buying 
When  marketing  is  considered  exchange  process,  it  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  the  resources  purchased/  acquired  are  made  available  in  sufficient  in  quantity  to  meet  user  demands  as  according  to  Baker14.  Libraries  trying to utilise their finance to acquire optimum, however  no  library  can  acquire  everything  that  is  published.  So,  vital  decisions  are  made  in  selection  and  building  of  library  collection.  Thus,  buying  is  the  most  important  function of libraries. To be successful in their operations  librarians  must  well  understand  the  need  of  the  user/ user market and their use behaviour, also anticipate their  needs,  are  needless  to  mention  the  primary  function  of  marketing in any library. Many times libraries come into  
127 

========2========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  3,  MAY  2016 
Explanation 
Acquiring goods/products/ raw material to meet customer demand Offering goods/product to match customer demands 
Movement of goods from seller to buyer Holding goods until customer need 
Library function Acquisition 
Dissemination/ Circulation Access 
Preservation and Conservation  Organising 
Marketing function  Buying 
Selling  
Transporting 
Storing 
Standardisation and grading Financing 
Risk taking 
Sorting product according to size, quality, weight, etc. 
Arrangement of fnances and credit for conduct of various marketing activities Financing Dealing with uncertainty  of consumer purchases and market   
Market information function 
Gathering, organising and analysing consumer, market data and information  
agreement with other libraries or publishers or participate  in  network/consortia  to  acquire  resources  as  and  when  required  by  users.  
4.2   s elling 
It  is  a  common  perception  that  the  library  is  one  which  is  more  concerned  with  preservation  rather  than  use.  But  the  success  of  the  library  depends  on  use.  Circulation,  reference  service,  services  like  selective  information  services,  document  delivery  services  and  similar  services  exist  to  enhance  use.  These  are  some  of  the  selling  efforts  on  the  part  of  the  library  to  meet  out  information  needs  of  the  users.  The  need  to  offer  customised  information  products,  timely  in  the  most  convenient  way  is  ever  emphasised.  To  reach  out  to  users, libraries employ various strategies directed towards  their  advertising,  promotion,  and  efforts  in  an  attempt  to  match  the  offers  from  the  library  and  the  need  of  users.  There  exist  wikis,  blogs,  discussion  list,  RSS  Feeds,  to  market  through  technology  support  services  to  the  larger  community  are  big  marketing  tools  of  modern  times.  Through  various  campaigns,  advocacy  and  lobbying  librarians  attract  the  attention  of  the  fund  providers, advocators, policy planners, political leaders,  government and general public. These efforts very much  help  not  only  to  attract  resources  but  also  establish  a  good  reputation  of  the  profession  and  professionals.  
4.3 transportation  and storage 
Transportation and storage are the two other important  marketing functions. Libraries are commonly considered  as a place for archiving of records to transfer knowledge  and experiences of one generation to another generation.  Now  libraries  are  not  only  preserving  print  documents  but  efforts  are  made  to  digitise  old  and  new  materials  based  on  the  assumption  that  future  generations  will  make use of those resources whenever they are in need.  Digitisation  efforts  offer  longer  life  to  the  information  and  wider  access  opportunities  to  the  user  community  through  the  participation  in  consortia,  network,  and  other  such  arrangements  opens  up  doors  for  across  the  place  marketing.  Mobile  libraries  and  branch  libraries  are  some  examples  of  existence  of  distribution  work  in  libraries. Electronic delivery of documents and information  offers  enormous  potential  for  improved  distribution.  
128 
Risk taking (to meet future  demands) 
Statistics  
Technology  has  changed  the  very  concept  of  library;  there  are  numerous  interpretations  to  libraries:  library  without  walls,  automated  library,  electronic  library,  digital library, virtual library, hybrid library and so forth.  All  such  concepts  have  come  with  the  emergence  and  applicability  of  technology  in  libraries.  With  the  vast  experience  of  technology  use  in  library,  it’s  clear  that  technologies  come  and  go;  its  full  potentials  must  be  explored  through  marketing  because  marketing  follows  technology  and  in  absence  of  effective  marketing  it’s  sure  that  technology  will  fail.  
4.4 standardisation  and organising 
Standardisation,  performance  measurement  and  evaluation,  are  important  in  marketing  as  these  help  librarians to perform their functions in an improved ways.  Benchmarking  helps  to  achieve  operational  excellence  resulting into more user oriented services and branding of  products and services. The efforts leading organising of  resources/information may be covered in operations such  as classification, cataloguing, abstracting, indexing, record  management, preparing bibliographies and bibliographical  databases  for  information  retrieval.  Such  organisational  efforts have been based on the assumption of permanent  or  relatively  permanent  relationships  among  the  several  branches  of  knowledge  to  facilitate  availability  of  the  desired  material  on  a  particular  branch  of  knowledge  at  one  place  for  the  convenience  of  users.  
4.5  Risk taking 
Risk  taking  is  imminent  to  serve  users  better:  As  managing libraries are managing businesses, then there are  considerable risks involved in managing them efficiently.  ‘The  library  is  a  growing  organism’  demands  many  thoughtful  planning  on  future  requirements.  Even  every  new initiative is a risky proposition. One must be ready  to  take  risks  if  the  new  initiatives  are  to  make  things  better  for  the  users.  
4.6  Financing 
Financing is important for all organisational activities.  It  is  needed  for  staff  to  be  employed,  technology  to  be  applied, buildings to be erected, equipment to be bought,  and  services  to  be  provided.  If  an  organisation  cannot  acquire  adequate  finance,  or  does  not  use  its  finance  

========3========

GUPTA: EVERYTHING IS MARKETING: AN ANALYSIS OF FUNCTIONAL RELATIONSHIPS 
effectively and efficiently, it will fail to meet its objectives.  Finances, which were formerly taken for granted for all  kind  of  libraries,  are  now  questioned.  Traditionally  the  main  responsibility  of  financing  libraries  was  placed  with  the  central,  state,  or  local  government  (in  case  of  academic  and  public  libraries)  and  parent  organisations  (in case of institutional libraries). Increasing importance  of self funding/self-management requires the role of the  government only to allocate budgets and subsequent audit  to ensure that public money has been spent properly. The  process  of  financial  analysis,  planning,  and  control  is  important for acquisition and effective use of information  resources and services, meet the manpower requirement,  technology  acquired,  and  above  all  to  be  remain  in  the  business of information acquisition and use. If a library  cannot  acquire  adequate  finance,  or  does  not  use  its  finance  effectively  and  efficiently,  it  will  fail  to  meet  its  objective.  
4.7  Market study 
Library conducts research in the form of user studies.  But, traditionally extensive surveys reveal nothing about  the individual user’s need or service that may be offered.  Most  of  the  time  individual  user  remains  invisible  in  such studies. Even after such efforts, many of the books  in  the  libraries  are  never  used  or  their  use  is  very  low.  In  spite  of  such  efforts  many  a  time  responsibility  of  no-use or lower use is put on the users rather improving  acquisition  process  or  employing  personal  efforts.  This  non-use or under-utilisation has emerged as a consequence  of  poor  marketing  approach  and  lack  of  know-how  in  the  library.  It  is  essentially  about  market  research.  
5.  REcEnt  FunctIons  oF   M ARKEtIng And  
LIbRARIEs 
Traditionally, libraries are concerned with four basic  functions,  namely,  acquisition,  organisation,  retrieval,  and  dissemination.  But,  the  flow  of  information  has  become  faster  than  ever  and  transferring  and  access  to  the  information  has  become  much  easier.  It  adds  two  more  important  functions  to  marketing  and  libraries  as  well,  namely,  sharing  of  information  and  publishing  of  information.  
Commercial  organisations,  generally,  oppose  for  sharing  their  marketing  knowledge  because  they  don’t  want to share the stories of their success. But, in modern  business, getting information about competitors has become  easier and information can be found from various ways,  may be from reports and publications, employees or even  from the customers. Customers interact more frequently  and freely these days and they express opinions over the  happiness  and  unhappiness  of  the  products  they  have  experienced.  They  can  influence  the  buying  decisions  taken  by  the  newer  customers,  as  newer  technologies  support  such  propositions.  
But,  libraries  are  open  organisations  and  may  be  willing  to  share  what  and  how  they  do  to  meet  out  the  
needs  of  the  information  users.  There  are  numerous  examples  of  Web  2.0  and  social  networking  sites  to  reach  to  the  users  and  engage  the  users  in  the  service  delivery  process  by  way  of  sharing  and  participating  in  such  activities.  If  good  information  is  shared  there  are  pretty good chances of linking library’s posts and website  by  others.  It  is  attracting  to  see  that  public  libraries  of  National  Library  Singapore  take  four  ways  to  interact  with  the  users,  namely  just  ask,  just  browse,  just  check  and just share. The library offers opportunities to its users  to  share  their  information  about  by  way  of  uploading  photos,  stories,  etc.  In  this  way  users  are  involved  in  library  activities  by  sharing  opportunities.  
Like  sharing,  publishing  has  become  necessary  for  the  library  professionals.  They  are  now  creator  of  website and are responsible for designing and publishing  on  websites.  In  order  to  be  successful  in  marketing  and  libraries,  both  marketers  and  librarians  must  think  more  like  publishers  than  like  traditional  marketers  or  librarians.  Because  one  of  the  core  elements  of  modern  marketing strategy is creation of content which they must  constantly be creating much like a publisher. Therefore,  it  makes  complete  sense  that  marketers  and  librarians  could  learn  a  lot  from  understanding  how  a  publisher  thinks.  In  its  2015  Open  Programme,  IFLA's  Section  on  Acquisitions  and  Collection  Development  Section  explored the topic of "Libraries as Publishers". Whether  through supporting author research and content creation,  publishing both printed and online content, disseminating  and curating publications, or promoting best practices by  educating  content  creators  about  both  Open Access  and  copyright,  libraries  have  become  increasingly  involved  in  the  publishing  process. 
6. concLusIons  
There  has  always  been  a  debate  as  to  whether  concepts derived from the business world can readily be  transferred to public service institutions like universities,  hospital,  and  libraries.  It  is  a  common  argument  that  libraries  and  such  institutions  are  funded  differently,  have  different  objectives  and  face  a  different  external  environment,  however,  such  impression  is  not  based  on  sound principles. Look at Ranganathan’s philosophy, one  can  see  that  he  matched  the  function  of  a  library  with  that of a store, used shop analogy for libraries, referred  work  of  librarians  as  that  of  canvassing  agent,  users  as  customers,  and  above  all  librarianship  as  salesmanship.  Ranganathan  advocated  for  such  business  connotations  favourably even when the marketing was not transplanted  to  not-profit-organisations.  Even,  functional  analysis  of  marketing and libraries proves that marketing is integrated  in libraries. When one dwells deep into such relationship,  he/she  understands  that  ‘everything  is  marketing’. 
REFERE ncEs 
1. Kotler,  Philip  &  Sidney,  J.  Levy.  Broadening  the  
Concept of Marketing. Journal of Marketing,  1969,  
33(1),  10-15. 
129 

========4========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  3,  MAY  2016 
2. Baker, Michael J. Marketing is marketing— everywhere!,  
VIKALPA,  July-September  2005, 30(3),  1-9. 3. Lyndon,  Simkin.  Marketing  is  marketing–maybe!.  
Marketing  Intelli.  &  Plann.,  2000, 18(3),  154-58.  4. McKenna, Regis, Marketing is everything.  Harvard  
Business  Review, Jan-Feb.  1991  
5. Mckee,  Steve.  Marketing  is  everything.   Business  
Week,   11  February  2006. 
6. Cram,  J.K.  Marketing  for  non-school  libraries:  A  
guide to an essential management activity. Department  
of  Education,  Queensland,  1994. 
7. Gupta, Dinesh K. Marketing in library and information  
context: Myths and realities. Lib.  Sci.  with  a  Slant  
to  Docum.  and  Inf.  Stud.   1998,  35(2),  99-104 8. Gupta, D.K. Broadening LIS marketing. In  Marketing  
library  and  information  services:  International  
perspectives, edited by Dinesh K Gupta,  et al.   KG  
Saur,  Munich,  2006,  pp.  5-20. 
9. Gupta,  Dinesh  K.  Bibliographical  literature  on  LIS  
marketing. Annals of Lib. and Inf. Stud.,  Dec. 2008,  
55(4),  308-16 
10. Kleindl, B. Marketing practices used by the emerging  
American  Public  Library  System  from  inception  to  
1930. Journal  of  Macromarketing,  2007, 27(1). 11. Renborg,  Greta,  Marketing  library  services:  How  
it  all  began. In   Adapting  marketing  to  libraries  in  
a  changing  and  world-wide  environment,  edited  by  
Savard,  Réjean,  De  Gruyter  Saur,  Munich,  1999,  
5-11. 
12. Gupta, Dinesh K. & Jain, Abhinandan K. Marketing  
library and information services: A study of periodical  
130 
literature. Annals of Lib. and Inf. Stud., Dec. 2009,  
56(4),  217-26 
13. Gupta,  Dinesh  K.  &  Savard,  Réjean.  Marketing  
library  and  information  services.  Encyclopedia  of  
Library and Information Sciences, Ed. 3, 1:1, 2009,  
3553-560. 
14. Baker, Sharon L. Responsive public library collection:  
How  to  develop  and  market  it.  Ed.  2,  Libraries  
Unlimited,  1993. 
contributor 
prof  dinesh  K.  gupta   is  Convener,  Library  &  Information  Science  and  Director  (Research)  at  Vardhaman  Mahaveer  Open University, Kota. He has served as Member of Standing  Committee of IFLA Education & Training Section, 2011-2015,  IFLA  Management  and  Marketing  Section,  2003-2007  and  2007-2011. He also served as the Chair of the Jury of ‘IFLA  International  Marketing  Award’  in  2009-2013.  He  also  has  been a Member of the Selection Committee of South Asia LIS  Award. He has attended many international conferences in Asia,  Europe  and  USA.  He  has  authored  about  50  papers/reviews  published in peer review journals and conference proceedings,  edited  volumes,  both  at  national  and  international  level.  He  has  published  three  IFLA  books  by  its  official  publisher  K.  G.  Saur/De  Gruyter  Saur.  He  is  presently  associated  with  reputed journals including IFLA Journal; Annals of Library and  Information Studies   (CSIR-NISCAIR,  New  Delhi)  as  Member  of  the  Editorial  Board.  He  has  also  undertaken  projects  from  Distance  Education  Bureau;  IIM  Ahmedabad;  UGC,  etc.  He  is  recipient  of  the Satkal  Young  Librarian  Award-2003,  Best  Librarian Award of Rajasthan Patrika-2006, Ranganathan-Kaula  Award-2010 and Master  Motilal  Sanghi  Best  Librarian-2011.  

========5========

