DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 36, No. 4, July 2016, pp. 212-219 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.36.4.9912 
 2016, DESIDOC 
Management of University Research Publication: A Case Study of JUIT  
Publication Database (JPubDB) 
Shri Ram* & Nitin Paliwal** 
*Central Library, Thapar University, Patiala-147 004 
E-mail:shriram2576@gmail.com 
**Central Library, National Institute of Technology, Hamirpur-177 005 
E-mail: nitinpaliwal2006@gmail.com 
ABSTRACT 
Along with the teaching, publications and research output, national and international funding has become  essential criterion for benchmarking and performance measurement of the university. To stand and compete with  stakeholders, it is essential to carefully monitor the impact of university publication over global research. The role  of the library becomes more important to take a lead in monitoring and management of the university publications.  A library needs to gather, organize and maintain publication in a standard format and take appropriate measure to  disseminate research with global community. Further, it is essential to assess the research impact of the publication  through different methodologies such as bibliometrics or web metrics. The purpose of this paper is to develop a  database of university publication with the acronym ‘JPubDB’ (JUIT Publication Database: available at http://juit. ac.in/jpubdb), in order to collect, analyse and organised at one place and market the research publication with global  community. The provisions have been made to link each publication with each faculty profle and department in  a standard citation style, assess the citation count through Google Scholar, sharing of publication through social  networking tools, and if the full text of any publication is available, that can be downloadable in copyright free  
mode.  
Keywords:  University research publication, publication record management,  bibliographic citation management,  
 research promotion 
1. InTRoDUCTIon 
The  reputation  of  academic  institutions,  primarily  engaged in research, is recognised by the research output.  The premier institutions in India like Indian Institute of  Technologies (IITs) or National Institute of Technologies  (NITs),  have  their  publication  information  capriciously  maintained. It is true that each faculty members must have  their publication on their profile page, but sometimes, an  external user looks for a comprehensive list of publications  at a central place such as on home page or on department  page.  Many  agencies  seek  a  print  copy  of  the  faculty/ department/university  bibliography  for  the  purpose  of  different  statistics,  ranking,  benchmarking  or  funding1.  Various  government  bodies,  as  a  part  of  their  education  reform,  have  made  research  activities  more  explicit  for  funding2-3.  On  this  parameter,  it  is  essential  to  have  a  central database of institutions publication which illustrates  the, (i) Visibility of university research strength through  publication; (ii) International standards and recognition by  international bodies; and (iii) Benchmarking of university  research  output  with  other  similar  institutions.  
So,  there  must  be  a  provision  of  managing  the  university  research  output  and  share  them  with  global  community  in  order  to  improve  the  image,  credibility  
Received 24 March 2016, revised on 6 June 2016, online published 28 July 2016 
and  status  of  university.  It  is  also  essential  to  market  institutions research publications, sharing on social web  (Altmetrics measurement—web-based metrics that takes  account of the total influence of authors and their use of  the web)4-6  and create a network of similar interest people  through research networking. During recent years, a shifting  trend  has  seen  towards  the  popularising  research  work  through social networking. The big database aggregators  like  SCOPUS7   is  using  Altmetrics  to  measure  article  level  metrics  to  assess  the  research  impact.  
According  to  Wood2,  the  success  of  the  university  depends upon the following: (i) their capacity to develop  and  implement  appropriate  research  management  plans;  (2) being able to identify and encourage the high research  performers on their staff; and, increasingly, (3) the ability  of  their  staff  to  design  projects  to  compete  for  funds  earmarked  for  national  priorities.  The  funding  agencies  also consider these aspects while funding for the different  kind  of  projects.  Along  with  this,  the  university  also  considers  the  performance  appraisal  of  its  staff  based  on  the  different  parameters.  These  parameters  include  teaching  loads,  research  loads,  research  collaborations,  arrangement  of  funds,  etc.  The  assessment  of  the  staff,  after all these activities, is based on the research output.  

========1========

    RAM & PALIWAL:  MANAGEMENT OF UNIVERSITY RESEARCH PUBLICATION: A CASE STUDY OF JUIT PUBLICATION 
These  research  output  may  be  in  the  form  of  research  publications,  articles,  conference  proceedings,  book  chapters,  patents,  case  studies,  reviews,  etc,  which  highlights  the  academic  and  research  capability  of  the  staff.  The  research  publication  is  one  of  the  important  factors  considered  for  the  career  advancement,  along  with  the  other  characteristics  such  as  ability,  energy,  creativity, motivation, ambition and self-discipline. These  characteristics  have  been  used  to  distinguish  between  productive and unproductive researchers. However, research  publications  always  been  kept  on  top.  For  an  example,  University Grants Commission (UGC) in India has made  a  rule  to  accumulate  minimum  Academic  Performance  Indicator  (API)  score  for  appointment  of  teachers  in  university and colleges and Performance Based Appraisal  System  (PBAS)  for  further  promotion.  Along  with  the  other  teaching  and  research  activities,  the  publication  records  do  hold  an  important  parameter  in  calculation  of  API  and  PBAS  scores.  Under  these  regulations,  the  applicant  has  to  score  a  minimum  score  as  decided  by  the  competent  authority  for  said  posts  (UGC  2010)8.  
Keeping this purview as a prime consideration, this  paper highlights the development of university publication  database  for  effective  management  of  publication,  its  dissemination, and to create publicity to global community.  Furthermore,  manually  typing  the  list  of  publication  on  profile page of each faculty is a cumbersome task for the  Webmasters. It is also a time-consuming task for preparing  the statistics whenever needed. During this process there  always  a  chance  of  errors  in  creating  bibliography,  standardising citation styles, etc. This paper discusses the  methodology adopted by Learning Resource Center (LRC)  of  Jaypee  University  of  Information Technology  (JUIT)  to  develop  a  JUIT  Publication  Database-  JPubDB. 
Founded  in  2002,  the  JUIT  has  been  committed  to  exemplary  teaching  and  research  in  different  areas  of  engineering.  The  LRC  is  an  integral  part  of  JUIT,  supporting the engineering education programs by providing  teaching  and  research  materials  in  the  form  of  books,  journals, databases and providing research support through  value  added  services.  Each  year,  LRC  makes  effort  in  collection  of  university  publication  information  and  analyse  it  for  different  kinds  of  statistics  required  by  different  agencies  for  the  purpose  of  benchmarking  and  other  statistical  analysis.  In  view  of  continued  demand,  the LRC has made an effort to create a database so that  the faculty publication remains continuously updated and  can  be  used  as  and  when  required.  
2. LITeRATURe  RevIew 
Maintaining a bibliography of institutional research  is an old phenomenon but certainly not unique9-12. Many  efforts have taken to create bibliography and have taken  the  shape  of  institutional  repositories13.  Mansheima  &  Thompson14  conducted a survey on 128 libraries to determine  how  many  have  databases  of  faculty  publications. They  reported that out of 128 respondents; only thirty two have  
faculty publications databases maintained with most of the  commercial bibliographic software while two institutions  maintain databases containing exclusively journal article  citations. The analysis of the faculty research impact and  the institutions research (monitored through maintaining  the  records  of  the  publications)  has  been  analysed  by  Ehrman  Medical  Library  of  the  New  York  University  Medical  Center  through  use  of  Journal  Citation  Report  (JCR)15.  An  attempt  of  developing  web  based  faculty  publication database at University of Connecticut Health  Center, Lyman Maynard Stowe Library where MEDLINE,  SciSearch,  Current  Contents,  BIOSIS,  HStar,  Sport,  TOXLINE,  and  Zoological  Record  Online  databases  were  used  to  develop  faculty  publication  database16.  A  similar  initiative  for  developing  web  based  publication  database  was  reported  by  Riedling  and  Selberherr17   for  the purpose of performance evaluation of Engineering and  Information Technology faculty at University of Vienna.  Volnyansky,18 et al  developed a database which facilitates  the  automatic  update  of  faculty  publication  based  on  PUBMED’s  PMID.  This  database  has  a  limitation  and  fails  to  update  the  data  when  PMID  is  missing.  Ho,19  et al.   proposed  a  model  ‘PubWatcher’  which  track  web  publications from user specified website. Similarly, some  of  the  library  using  reference  managers  for  managing  their  institution  publication20.  
Blummer21  discusses the faculty publication databases  as an opportunity for libraries to provide services to users  and proposed a Web-based faculty publication databases  provision  through  library  website.  A  Similar  initiative  was  also  taken  at  Illinois  State  University  libraries  for  developing an online bibliography of scholarly works by  campus faculty22. Some publication management initiatives  specially  focused  on  creating  publication  database  for  the purpose of creating standardized citation23. Novak &  Pardo24  discusses the application of technology in assessing  the  evolving  nature  of  faculty  publication  and  role  of  library in managing them. They studied these aspects to  understand  the  trends  in  legal  scholarship  and  change  in  the  publication  patterns  such  as  blogs  and  podcasts  and  the  open  access  initiatives,  active  role  of  libraries  to  develop  creative  solutions  to  manage  them  in  the  form of bibliographies, searchable databases, and digital  repositories to manage access, preserve, and disseminate  faculty writings25. Tabaei, 26 et al  presented a case study  on  building  an  in-house  faculty  publications  database  of  ‘Touro  College  and  University  System  Library’  and  assessed  a  positive  impact  on  visibility  of  library.  
Many  literatures  reported  the  utility  of  publication  as a measure of faculty research strength and the record  of  publication  is  being  used  as  a  factor  for  promotion  or credit of the faculty or department or university. The  publications of the university in high impact journal are  being  used  as  a  criterion  of  benchmarking  and  ranking  among  the  institution27.  Doost3   argues  on  the  dilemma  on teaching and research results in publication and there  must be criteria where it is important for faculty to bring  
213 

========2========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  4, JULY   2016 
out  publication  in  terms  of  their  teaching  and  research  in  order  to  assess  the  impact.  Some  more  literatures  available,  which  highlight  the  faculty  promotion,  based  on  the  publication28-31.  So  keeping  these  paramount  aspect as a focused area, the initiatives on collecting and  managing faculty publication database can be witnessed  through  different  methodologies.  Connor32   described,  Wiki  Technology  to  create  faculty  publication  database  for  promoting  research  productivity.  Some  others  came  up  with  the  idea  of  Institutional  repositories33. 
There are some reports, which illustrated the problem  associated  with  the  data  collection  and  continued  effort  to  build  relationship  between  the  library  and  teaching  faculty to strengthen the publication database24. Though,  due to advancement in Internet technology and the legacy  associated  with  copyright  restrictions,  the  concept  of  maintaining  bibliography  remains  alive.  Schwartz  &  Stoffel22   has  discusses  the  development  of  bibliography  is  easy  and  less  costly  than  maintaining  institutional  repositories. Technology support such as Microsoft Access  and Oracle, openURL linking services such as SFX, and  digital  management  software  such  as  CONTENTdm  are  quite  helpful  in  management  of  bibliography34-36.  
It  is  evident  from  the  literature  review  that  the  creation  and  maintenance  of  publication  database  is  far  essential for assessing research impact, ranking, selection  and promotion of faculty and benchmarking. The overall  purposes of faculty publications bibliographies/databases  fall into the categories of tracking research, communication,  public  relations,  and  statistics  for  accrediting  bodies,  etc.  With  these  broader  aims,  the  effort  has  been  made  to  design  and  develop  a  database  of  ‘Jaypee  University  of  Information  Technology  Publication  Database’  with  acronym “JPubDB” accessible at http://juit.ac.in/jpubdb/.  The  database  is  accessible  from  both  library  webpage  as  well  a  university  home  webpage. 
3. 
MeThoDoLogy 
3.1  Planning 
A custom computer programming methodology was  adopted  to  develop  the  database  “JPubDB”. A  strategic  plan was prepared in order to identify the most frequently  asked information related to publication and its component.  A  relationship  among  each  component  was  established.  Based  on  the  relationship  between  each  component,  the  programming was carried out. Strategically, an ‘Author’  is  one  of  key  component  in  case  of  publication  and  it  has  been  kept  at  center  stage.  An  entity  relationship  diagram is shown in figure 1, illustrating the relationship  of author with other entities. The bibliographic data for  the  database  has  been  taken  as  four  different  kinds  of  document types (books, journals, conference publications  and  department  of  the  university).  Figure  1  shows  the  relationship of an author with different kinds of publication  types. The author is also linked with the year, for showing  the  productivity  by  time.  Based  on  these  conceptual  strategic  planning,  the  programming  was  carried  out  to  develop  the  database.  
3.2  Database  Design 
The JPubDB was designed using PHP web programming  language  and  database  management  system  software  ‘MySQL’. While creating the different types of tables in  database,  the  different  relationship  amongst  the  entities  was  considered  to  link  various  components. 
The  author  is  related  to  various  publications  types  (four in this case). These are Journal articles (author_jour),  conference  articles  (author_conf),  book  (author_books)  and  book  chapters  (author_booch).  Each  of  these  four  document types further has their bibliographic description  provided  in  the  various  tables  (journal,  conferences,  books, and bookch). The author is further related to the  
Figure 1. entity relationship diagram showing various relationships in the JPubDB database. 
214 

========3========

    RAM & PALIWAL:  MANAGEMENT OF UNIVERSITY RESEARCH PUBLICATION: A CASE STUDY OF JUIT PUBLICATION 
Figure  2. workflow  diagram  of  JPubDB. 
department.  Furthermore,  there  are  three  more  essential  component  associated  with  the  author  and  these  are  productive  authors  (pro_auth),  which  provide  details  on  most  productive  authors;  productive  departments  (pro_ dept),  which  gives  data  about  productive  departments;  and  productive  years  (pro_year),  which  gives  data  on  productive  year. The  productivity  of  author,  department  and  year  has  been  assessed  as  a  measure  of  number  of  publications  linked  to  these  components.  As  author  is  responsible for publishing a paper; author must be related  to  a  department  and  furthermore  the  paper  must  have  been  published  in  a  particular  year.  Whenever  a  paper  is  added  to  an  author  profile,  the  respective  component  also  get  values  along  with  the  author,  in  turn  giving  the  statistics  for  that  component.  The  overall  workflow  of  the  each  of  these  components  and  relationship  with  the author is depicted as a graphical layout (Fig. 2). An  administrative  panel  is  also  designed  to  monitor  data  input  (Fig.  3). 
3.3  Data  Collection 
The  bibliographic  data  for  the  database  is  taken  as  
Figure 3. Administrative panel of JPubDB. 
any  publication  falling  under  the  four  document  types  (journal,  conference,  book  and  book  chapters)  with  affiliation  of  university.  At  initial  stages,  the  data  was  collected  from  major  bibliographic  databases  such  as  SCOPUS  and  Web  of  Science  and  annual  reports  of  the  university.  The  publications  were  manually  sorted  out  having  affiliation  of  JUIT.  At  later  stage  of  the  database  development,  a  form  for  each  document  types  is  created  for  data  input.  Each  faculty  members  were  asked to input his or her publication information through  the data input form from their respective web pages. An  alert system is also created with Google Scholar as well  SCOPUS, which track any new publication appearing in  the name of university, which automatically alerts for new  publication.  To  avoid  duplicate  entry,  an  algorithm  was  design  to  check  the  duplicate  article  (checked  by  title),  if  entered  by  any  co-author  of  the  paper.  Once  the  data  is  entered,  the  bibliographic  records  are  re-checked  for  any probable error, cross checking of impact factor, etc.  through administrative panel (Fig. 3). The paper added by  author  appears  at  administrator  page  under  ‘Publication  for  Approval’.  To  avoid  author  name  ambiguity,  only  those articles are chosen, which have affiliation of JUIT.  After  all  cross  validation,  the  article  is  included  into  the  database  and  linked  with  author  profile  to  appear  on  respective  profile  page  as  well  as  department  page.  The  Impact  Factor  for  the  journals  is  being  taken  from  the  Journal  Citation  Report  of Web  of  Science. 
4. 
DISCUSSIonS 
4.1  Status  of  JUIT  Publication 
The  university  was  established  in  2002  and  since  its establishment; the faculties have published a total of  1985  research  documents  (till  December  2015).  These  documents have been published in four major document  types.  These  are  abstract  in  conferences  and  seminars  (2.82 %), Book Chapters (25, 1.26 %), Books (27; 1.36 %),  Conference  papers  (826;  41.61  %)  and  Journal  articles  (1051;  52.95  %).  As  per  the  bibliographic  information  
215 

========4========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  4, JULY   2016 
retrieved  from  SCOPUS,  1024  (51.59  %)  articles  are  indexed in it and accumulated a citation of 2937 citations.  On the parameter of research output, the JUIT had been  ranked 130rd   in  India  and  2686  in  World  by  SCIMAGO  institutional  ranking.  (Table  1) 
Table 1. Status of JUIT research publication (December 2015) 
Document yypes Abstract Book chapters Books 
Conference papers Journal articles grand Total 
Total Publication 56 
25 
27 
826 
1051 
1985 
%age 2.82 1.26 1.36 41.61 52.95 100.00 
4.2  Management  of  JUIT  Publication 
The  database  has  two  interfaces,  one  is  meant  for  administrative activities, used by administrator (Fig. 3);  
Figure  4.  JUIT  publication  database  home  interface. 
Figure  5. Author  profile  page. 
216 
while other is user interface, used by the users (Fig. 4).  The  administrative  interface  facilitates  the  data  entry,  editing,  and  programming  control,  while  user  interfaces  is used by user to see the various statistics. Each author  and  department  has  been  provided  with  its  own  web  interface.  The  author  interface  is  directly  linked  with  the  profile  page  of  the  author  available  at  respective  department. On the profile page, the bibliographic citation  is  populated  according  to  its  publication  year.  Under  each year, the list of the citation appears in an order of  Book, Book Chapter, Journal and Conference Publications  (Figure  5).  On  department  page,  the  same  information  can  be  found  displayed  in  similar  order  as  it  appears  on  author  page.  
4.3  Display Authors  Contribution 
Zyzanski, 
37 
et al.,  argued on Academic achievement  and promotion of faculty members based on the academic  performance through research publication. The academic  performance  based  on  the  publication  output  is  one  of  

========5========

    RAM & PALIWAL:  MANAGEMENT OF UNIVERSITY RESEARCH PUBLICATION: A CASE STUDY OF JUIT PUBLICATION 
the  fundamental  parameter  to  adjudge  the  performance.  Author’s academic and research performance has become  more  crucial  in  academic  and  research  institutions.  The  database  gives  a  facility  to  showcase  the  publication  performance of individual faculty. Looking at the statistics,  authority  may  be  able  to  judge  the  performances  of  faculty  (Figs  4  &  5).  Many  authors  have  given  their  viewpoint on research publication and the publication has  always  been  a  measure  of  tenure,  promotion  or  annual  pay revisions. Further, the publication output has become  the  key  criteria  for  measuring  the  quality  of  university  academic  program  as  well  as  department.38-39 
4.4  Display  of  Department  Contribution 
Beckett,40 et al.,  are of opinion that, while considering  benchmarking and ranking of an institution, the publication  performance of the institution or department is an essential  parameter and play a crucial role for comparison with the  other institution or department, other than infrastructure. The  JPubDB provides a separate statistics for the department  showing  number  of  publication.  The  statistics  available  against  each  department  on  home  page  and  can  be  navigated  to  respective  department’s  webpage  (Fig.  6).  The  statistics  for  department  is  populated  based  on  the  linking  of  authors  with  the  department.  
Figure 6. Department statistics display. 
4.5  Display  of  Document Types 
The database has provision for display of total number  of articles published as different document types, such as  books, book chapters, conference publications and journal  articles. To  view  detailed  list  of  publication  under  each  type, a provision for navigation has been provided which  display  the  complete  list  of  items  under  each  document  types (Table 1). It also provides the statistics of indexing  of  the  article  in  SCOPUS  which  is  considered  as  an  important  factor  for  quality  assurance.41,42 
4.6  Display  of high  Impact  Factor  Journals 
Authoring  an  article  and  publishing  them  in  high  ranked journals is an important factor at any academic and  research focused institution. The visibility, benchmarking  and  ranking  of  the  institutions  always  has  criterion  of  the  publication  in  high  impact  journals.  SCOPUS  SCI- 
MAGO  Institution  Ranking  is  based  on  the  university  publication appeared in high impact journals. In order to  assess the publication in high impact journals, a provision  has been provided to enlist the journals in which faculty  have  published  their  research.  The  list  provides  the  ranking based on the Impact Factor published by Journal  Citation  Report,  ISI,  Philadelphia.  The  navigation  to  each journal provides the complete bibliographic details  of  the  article(s)  published  in  that  journal.  
4.7  Linking  and  Providing  Full Text Access 
Rioux43   of  the  opinion  that,  provision  for  making  faculty  publication  linked  over  World  Wide  Web  helps  in  reaching  masses.  Each  article  in  the  JPubDB  is  hyperlinked  with  the  original  source  of  publication  for  full  text  access  where  ever  full  text  available.  The  linking  has  been  done  in  three  ways.  Firstly,  with  a  persistent  URL  of  the  article  from  publishers’  website;  Secondly,  DoI  (Digital  Object  Identifier);  and  Thirdly,  through Google Scholar. Any article, if available as full  text  mode,  can  be  accessed  through  navigation  from  JPubDB. If the full text of the article is not available, a  link  to  abstract  page  of  the  publisher  can  help  users  to  seek  article  from  author/publisher.  Further,  it  any  book  published  by  the  faculty  and  is  available  in  the  library,  it  is  linked  with  the  library  catalogue.  
4.8  Search  Facility 
The database has been provided with search facility,  which  facilitates  the  searching  of  database  by  Title  and  Author  (Fig.  4  –  search  box  for  title  and  author). 
4.9  Connecting  Professional  Scholarly networks 
The  priorities  of  the  academic  librarians  should  be  to  develop  strategies  for  providing  value  added  services to researchers well beyond online access to full  text  databases.  While  planning  and  giving  value  added  services,  it  becomes  essential  to  change  the  role  of  the  special  librarian44.  Building  connection  to  professional  and  academic  network  strengthen  the  visibility.  In  this  regard,  the  strategy  for  creating  visibility  through  use  of web tools such as ResearcherID and ORCID must be  included  as  a  value  added  services  for  researchers45.  A  provision  has  been  made  to  connect  the  faculty  profile  to  the  academic  tools  such  as  ResearcherID,  ORCID,  Google  Scholar,  and  SCOPUS  Author  Profile  (Fig.  5).  This effort helps in assessing the indexing of the articles  on  these  social  networking  tools.  Further,  it  helps  in  building  the  networks  with  JUIT  fraternity. 
The JUIT Publication database provides a comprehensive  platform for aggregated access to the university publication  at  single  platform. The  database  is  supported  with  most  frequently  needed  statistics,  most  productive  authors,  department,  journals,  impact  factor  of  journals  and  propagating  research  through  social  media. The  success  of  the  database  depends  on  the  universal  acceptance  of  the  initiatives  of  the  libraries.  
217 

========6========

DJLIT, VOL.  36,  NO.  4, JULY   2016 
5. ConCLUSIonS 
Creating a tangible product for collection and dissemination  of  information  is  an  essential  activity  by  the  librarians.  However, collecting, marketing and publicizing the faculty  publication is an added responsibility of the librarians for  ranking,  benchmarking  and  whenever  desired  reporting  authorities for decision making in terms of faculty selection  and  promotion.  Analyzing  the  importance  of  faculty  publication  for  ranking,  benchmarking  and  other  aspect  related to it, it was decided to develop a robust system,  which shall always remains a primary source for all kinds  of  statistics.  A  database  with  nomenclature  ‘JPubDB’  was developed using a database management system and  hosted on http://juit.ac.in/jpubdb. The database has more  than one thousand nine hundred bibliographic records of  publication. The details, especially statistics, are helpful  in  assessing  the  research  progress  of  the  university.  It  also  helps  in  assessing  the  individual  contribution  as  well  as  department  contribution  available  in  terms  of  number and types of publications in different years, most  productive department, most productive authors and highly  impact  journals. Through  this  database,  it  is  possible  to  access the full source of article, its access, and building  research  network  with  the  university.  Effort  of  creating  the publication database proved feasible and informative  but there are several logical extensions (tracing funding  source, patents, author networks etc) could be established  at  later  stage  of  the  database  development.  
ReFeRenCeS 
1. Kumar, V. & Kundu, S.K.. Ranking the international  
business schools: Faculty publication as the measure.  
Manag.  Inf.  Rev.,  2005,  44(2),  213-38 
2. Wood,  F.  Factors  influencing  research  performance  
of  university  academic  staff.  Higher  Education ,  
1990, 19,  81-100. 
3. Doost, Roger K.. Faculty evaluation: an unresolved  
dilemma? Managerial Auditing J., 1997, 12(2), 98- 
104. 
4. Altemetrics.(http://hlwiki.slais.ubc.ca/index.php/ 
Altmetrics). 
5. Altemetrics.  (http://altmetrics.org/). 
6. Galligan, F. & Dyas-Correia, S. Altmetrics: Rethinking  
the  way  we  measure.  Serial  Review ,  2003,  39,  
56–61. 
7. Altmetric for Scopus. (http://support.altmetric.com/ 
knowledgebase/articles/83246-altmetric-for-scopus). 8. University  Grants  Commission.  Academic  
Performance  Indicator  Score,  2010,  http://www. 
ugc.ac.in/pdfnews/8539300_English.pdf  (accessed  
on  3.7.2015). 
9. McKee, A. M., & Feng, C.C.H. Using computerized  
literature  searches  to  produce  faculty  publications  
lists. Bull.  of  the  Med.  Lib.  Asso.,  1999,  67,   333- 
35. 
218 
10. Popovic, T. The college faculty bibliography. Catholic  
Lib.  World,  1985,  56,  338-39. 
11. Potter,  L.A.  Creating  a  faculty  publications  
database  using  Sci-Mate.   Medi.  Ref.  Serv.  Quart. , 
1987, 6,  43-62. 
12. MacCorkle, L. Publishing an annual faculty bibliography  
at  the  University  of  Miami.  Inf.  Tech.  and  Lib.,  
1991, 10,  121-27. 
13. Johnson, Richard. Institutional repositories: Partnering  
with  faculty  to  enhance  scholarly  communication.  
D-Lib  Magazine,  8,  11 
14. Mansheim, R.E. & Thompson, J.L. Faculty publications  
databases  in  academic  health  sciences  libraries:  A  
comprehensive  survey.  Medical  Ref.  Serv.  Quart., 
1994,   13 (4),  21-34. 
15. Vieira,  D.  &  Faraino,  R.  Analyzing  the  research  
record of an institution's list of faculty publications.  
Bull.  of  Medi.  Lib. Asso.,  1997,  85(2),  154-57. 16. Bai,  S.  &  Kelly,  P.  Development  of  a  Web-based  
faculty  publications  database.  Bull.  of  Medi.  Lib.  
Asso.,   2004,  88(2),  189-92. 
17. Riedling, K. & Selberherr, S. A web-based publication  
database  for  performance  evaluation  and  research  
documentation.9th   International  Conference  on  
Engineering  Education,  2006,  pp.  R2F5-R2F10. 18. Volnyansky,  Z.;  Krol,  M.;  Roth,  R.;  &  Reich,  D.L.  
2001. Automatic Update of the departmental faculty  
database  using  PUBMED’s  PMID.  Proceedings  of  
the Fourteenth IEEE Symposium on Computer-Based  
Medical  Systems,  p.  327. 
19. Ho, L.V.; Hui, Siu Cheung & Fong, A.C.M. Monitoring  
scientific  publications  over  www.  The  electronic  
Library,  2003, 21(2),  110-16.  
20. Kelly, J. & Marsalis, S. Building a RefWorks database  
of  faculty  publications  as  a  liaison  and  collection  
development tool. Issues in Scie. and Techol. Libra.,  
Summer  2004. 
21. Blummer, B.A. The availability of faculty publication  
databases  from  library  web  pages. J.  of  Web  Libr., 
2007,  1 (2),  27-55. 
22. Schwartz, V. & Stoffel, B. Building an online faculty  
publications  database.  College  &  Undergraduate  
Lib.,   2007,  14(3),  1-25. 
23. Yu, Shien-Chiang. Design of a model of publication  
sharing and harvesting. The Electronic Library, 2008,  
26(4),  582-93. 
24. Novak,  J.R.  &  Pardo,  L.A.. The  evolving  nature  of  
faculty  publications.  Legal  Ref.  Ser.  Quar.,   2007,  
26(1-2),  209-32. 
25. Armstrong, M. & Stringfellow, J. Promoting faculty  
scholarship through the university author recognition  
bibliography at Boise State University. New Review  
of Acad.  Libr.,  2012, 18(2),  165-75. 

========7========

    RAM & PALIWAL:  MANAGEMENT OF UNIVERSITY RESEARCH PUBLICATION: A CASE STUDY OF JUIT PUBLICATION 
26. Tabaei,  S.;  Schaffer,  Y.;  McMurray,  G.  &  Simon,  
B.  Building  a  faculty  publications  database: A  case  
study. Public  Serv.  Quart. ,  2013, 9(3),  196-209. 27. Berbegal-Mirabent, Jasmina and Ribeiro-Soriano, D.  
Enrique. Behind league tables and ranking systems,  
J.  of  Serv.  Theo.  and  Prac.,  2015,  25(3),  242-66. 28. Green, Robert G.. The paradox of faculty publications  
in professional journals. Social Work in Health Care,  
2005,   41 (3-4),  103-08. 
29. Glover, S.M., Prawitt, Douglas F. & Wood, David A.  
Publication  records  of  faculty  promoted  at  the  top  
75 accounting research programs.  Issues in Account.  
Edu.,   2006,  31(3),  195-218. 
30. Fabianic, D. Publication profiles at point of promotion  
of criminal justice faculty, J. of Crim. Just. Educ.,  
2012, 23(1),  65-80. 
31. Beattie,  V.  &  Goodacre,  A.  publication  records  of  
accounting and finance faculty promoted to professor:  
Evidence from the UK. Accou. and Bus. Res.., 2012,  
42(2),  197-231. 
32. Connor, E. Using Wiki technology to build a faculty  
publications  database.  J.  of  Elec.  Resou.  in  Medi.  
Lib.., 2007, 4(4),  11-25. 
33. Newton, M.P.; Miller, C.C. & Bracke, M.B. Librarian  
roles  in  institutional  repository  data  set  collecting:  
Outcomes of a research library task force. Collection  
Management,   2010,  36(1),  53-67. 
34. Chudnov,  Daniel,  et  al.  Opening  up  OpenURLs  
with Autodiscovery. Ariadne, 2005, 43. http://www. 
ariadne.ac.uk/issue43/chudnov/. 
35. Change, Sheau-Hwang Chang. Full-text article linking:  
Where  are  we  now?  http://www.white-clouds.com/ 
iclc/cliej/cl23chang.htm. 
36. Anbu,  JPK.;  Kataria,  S.  &  Ram,  S.  Dynamics  of  
managing  electronic  resources:  Electronic  resource  
management  system  (ERMS)  initiatives. DESIDOC  
J.  of  Lib.  &  Inf.  Tech.,  2013, 33(4),  300-06. 37. Zyzanski,  S.J.,  et  al.  Academic  achievement  of  
successful  candidates  for  tenure  and  promotion  to  
associate professor. Family Medicinem, 1996, 28(5),  
358-63. 
38. Henry, W.R. & Burch, E.E. Institutional contribution  
to scholarly journals of business. Journal of Business, 
1974, 47,  56-66. 
39. Stahl, M.; Leap, T.L. & Wei, J.J. Publication in leading  
management  Journals  as  a  measure  of  institutional  
research  productivity.  Acad.  of  Manag.  J.,   1998,  
31(3),  707-20. 
40. Beckett, M.K.; Goldman, C.A. & Miller, T. Developing  
a  higher  education  ranking  system  for  Abu  Dhabi.  
geomatics and Information Science of Wuhan University,  
2012, 37(Supp.  1),  20-4. 
41. Meho,  L.I.  &  Yang,  K.  Impact  of  data  sources  on  
citation  counts  and  rankings  of  LIS  faculty:  Web  
of Science versus Scopus and Google Scholar. J. of  
the Amer. Soc. for Inf. Sci. and Tech., 2007, 58(13),  
2105-25.  
42. Jasco, P. Pragmatic issues in calculating and comparing  
the  quantity  and  quality  of  research  through  rating  
and  ranking  of  researchers  based  on  peer  reviews  
and  bibliometric  indicators  from  Web  of  Science,  
Scopus and Google Scholar.  Online Inf. Rev.,  2010,  
34(6),  972-82 
43. Rioux,  Margaret  A.  Contributing  to  the  literature  
migrating  a  local  bibliographic  database  to  the  
World Wide Web. Sci. and Tech. Lib., 2001, 20(1),  
103-12. 
44. Pinfield,  S.  The  changing  role  of  subject  librarians  
in academic libraries, J. of Lib. and Inf. Sci., 2001,  
33(1),  32-8. 
45. Nolin, Jan Michael. The special librarian and personalized  
meta-services: Strategies for reconnecting librarians  
and  researchers. Library  Review, 62(8/9),  508-24. 
Contributors 
Dr  Shri  Ram   is  working  as  Deputy  Librarian  at  Thapar  University,  Patiala.  Before  joining  Thapar  University,  he  was  working with Jaypee University of Information Technology for  over  thirteen  years.  He  holds  PhD  in  Library  and  Information  Science along with MSc in Anthropology. He has also qualified  UGC-NET  in  library  and  Information  Science.  He  has  been  awarded  with  Commonwealth  Professional  Fellowship  2013  and  went  to  University  of  East  London,  London  UK  during  September-December  2013  and  also  ICSSR-NRCT  Research  Fellow  at  Thammasat  University,  Bangkok,  Thailand.  He  has  published  23  papers  in  various  national  and  international  journals,  15  papers  in  national  and  international  conferences,  and  also  edited  three  conference  volumes.  His  research  area  include:  Implementation  of  information  and  communication  technology  in  library  and  information  services,  multimedia  based  information  literacy  and  user  education  and  library  automation  and  mobile  application  in  libraries.  
Mr nitin Paliwal  is working as Assistant Librarian at National  Institute of Technology, Hamirpur. Prior to joining this position,  he has worked as Professional Assistant at Jaypee University of  Information Technology,  Solan.  He  holds  MLIS  degree  along  with Master of Computer Science. He has also qualified UGC- NET  examination  in  the  subject  of  Library  and  Information  Science.  He  is  pursuing  his  PhD  (LIS)  from  Indira  Gandhi  National  Open  University,  Delhi.  His  research  area  includes  Implementation of information and communication technology,  database management, web programming, user education, library  automation,  and  mobile  application  in  libraries. 
219 

========8========

